Lecture 21 Shakespeare
The subject of today's lecture is William Shakespeare, and of course that already deals
with literary giants. Here is a giant among giants.
Sir Kenneth Clark in his groundbreaking civilization series of quite a few years ago now, when
he got to Shakespeare said that there's no way that Shakespeare can be fitted into the
scope of his programs. I have sort of the same problem here. I have the feeling that
somehow Shakespeare simply cannot be fitted into this series of programs. I wrote my dissertation
on Shakespeare and I've taught him almost every year for a long time. Most of my publications
are on Shakespeare and still this is the one that I most don't know what to say in
thirty minutes. The problem is to avoid saying something either obvious or trite or both
in the thirty minutes that I have. I had a colleague once who started off every Shakespeare
class by having every student pay a brief homage to Shakespeare. Every student had to
come in prepared every day to say something that was remarkable about Shakespeare, particularly
about the play they were studying that day. And perhaps that's what we'll wind up doing
here is we'll wind up paying a kind of homage to Shakespeare and in the process we hope
find a couple of ways that we can make entry into the plays themselves which is really
the point of Shakespeare in the first place. Drama has been invented many times in many
places over the years. Back in lecture seven we looked at the golden age of theater and
Athens which is one of the high water marks not only of theater but of literature in the
history of the world. India had a kind of classical golden age of drama in the fourth
and fifth centuries during the Gupta period when it produced Kaladasa who many Indian scholars
particularly consider the sort of Shakespeare of Indian drama and later on Kaladasa was
going to influence a lot of other western writers, particularly writers like Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe. Chinese drama emerged in about the thirteenth century and Voltaire
would say later that a fourteenth century Chinese play which he rewrote as the Chinese
orphan was superior to anything the west had produced by the fourteenth century. And in
Japan no drama had been flourishing for 200 years before we get to Shakespeare. Drama
in England too has had a long history, had a long history before Shakespeare. It seems
to have evolved on the one hand out of the practice of dramatizing gospel readings on
festival Sundays in the mass and that tradition led first to the mystery plays which were
plays based on biblical stories and then to the morality plays which were plays like
every man in which personified vices and virtues battle for the human soul. But English
drama likewise grew out of the mummings and the disguises and the satire of village festivals
and holidays when local dignitaries and priests could be mocked by the people who played them
who dressed up as the local dignitaries and priests and made fun of them for a day. The
result was in England was a lively and rambunctious and relatively undisciplined native drama
that produced a handful of really interesting plays. That native tradition was given a kind
of artistic shape and discipline when the Renaissance writers particularly Plautus and
Terence for Comedy and Seneca for Tragedy found their way into the curriculum of English
schools so that schoolboys would have begun to study these at a very early age and they continued
to study them all the way through the university. Just before Shakespeare came up to London there
was a group of young men who had studied at Cambridge and they came down to London and began
to write plays that combined some of the liveliness and the vigor of the English tradition with those
disciplines that they had learned from studying the classical writers at Cambridge and they created
Elizabethan drama. They were sometimes called the University Wits and the most notable of the
University Wits was of course Christopher Marlowe who without whom Shakespeare would not have
probably been able to do what he did. So Shakespeare's timing in one sense was absolutely superb. He
came up to London at exactly the right time. Everything was kind of prepared for a genius of
the first order in drama to come up and begin to use this new form. On the other hand having said
that there's no account of sources or influences that has ever really accounted for Shakespeare's
achievement any more than the same kind of study can account for the wonders of Mozart's music.
What I would like to do today is to pick out one aspect of Shakespeare's achievement and start
talking about that and perhaps use that as a kind of entry into the plays themselves and that
aspect that I would like to talk about a little bit is the aspect of language. Shakespeare created
about 1,000 characters in his 37 or 38 plays and yet each character speaks with his own rhythms,
his own accents, his own vocabulary, his own tricks of speech. John Dover Wilson who was a very
important critic at the beginning of the 20th century said that Shakespeare never created a
character that he didn't understand well enough to know what it would feel like to be that character,
to see the world through his or her eyes and each character has a language that reflects his or her
own experience and background and vision. So every speech in Shakespeare is not just in character,
it is also a revelation of character. We learn something about the character by listening to
the way he or she talks. John Keats, the romantic poet in the 19th century, said that Shakespeare had
what he called a negative capability and what he meant by negative capability was that Shakespeare
had the ability to empty out his own ego so thoroughly that he could become another character,
he could become an entirely different person. Most of us, if we've tried our hand at writing
drama or short stories or anything that involves characters, wind up putting too much of ourselves
in our characters so that they all wind up being like us. It's like a whole bunch of different
selves wearing different masks and it particularly in languages that this is true that when we try
to write characters, they almost always wind up sounding like us. They sound too much like us to be
thought of as individual characters. This is not the case with Shakespeare and that's what Keats
meant. Somehow when Shakespeare could empty himself out, he could become a character so thoroughly
that he would know what it felt like to see the world from that character's point of view and know how
that character would talk. Shakespeare's characters are so individualized in terms of speech patterns
that it has been said that you could actually, in any given play, you could take the name tags off
of all the speeches, take all the speeches, drop them into a hat, shake them up, bring them out one by
one and if you had a good enough ear, you would be able to, assuming that you didn't know the play, of
course, that you would be able to put the characters together, put all the speeches of a single character
together simply because there are no two characters who sound alike. They all have their own vocabulary,
they all have their own tricks of speech. And if this isn't remarkable enough in itself, it's
even more remarkable when we think about what a huge range of characters there are in Shakespeare's
plays and the immense range of language that they use. Caliban in the Tempest speaks a kind of pigeon
English. Hamlet has studied philosophy at the University of Wittenberg and his training shows not
only in the way that he approaches problems, the way he analyzes things, but in the language he uses
because he uses the language of his own discipline, of his own intellectual training to talk about
what he's going to talk about. Dogberry in Much Ado About Nothing and Mistress Quickly in the Henry
Fourth in Henry V plays and a slightly different character in Mary Wives of Windsor, stumble into
one malapropism after another. Many of them funny to us, although inadvertently funny because neither
Dogberry nor Mistress Quickly intends them to be comic when they make these mistakes in language.
The Lords and Ladies of Love's Labor's Law speak the most refined, courtly, elegant language. Henry
the Fifth can make his great stirring speeches before the Battle of Agincourt. Falstaff's
language is so flexible and is so resourceful that he can extricate himself from the most
difficult and impossible situations simply with language alone. He can talk his way out of any
corner that he gets caught in. Romeo and Juliet speak the language of love, the language of love
of very young people. Titania in a Midsummer Night's Dream speaks an amazingly beautiful lyrical
language to describe the beauties of the forest or the ravages that bad weather can wreak on
agriculture. Othello has a style so grand, so magnificent that when he uses it on stage he
can actually hush the other people on stage. They stop talking when he begins to speak. And beyond
that there are sailors and doctors and merchants and moneylenders and working men and emperors and
kings and queens all the way to the very end of his career when he when he writes that naughty,
twisted, difficult language of liantes who was ravaged by jealousy in the first part of the
Winterstale. A good university library and sometime when you're at one of them you should stop and
just check this out will have a lot of books that will have been written by lawyers, by doctors,
by sailors, by military men, by statesmen and each one of these will contend that Shakespeare must
have been one of them since he gets their specialized language down so well and he uses
specialized language in specialized ways accurately so that he must have been a sailor, he must have
been a doctor, whatever. Shakespeare could do all of this in part because of one of the most
amazing vocabularies in history. In Love's Labor's Lost there's a rustic, a clown named
Costard who goes to dinner and at dinner he hears there are a lot of learned men sitting around
the table and he listens to them talk and he comes out of that dinner marveling at what he calls
this great feast of languages that he's just attended. He's much more impressed with the language
that he heard at the feast than he was the food itself. Shakespeare himself must have been something
like that, just amazed and charmed by the feast of languages one could attend every day just by
listening. Sir Eifer Evans in a book called A Short History of English Drama says this about
Shakespeare's sense of language and his interest in language and the play when he mentions the play
here in this quotation he's going to be talking about Love's Labor's Lost which is a very early
Shakespeare play. Evans says it is language that dominates the play. It is as if Shakespeare
observed every device by which words could be the instruments of wit or the play things of sound
and fancy. He exploits all that Walter Pater has described as the phoppery of words with
gaiety and sophistication, realizing at the same time that words have other and stronger powers.
He is engaged in that absorbing passion for words which leads from a game played for the
pleasure of throwing colored balls into the sunlight to the compact twisted elusive verbal
inventions of the tragedies and of the early part of the winter's tale. He shows already,
and already he's again talking about Love's Labor's Lost, he shows already that language
and its employment is to be the major and consistent occupation of his life. Taffeta
phrases, silken terms precise, three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation, figures pedantical. In that
last part of the quotation comes of course from Love's Labor's Lost. This is from the play itself,
taffeta phrases, silken terms precise, three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation, figures pedantical.
When Shakespeare couldn't find the right word, he frequently invented one, or at least redefined
it in a way that we've been using it ever since. In the story of English, Shakespeare and the King
James Bible, which were contemporary, they were written about the same time, between them created
modern English. Then if you ever browse through an OED, you'll be struck by how many words are
attributed to Shakespeare used for the first time, either the word used for the first time or used
for the first time in the sense that we have used it ever since. McNeil mentions some of these words,
just gives a little list of them, some of those to whom we attribute the contemporary meanings
to Shakespeare. Words like lonely, laughable, bump, monumental, aerial, critic, pedant,
altitudinous, incarnadine, accommodation, premeditated, assassination,
submerge, obscene, all of which are cited, along with many others, as being used in their modern
sense by Shakespeare for the first time. It's also true that Shakespeare invented a lot of
expressions and used them for the first time in plays, which have been used so often since then
and have become proverbial, so that most of us quote Shakespeare several times a day,
whether we realize we're doing it or not. From Hamlet alone, we get such phrases, such
well-known common everyday phrases as frailty, thy name is woman, a truant disposition,
he was a man, take him all in all, a countenance more in sorrow than in anger, the prim rose path
to the manner born, something is rotten in the state of Denmark, the time is out of joint,
by indirection find direction out, brevity is the soul of wit, more matter with less art,
the play is the thing, to be or not to be that is the question, the lady doth protest too much,
hoist with his own patar, and I must be cruel only to be kind. There's a joke that's told
about a man who had never seen Hamlet before, who sought for the first time, and he came back
out of the theater complaining because he said the entire play is just made up of quotations.
You could actually say that about a lot of Shakespeare's plays. Again, as McNeil points out
in his story of English, words had a lot to do on the Elizabethan stage. The Elizabethan stage
was a bare stage and there were very few props, if you needed a throne you could bring a throne in,
if you needed a table you could bring a table in, but mostly it was a bare stage with no scenery
and no artificial lights, just the sunlight of a London afternoon. So every effect for which
the modern theater uses lighting had to be done with words, you had to create starlight and moonlight
and candlelight and storms with words alone. And since a bare stage always looks the same,
the first characters out on stage always have to identify where we are, so the words have to
locate us in a forest, in a cottage, in a palace, on a battlefield, wherever we happen to be.
And it's why when we go to see a play we are called an audience. Audience comes from the
word audio, which means to hear. We are not spectators. Spectators go to football games,
audiences go to theater. We go to hear a play. Ian McKellen in his years ago when he was
doing his one-man acting Shakespeare show said that he had played Romeo when he was a young man
and he and Juliet who played across from him realized that Romeo and Juliet were only on
stage for 14 minutes together of the whole play. And since women's parts in Shakespeare's theater
were played by boys there couldn't be any physical love making. They just talk about each other
all the time, so when he's on stage he talks about her, when she's on stage he talks about him,
and so when the play is done we have the sense of a fully developed and passionate relationship,
but it is entirely done with words. The concern for words, the love of words, also leads I think
naturally and automatically to a kind of metaphoric habit of mind, comparing one thing to another,
and so it's not a surprise that the plays are full of comparisons of one thing to another,
explaining something we don't know in terms of something we do, or using metaphors to give the
precise emotional shading to a speech. Romeo when he sees Juliet for the first time at the Capulet
Party says that Juliet hangs upon the cheek of night as a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear.
In a sonnet that Shakespeare writes about growing old what it feels like to grow old he says that
time of year thou mayest in me behold when yellow leaves or none or few do hang upon those bows
which shake against the cold bear ruined choirs where late the sweet bird sang. Lear waking up
from his long long unconsciousness and seeing Cordelia says thou art a soul in bliss but I
am bound upon a wheel of fire that mine own tears do scald like molten lead. The fool in Lear seeing
a lantern approaching from a great distance across the dark and stormy he says that the lantern looks
like an old lecher's heart a small spark all the rest on's body cold. Helena in all's well it ends
well talking about falling in love with Bertram who is a noble who is so far outranks her. She says
it is as though I should love a bright particular star and think to wed it he is so above me.
Prospero ends his pageant for Ferdinand and Miranda in the Tempest by saying we are such
stuff as dreams are made on and our little life is rounded with asleep and of course very famously
Macbeth says life is a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury signifying nothing.
Every line in Shakespeare virtually every line and almost every word is worth a second or third
look it is truly a feast of languages. Part of what Keats meant by Shakespeare's negative capability
is Shakespeare's personal reticence. After 400 years of the most intense scrutiny we don't know
if Shakespeare was Catholic if he was Protestant or if he had any religion at all. We don't know
if he was a monarchist or an anarchist whether he believed the Tudor myth or not whether his personal
life was happy or sad we don't know any of this because he never says anything about that.
When in King Lear he has Edmund the son and Gloucester his father debate whether the comets
and falling stars and eclipses in the heavens whether they mean anything or not. He argues both
sides of the case so well that you can't tell where Shakespeare falls in this argument at all.
Does Shakespeare think that comets and eclipses and terrible storms mean something or don't they?
He could have it both ways because he argues both sides equally well and as you like it we get an
extended meditation on the values of the pastoral. The pastoral was a genre in which Elizabethan
courtiers pretended to be shepherds and tried to live the simple life in nature
rather than living the life on the slippery slopes of court. The meditation and as you
like it is very rich. There are about a dozen different perspectives on the pastoral and at
the end of the play we have the feeling that justice has been done to the debate. It's been
really richly debated but as always we have no idea which one if any of those positions
was Shakespeare's own which side he would have come down on. Matthew Arnold in the 19th century
in a poem called to a friend said that he had always admired Sophocles who as he put it saw
life steadily and saw it whole and the very same thing can be said about Shakespeare.
It's one of the reasons why his plays are so renewable why every generation has been able
to find itself in his plays and reinterpret them in light of its own concerns. It's perhaps true
that Shakespeare didn't say that many things that are universally true rather he gets the
issues so thoroughly discussed and so fairly presented and so beautifully spoken that we
can always find ourselves in them in light of our own needs and thus the plays infinitely renew
themselves. Every generation rediscover Shakespeare by finding its own concerns its own needs in
those plays. Jorge Borges the postmodernist Argentinian short story writer wrote a little
tiny short story once about Shakespeare called everything and nothing in which he imagines
Shakespeare always feeling a kind of interior coldness a kind of interior emptiness which he
tries to fill first with books and then with Anne Hathaway and sex and marriage and then finally on
the stage but even on the stage it's you know you you only get to play the part for a couple of
hours and the play is done and then you're back to this emptiness again. Eventually he starts
writing plays according this is according to Borges so that he can be Caesar and Juliet and
Macbeth and Richard the Third and Yago and he eventually retires and then he later dies.
This is the last paragraph of Borges's story. History adds that before or after dying he found
himself in the presence of God and told him I who have been so many men in vain want to be one and
myself the voice of the Lord answered from a whirlwind neither am I anyone I have dreamt the
world as you dreamt your work my Shakespeare and among the forms in my dream are you who like
myself are many and no one. So the point of all of this is that any place is the right place to
start with Shakespeare. We'll start spend the last couple of minutes we have together here
doing a very very famous soliloquy one that I'm sure that you all know you probably had to
memorize it when you were in high school from Macbeth. This is the tomorrow and tomorrow and
tomorrow speech. To remind us of how we get to that soliloquy Macbeth starts out to play as a
very brave man and a great warrior who was almost single-handedly saved his the kingdom for his
king Duncan then tempted by the three weird sisters prompted in part by his own inner voices
and goaded a little bit by a very ambitious wife he brings himself to kill Duncan when the king
is a guest in his castle. Howard Felperin in a book called Shakespearean Representation says
that in all four of Shakespeare's great tragedies that the central character is forced to play a
role for which he is not temperamentally suited. In this case Macbeth is a great warrior but he is
not a cold-blooded murderer and the kill a king while he's a guest in your house should be for
Macbeth an impossibility. Ian McKellen who played Macbeth many times said that he always thought
Macbeth was a murderer with a conscience. Macbeth pretty much knows all of this before the murder
and he really is sure of it afterwards when he faces the consequences of the violations that
he's made on his own nature. He spends the rest of the play in a kind of sleepless agony and
when he realizes that he really has done this horrid deed that it can't be undone then he tries
to kill his conscience to quiet the voices inside him that won't let him sleep. In the process he
increases the brutality and the random wanton wantonness of his violence in the hope that he
will make his conscience die and thus be able to sleep again. He's also keenly aware that in
doing this he's giving up everything that ordinarily makes life precious friends and feasts
and good cheer and loyalty and loving subjects have all been traded in for having to relive this
one moment the moment of the killing over and over and over. Shakespeare lets us into the soul of
Macbeth in the soliloquies that demonstrate Keats' negative capability and his skill in putting
his character's thoughts into words. When things have gotten seemingly as bad as they can get his
wife is dead perhaps by her own hand his castle about to be attacked by most of his followers
who have deserted to the enemy he has his most famous soliloquy and we all know this one but
let me read it to you one more time anyway. Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow creeps in
this petty pace from day to day to the last syllable of recorded time and all our yesterdays
have lighted fools the way to dusty death out out brief candle. Life's but a walking shadow
a poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage and then is heard no more.
It is a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury signifying nothing.
This is I guess that we can admit one of the bleakest speeches in all of literature and it's
very beautifully rendered. Those first lines tomorrow tomorrow tomorrow plot along creep in
the petty pace that Macbeth notices not striding the way they did when he was a war hero beloved
by his king and his subjects but shuffling with contemptible mincing little steps creeping in
from from day to day and they keep plotting not to the end of the line not to the end even of the
word but to the end of the syllable to the last syllable seeming forever I always think that Macbeth
must have in mind a multi-syllable word so that that last syllable isn't even doesn't even make sense
by itself it's it's a meaningless squeak it's just a sound something that you had to add to
something else to make give it a meaning or a significance at all and so it pushes on until
the last squeak of the last word has been uttered and that's what time has become for Macbeth it's
become an endless repetition an eternal recurrence tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow like Alice on
her treadmill running faster and faster to get nowhere always back to where she started he's
given up his future with its possibility of hope and change and happiness and all he can look forward
to is this eternal plod to the last dumb syllable of recorded time he sees life as a candle that
is merely lighted fools and I'm sure he's thinking about himself himself included his lighted fools
the way not to grand but to dusty death and he wants the candle now to go out since life for him
is a walking shadow as he calls it it's not substantive but it's the shade of a substance
it's empty it's nothing that it's something that mimics life without having any life of its own
worse and for a theater person this is worse worse life has become for him a poor player that is a
bad actor a bad actor who rants and fumes and gestures the part of a king on stage and then
when the play is over and the audience goes home is once again nothing it's a story told not by a
good storyteller but by an idiot full of noise and rant and what does it mean it means nothing
it means nothing one of those emptiest words in all of english it means nothing it's like
lear's lines of never's he has one lear has one whole line made up of just the word never
repeated five times the emptiest line in literature this comes close this comes very close it means
nothing what makes mcbeth worth our attention up to the very last moment the moment that mcduff
actually does put out his candle is that he never flinches from the truth he never blames his wife
or the weird sisters or anything else for what he's done to himself he's absolutely honest about
looking into his own soul and reporting what's there what he's done to himself in the process of
trying to be more than he was it's part of what makes him a hero in the elizabethan sense of that
word despite all the terrible things he's done and what makes him worth our attention and fascination
today once shakespeare came into being once his plays were written he's everywhere in our course
we'll come across him directly three more times gerta begins his false with the gretchen story which
fauldes said he meant to be the ophelia story from hamlet told this time from ophelia's point of
view in pre-civil war america huck fin and jim will have their raft commandeered by two characters
who called themselves the king and the duke and one of the scams they work on the river towns
along the mississippi is that they announce a one-night performance of a shakespearian revival
featuring david garrick the younger of drury lane theater and edmund keen of the royal hay market
theater performing the balcony scene from romeo and juliet a fight from richard the third and
hamlet's immortal soliloquy that soliloquy as the king rehearses it is just a pastiche made up of
little bits and pieces from a lot of different shakespear plays and of course as we know as we
remember when that show was finally offered it isn't shakespear at all but it's the royal non-such
and then in james joysus story the dead gabriel conroy's ants will have a picture of the balcony
scene from romeo and juliet hanging over the piano that's germany pre-civil war america
ireland and we could add japan and poland and south africa and everywhere the germans discovered
shakespear in the 19th century and he's been close to their hearts ever since there's a fine
academic shakespear industry in japan and america has more or less adopted him as our national poet
too um there are over 200 shakespear festivals every summer in the united states alone and even
hollywood from time to time produces a new cluster of shakespear films the last cluster started by
kenneth brandos henry the fifth he's by now a truly international figure who breaks out of even a
course with a scope as broad as this one refusing as sir kenneth clark said to fit into a series like
this like his or like like ours however if we've gotten if what we've gotten out of this
lecture today is a way one way at least of getting at the plays then we will have achieved
something worthwhile anyway we can remember shakespear's magnificent use of language his
ability to see life steadily and see it whole and his negative capability is one way to get into
the plays which are profoundly interesting other cultures have produced drama and other
dramatists have been good with words but in the western tradition nobody has combined these things
as well as the band from stratford william shakespear next time we'll be back to tracing the
development of the novel in the you know work that more than any other has become the grandfather of
all novels in europe and after that we get to the beginning of the 20th century of all novels
everywhere the most influential and productive novel in history servantes don kihody
