Lecture 12 Indian Stories
As promised in our last lecture, this one moves from essentially the world of epic literature
and heroic literature where we have spent the first eleven lectures into a subject that's
going to be the theme and focus for really the next two units.
That is narrative strategies, narrative techniques, how stories get told, who tells them.
And we begin that with three collections of Indian short stories that have traveled everywhere
and whose influence on the stories of the world is probably unparalleled by any comparable
body of work anywhere.
India's reliance on the oral tradition has been a subject of some study and one of the
questions that people ask is why have so many of the great stories of the world come from
India?
A lot of answers have been given but we do know that because India has relied to a certain
extent perhaps more than some other cultures on the oral tradition down through history
for entertainment, for instruction, that storytelling has become an incredibly rich tradition.
To this very day, there are still folklorists coming through India collecting stories and
bringing them back for us.
Historically in India, wisdom is evaluated not just by your degree, by how much education
you have, but how well you can tell an appropriate story, find a right passage from scripture.
And stories of course have been told by everybody down through history.
They've been told by folk singers and dramatists and teachers and priests and parents of course.
They've been told at temple ceremonies and festivals and at village festivals and in
family gatherings.
Stories have become simply a way of life or have been a way of life in India.
The simple abundance of stories, the fact that so many of the stories of the world have come
from India, doesn't explain entirely however why the complex ways of telling stories also
came from India.
The three collections of stories we're looking at today are all very complexly told and in
very sophisticated ways.
They're organized in very complex ways.
All three of them in fact use a device in literature which is called framing which sets stories
inside other stories so that every story is unboxed or nested inside some other story.
The first one, the first collection of stories we want to say a few words about is the Jataka.
It frames its hundreds of stories inside the large story of the 550 prior incarnations of
the Buddha before he was born as Prince Siddhartha in 563 BCE.
The name Jataka in fact means story of a birth.
In each one of these stories it's told in this collection, Buddha isn't Buddha yet.
He's a Bodhisattva.
That is he's a being on his way to enlightenment but who will still be born many times before
he achieves final release.
As in Hinduism, in Buddhism karma is of course carried over from one lifetime to the next.
So each lifetime is made up of actions and remembered knowledge from previous lives.
Each individual story in this collection is set inside this frame.
In each one a disciple will ask Buddha a question or the Buddha will explain some teaching point
by recalling a prior life.
He always tells these stories in the third person by the way and each one of these stories
makes a point about Buddhist doctrine or ethics.
In each one the main point is underscored toward the end with an epigram and then the
Buddha explains what role he played in that story.
Sometimes he explains the roles of other characters in the story too and sometimes he also says
what's going to happen to people because of what they did in this lifetime.
In one story a high-born lady who fails to perform any act of merit is told that she
will be born next time as a crane which means she's going downward rather than upward.
The whole framing device here sounds intimidating but Buddhism from its very outset was a popular
religion and it used materials from popular culture to convert and teach.
The Jataka was not written in Sanskrit which would have been the courtly language but it
was written in Pali which is a northern Indian dialect and it uses a lot of stories that
are much, much older than Buddhism, many of which had nothing to do with Buddhism originally.
They were simply co-opted by the Buddhists and then framed by making each one a birth
and the progress toward enlightenment of the Buddha himself.
Occasionally for us when we read the story it's either difficult to see what the Buddhist
point really is or sometimes we can very clearly see what the point behind the story was, what
the original point was before it got co-opted by the Buddhist.
There's one for example in which a rabbit starts a panic when a large fruit hits the
ground and the rabbit gets frightened and thinks the sky is falling in.
We recognize this as our chicken little story.
A lion in that story who turns out the bodhisattva in that story is a lion and he investigates
and settles everybody down and the story ends happily.
The Buddhist point of that story is that some suffering is unnecessary, that is the point
is that this hare brought on a lot of suffering for himself and others and that some suffering
is unnecessary.
The Buddhists were against extreme forms of asceticism but we can still see behind that
Buddhist point we can still see the story's original point which probably had something
to do with overreacting.
There's another story in which birds are fighting over a piece of meat and invariably it turns
out that the only bird attacked is the one who's actually holding the meat at the time
and all the rest of the birds attack that one.
There's another story about a woman who is anxiously awaiting the coming of her lover
at night and she's nervous and tense and then when she finally decides that he's not coming
she goes to bed and sleeps peacefully through the night.
The point of both stories in the Buddhist context is that desire is most harmful to the one
who does the desiring.
We can see behind that Buddhist point we can see that there are some older meanings that
probably were in those stories before they were taken over by the Buddhists.
I'm not suggesting that these stories should be detached from the Buddhist frame but they're
lively enough to be interesting to us even outside the Buddhist frame and they have of
course been borrowed by a lot of people and used a lot of other ways that have nothing
to do with Buddhism.
The first of these stories was collected probably shortly after the death of Buddha but the
collection was enhanced over the centuries and the modern text in fact is based on one
from the fourth century CE so had lots of time to collect stories there.
Later Sanskrit scholars took some of these stories, put them into Sanskrit and then worked
up the Buddhist readings for them in more formal and detailed kinds of ways and some
of those books actually are still used as authoritative texts in many parts of the world.
Most of the stories do in fact teach Buddhist values.
They teach not to destroy life, not to take what is not given, to keep away from alcohol,
to love selflessly, to perform selfless acts of charity and to be useful and so they do
manage to teach these points while at the same time not entirely losing their original
focus.
Some of them are just superb illustrative little stories.
There's one for example in one life the Bodhisattva is born as a hare and he lives with his friends
the otter, the monkey and the jackal and he teaches them the way.
On the day when there's going to be a fast day he tells his friends what they should
all do is they should all gather not just fast but they should gather some food so in case
an ascetic or a beggar or someone in real need comes by they can offer him food.
The otter provides fish, he can do that, the monkey, mangoes, the jackal, meat and milk curds.
The rabbit however realizes that he has no human food that he can offer so when a beggar
comes by what the rabbit does is he asks the beggar to build a fire and then he offers
to throw himself into the fire to become the food of that beggar.
Well in this story the beggar happens to be the disguised Saka who's king of the gods
and when he waits until the hare actually throws himself into the fire and then the
hare is saved of course not only by his own virtue but by Saka himself and Saka is so
impressed at this great sacrifice, at this great story that he puts the shape of the
hare on the moon.
And so again we can see that somewhere back here there was a story when the Indians look
at the moon they see a hare not the man in the moon and so somewhere back there this
story had to do with how the shape of a hare got onto the moon.
Here that story without changing it very much by putting it in a frame has simply been adapted
to teach the value of selfless acts of charity.
The stories could escape their temporary Buddhist meanings and with or without Buddha they were
translated into Persian and into Greek and into Hebrew and into Arabic and from there
they made their way across the whole world and we keep these stories keep turning up
in other contexts that sometimes surprise us.
One of the Indian specialties and one of the specialties of this collection of stories
are animal stories.
Every animal in the collection is given a certain kind of stereotypical human quality.
The lion is always powerful and proud but a little bit gullible.
The jackal is always cunning and treacherous maybe a little like the fox in western literature.
The cat is always hypocritical.
Many of these stories in fact are going to show up later on in E.S.U.P.s fables and if
you have ever read E.S.U.P.s fables you'll be surprised to learn that at least half and
maybe more than that are Indians in origin.
Buddhism like Hinduism is an optimistic religion which means that most of these stories have
happy endings in which the good are rewarded and the bad are punished and hence they have
also survived as children's stories and fairy tales.
It's been estimated that something like 30 to 50 percent of all the stories that were
collected by the brothers Grimm are Indian in origin.
There's even, surprisingly, a very early version of Brer Rabbit and the Tar Baby which you
run across in this collection and other stories will show up that we recognize from other
sources.
There's a version of the story of Joseph and Potiphar's wife from the Old Testament
in this collection.
There's also a story of the judgment of Solomon which shows that the influences can work in
both directions.
But part of the charm of these stories is not just that animals have human stereotypical
qualities but they also stay in character as animals and so that they behave with some
of the same qualities that they have as animals.
There's one really wonderful little story about a monkey king who is, that is the Bodhisattva
in this story, is a monkey king.
He has his subject monkeys in a tree and the tree is surrounded by archers and the archers
are waiting until dawn and when it's light they're going to, you know, when they could
see they're going to kill these monkeys with their bows and arrows.
So the monkey king has to save them so he very, very carefully measures the distance
between two trees and then he cuts a vine of exactly that distance, it's going to reach
from one tree to the other and then he wraps one part of around his waist and then he makes
a leap for that tree forgetting to take into account the amount of vine that he's wrapped
around his waist.
So he winds up just a tiny bit short and so what he has to do is when he gets to the tree
instead of reaching the tree all the way he has to hang on to one of the branches and
then all of his subject monkeys have to run over his back as he becomes part of the escape
route.
And many, many of the stories in this collection have that kind of realism in the stories.
The second collection of stories that we'd like to talk about is called the Panchantantra
which means the five books or the five strategies.
It has as its mainframe a sage attempting to teach three rather dull-witted young sons
of a king the fine arts of governing.
The larger frame suggested the king was worried about what was going to happen to his kingdom
when he had to turn it over to these three not very bright young men and so he called
in the wisest sage he could find a sage whose name is Vishnu Shurman and asked him can you
teach my young sons how to govern and the sage decides that this is a challenge but
he will take it on as a challenge and if he can teach these young men the arts of governing
then he can do anything.
He's a pretty good teacher.
Which also the sidebar here it suggests the importance of storytelling and education and
Indian education.
This book because it's a courtly book it had to do with courtly and political matters
is written in Sanskrit it was written in the courtly language but it too was almost immediately
translated into many languages.
It was brought to Europe by the Arabs in the 8th century and there its stories and its
framing devices are going to inspire such works as the 1001 Knights, the Decameron and
the Canterbury Tales and a lot of the animal stories in this collection are going to be
retold by La Fontaine and his animal fables.
Each of the five books in this collection is devoted to one set of governing skills and
each one of those books has its own frame and inside those frames and inside those stories
characters will tell stories so that you can start a story and inside that story some
character will start a story inside that character another character may start a story and so
we may actually have stories going at four or five different levels simultaneously.
It's been suggested and thought that the authors of the 1001 Knights which are going
to make very much out of these multiple levels of stories going on at the same time actually
may have gotten their idea from this book and the frame stories in these books actually
do function in the stories as well.
In the frame story for book one the jackals who used to be the lion's counselors stir
up trouble between the lion and his good friend the bull and the theme of that first book
is the loss of friends and shows how alliances and treaties get broken.
The punch and tundra like the jackata is full of good animal stories in which animals behave
like enough like human beings in political situations that even the three dull-witted
sons should probably get the idea if they listed the stories carefully.
There's one called the wise old crow and in the wise old crow because the owls sleep
at night or sleep during the daytime or out at night the crows do vice versa.
When the crows are sleeping they're attacked by the owls who do a significant amount of
damage to the crows.
The crows are panicked and don't know what to do they think they may have to leave the
area and then a wise old crow the father of the current crow king says I know what to
do he said pluck all my feathers so that they pluck all his feathers out and then he lies
down below the tree and when the owls find him there he convinces them that he was treated
this way by the other crows because he had counseled them to give in to the owls to surrender
to the owls.
So the owls take him back and over time they he wins their confidence they learn to trust
him and then one time when the owls are sleeping then he manages to plug up all of the holes
of their trees and then the other crows come in and set the trees on fire with fire sticks
and that's the end of the owls.
The point of this story is that might alone cannot always defeat one's enemies foes killed
with weapons aren't always killed but those who are killed with wits stay dead and so
that's one of the stories these sons might have learned.
There's another story on the other end of the political or virtue spectrum it's called
the dove and the mouse and this one the pigeon king leads his flock of pigeons right into
a Fowler's net and they're all in big trouble now because the Fowler can come any moment
and take them away.
The pigeon king saves his pigeons first by convincing them all to fly in the same direction
at the same time so instead of just floundering about randomly they actually manage to lift
this net and fly away with it.
He then leads them to the home of a mouse who's a friend of his and who agrees to chew
the net but what the king says is he says look I got these people into this trouble
I got my subjects into this trouble so chew them out first save me till last so if your
teeth were out or you get tired you can't do it then I'll be the one who's trapped
it's my fault I should be the one who gets caught if anybody does and the mouse says
that compassion is the first real requirement of good rulership and the pigeon king has
just demonstrated that that characteristic with that gesture.
There are other good stories not all of them brought animals there's a good story about
it's called the broken pot this one will recognize the pattern of anyway a man has this huge
pot of rice and he starts thinking if I sold this rice I could then buy this and if I bought
that I could sell this and then I could and he imagines eventually negotiating this pot
of rice into a huge vast fortune.
As this fortune grows he eventually marries himself a beautiful and very desirable wife
he eventually buys for himself a beautiful palace and then he moves into the palace and
then he's living happily and then one day he and his wife are having a fight and in
the fight he reaches out to kick his wife and inadvertently kicks over the pot of rice
and there goes the fortune there goes the dream that grows everything I suppose the
moral for us the story was don't count your chickens before they're hatched or don't spend
your fortune until you have it.
There's another story which is sort of similar that a hooded serpent who lives in an antel
each day a farmer takes this hooded serpent a bowl of milk and the serpent returns a gold
coin.
This has been going on for some time until the farmer has to be gone one day and when
the farmer has to be gone he tells his son about this and tells his son every day take
out this bowl of milk for the serpent and he will bring you a gold coin.
The son assumes that this serpent must simply be living in an antel that's full of gold
coins and he decides just to kill the serpent and take all the coins at once.
Of course what happens is that the serpent kills the boy and by the time the farmer
comes home he's out a gold piece a day and a son.
Lots and lots of stories like this all designed to teach us lessons.
The stories themselves individually sound perhaps sometimes simple but if you put all
the stories together and look at the way they're balanced and compared and set side
by side we realize that this sage is actually giving these young men a fairly complex and
multi-layered picture of social and political life so that it has to be taken in its entirety
rather than one story at a time I'm just giving you a couple of examples.
Many of the stories appear in both collections but they're given different spins and this
is a kind of suggestion of what a frame can do to a story.
You can put the same story inside a different frame and it will suddenly be a different
kind of story.
There's a kind of fine little book written by two authors Roy Amor and Larry Shin.
The book is called Lustful Maidens and Ascetic Kings, Buddhist and Hindu Stories of Life.
And what they do is they give translations of many of these stories and they show how
the frame that you use for any given story can alter a story's meaning.
The largest and most famous of these three collections of stories we're looking at is
Soma Deva's a book called Katha Saritsagara which is translated something like The Ocean
of the Rivers of Story.
This is an 11th century Sanskrit translation of an early 7th century work which was written
in dialect, a book which is translated as The Great Romance by somebody called Gunaja.
This one has a really complex and interesting frame.
According to tradition Gunaja had written seven romances as a penance imposed on him
by a goddess who had turned him into a troll.
This becomes part of the frame.
The idea was that his sin could be atoned and his shape restored only when his work
would be known to the entire world.
He took it, after he finished his seven romances, he took it to a king who was disgusted with
its language.
It was written in troll's tongue.
Later Sanskrit writers would make jokes about this but it was written in troll's tongue
and so he said, I won't read anything that's that vulgar that's written that badly.
So Gunaja went back to the forest and burned his manuscripts one page at a time while reading
them to the birds and animals who came by to listen.
The king heard that he was burning his manuscript.
He repented his rashness of his action.
He sent messengers to the forest to bring back the writer who by then had burned all
the volumes except one, this one, the one that has survived.
But that's not the whole frame.
The reason why Gunaja is down here writing this on earth in the first place is that the
big frame starts out in heaven where the god Shiva one day takes his wife on his lap and
tells her all of the stories in Gunaja's seven volumes.
His wife Parvati wants to hear all these stories and so she sets a bull outside their
bedroom door so that nobody can get in disturb them while she's listening to these stories.
One of Shiva's retainers needs to see Shiva but he can't get in because of the bull and
so he makes himself invisible and comes inside and listens to all of the stories.
Later on he tells his wife and she makes the mistake of retelling some of those stories
in a place where Parvati could overhear them.
So he gets banished and sent to earth as a troll along with one of his friends who also
gets banished to earth.
One of the trolls was Gunaja who wrote the seven romances in Troll's tongue.
That earlier work has not survived but Soma Davis says he's been very very faithful in
his adaptation of the lost original.
One translator says that perhaps he's even been too faithful since in this collection
stories within stories keep proliferating until it is possible sometimes to lose track
of what the main story is where seven or eight levels deep into stories and it's hard to
remember where the original story started out in all of this.
As one critic said it's like a banquet that's made up entirely of hors d'oeuvres.
This book itself has its own frame and this frame are the adventures of a prince and the
stories themselves are told inside the frame by characters and they tell stories to each
other.
They tell stories to entertain friends and lovers and husbands and wives which is really
interesting because that duplicates exactly the way that Shiva told the stories to Parvati
in the first place.
And then within these collections of stories there are also individualized frames with
their own collections of stories inside them so that sometimes you'll be working with
frames within frames as well as stories within stories.
There are 25 very famous ones that are organized around a king who has agreed to reclaim a corpse
from a burial ground.
Now the corpse has in the meantime been inhabited by a ghoul or a demon or a vampire and in
order to get the corpse to where he wants to take it the king has to agree not to talk
as soon as he says something then the ghoul will fly back to its tree and he'll have to
do this over again.
But as they're walking toward where the king is going the ghoul keeps telling some really
interesting riddle stories and at the end of each story he says okay now if you know
the answer to this riddle you have to answer because if you know the answer to this riddle
and you don't say it your head will explode.
So the king has to answer the riddle and every time he answers the riddle he's just talked,
the corpse flies back to its original tree and he has to go back and start the process
all over again.
He does this 25 times and those 25 stories are framed inside this frame.
Within that collection of stories are some other really, really familiar ones.
Usually the riddle involves saying which one of the young men is really this woman's husband,
you know who really deserves to have this treasure.
The one is a story about who's the most sensitive and the one who gets decided by the king as
the most sensitive is a young man who has slept under a huge pile of very, very soft
mattresses but who wakes up with a huge welt on his side because underneath the bottom
mattress there was a hare.
And we recognize this as Hans Christian Andersen, this is the princess and the pea.
These stories have gone everywhere and have had long and happy lives since they were first
told in these collections.
The values of this book, if the Buddhist book is religious in teaching in the Panchantantra
is political in teaching, this one interestingly enough is about profit is about being successful
is about making money.
As we remember from the Bhagavad Gita, there is one stage of Hindu life in which making
money is an appropriate goal but it's still unusual to find an entire huge collection
of stories dedicated to that theme.
The original of this was, remember, was written in Trollstone, was written in dialect which
means that it was written for popular consumption, not for a learned audience and its heroes
are mostly merchants.
Even the prince, the frame story here is that of the prince and even the prince whose story
provides part of the frame has a name which translates as gift of the god of riches.
His special talents are charm and wit, the talents of merchants.
He's a sailor but as critics have said he's much more like Sinbad than he is like Odysseus.
The stories themselves are full of really interesting sharp dealers and sometimes the
line between rogues and merchants grows a little bit thin.
There's a really interesting story about a man named Harry Sarman, part of whose story
is going to metamorphose eventually into part of the Rumpelstiltskin story.
This Harry Sarman gets a reputation for magic by stealing a horse, hiding it and then pretending
to use his magic to find out where the horse is.
This works initially but he gets himself into trouble when some seriously powerful people
try to get him to use his magic, which of course he doesn't have any of, to find out
things for them.
Through a combination of quick thinking and luck he manages to turn his chicanery into
a comfortable living.
As critics have said the line between merchants and crooks is a little blurred sometimes in
this book but that's part of also what makes this story so much fun.
Most of the stories, if there's one tiny thing about the first two collection of stories
that may be a little bit disappointing for modern readers, it is that neither of the
first two books has very interesting women characters in it.
Women in the first two books tend to be either very faithful wives or tempting courtesans
and there doesn't seem to be much in between those two extremes.
But this third collection, Somadeva's, is full of some really witty resourceful courageous
women characters.
There's a one story that is very famous story from this collection which is called the Red
Lotus of Chastity in which a young wife deflects the advances of three young playboys who
are trying to seduce her in order to humiliate her husband.
Her husband is bragged about her chastity and her beauty and how wonderful she is and
these three young men are trying to seduce her so they can go back and humiliate the
husband.
This one, if you know the story of Shakespeare's Symboline you know that this is going to wind
up as part of the plot of one of Shakespeare's plays.
She winds up in this story resisting the three young playboys so successfully that
she winds up staying faithful, humiliating the playboys, reminding her husband that she
expects the same kind of faithfulness from him that she gives to him and then she gains
him a lot of money in the process so it's a pretty clean sweep.
There are enough reminders in these stories of rebirth and memories of earlier lives to
provide a kind of Hindu context.
But that's really a sub-theme because the main theme is really this one of making money.
But the frame is important in emphasizing the seriousness of stories in Indian life.
Even the gods tell stories to one another and we are reminded over and over that hearing
stories can help us overcome our own demons and discover new selves which can begin to
move us toward liberation.
So these collections of stories are not only great stories in themselves but they are going
to provide the rest of the world with some amazing techniques for storytelling that we'll
get to in future lectures.
Not immediately, a couple of lectures away because for the next three lectures we will
stay in the east and in our next lecture we will take a look at Chinese poetry from the
Tang period taking a closer look at Chinese poetry which we started taking a look at
in lecture six.
Then we'll take a look at the poetry of Japan who learned a lot about poetry from China
and then we will take a look at the first novel in history and we will begin that part
of our course, that theme of our course, The Rise of the Novel with Murasaki's The Tale
of Genji.
After that we'll come back to talk about narrative techniques to find out how much the world
learned from these collections of Indian stories.
