Lecture 18, 1001 Nights
In our last lecture, we looked at Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, and we particularly
focused on the way that Chaucer used the frame of that collection of stories to make all
of the stories inside that frame more complicated, more ambiguous, and more interesting.
In this lecture, we're going to take up what is probably the most famous framed collection
of stories in history, The 1001 Nights.
In many ways, this is a very unusual book.
For one thing, it has no single author.
It grew over the centuries, collecting stories from India, and Persia, and Syria, and Egypt,
as well as from Iraq, a place that turned out to be very important to this collection,
because about 50 of the stories are connected to a caliph of Baghdad, a Harun El Rashid,
who ruled at the late eighth and early ninth centuries, even though his stories, the ones
that are connected with him, were probably not written down or reached final form until
decades or even centuries later.
The book, in addition, exists in a variety of texts, all of which are very different
from each other.
No single text contains 1001 Nights, or even enough stories to get through that many nights.
And different texts contain different stories.
Even the ones that we're likely to know the best, like Aladdin and his lamp, or Alibaba
and the 40 Thieves, exist only in some manuscripts, and most scholars think that they were probably
late additions to this collection of stories.
There's a really good book on the history of the text, which makes an interesting study
in its own right, by Robert Irwin.
It's called The Arabian Nights, A Companion.
And if you're interested in the history of the text, it is a good story, and it's a
good study in itself.
I recommend that book to you.
Our interest in this collection of stories is in the frame, on the way the stories get
told.
We've dealt with frames in lecture 12 and then with Chaucer again, and this frame story
is undoubtedly the most famous frame story in history, known by many, many people who
don't even have never even read the book.
The frame story, to briefly summarize it, King Shariar of India and Indochina, whom
we are told is a very, very good king, sends for his brother, Shazaman of Samarkand.
Shazaman leaves to go visit his brother, but then he has to go back to the palace for something,
and when he gets back, he finds his wife in bed with a kitchen servant.
So he kills them both, and then he goes to visit his brother.
Shariar notices that his brother is depressed when he gets there.
He's not as usual in his usual good mood.
He attributes it to homesickness and being a delicate man himself.
He doesn't press his brother on this.
And then one day, this depression seems to be lasting for quite a while, one day when
Shariar goes out hunting, Shazaman says he's not up to it, he'd like to stay home.
So he stays home, and from his window, he looks out the window and sees his brother's
wife having sex with a slave, and ten other couples having sex in a kind of an orgy.
Well in a way, he's kind of consoled by the incident because he says, my brother is a
greater king than I am, a better man than I am, and if this can happen to him, it can
happen to anyone.
So when his brother comes home, he's a little more cheerful.
The brother is curious as to what has caused this new cheerfulness, and he keeps pushing
until finally his brother tells him both stories, the story of his own wife and the story of
his brother's wife.
Shariar says he needs to see this for himself, so he and the brother pretend to leave, they
sneak back into the palace, and Shariar looking out the window sees exactly the same thing
his brother had seen the first time.
And Shariar is devastated.
He suggests the brothers take a trip, the point of which is if they find someone whose
misfortune is greater than theirs, they'll come home.
If not, they'll simply keep on traveling.
They haven't traveled very far when they come to a shore, and just as they get to the
seashore, they see a huge ifrit or gin or demon bringing ashore, a huge glass chest secured
with four locks inside when he opens up this chest.
It turns out to be a woman that he stole on her wedding night, and thus he thinks secured
her to himself forever.
The two brothers have managed to climb a tree to hide from the ifrit, but when the ifrit
falls asleep in the woman's lap, she who has seen them in the tree summons them down
by telling them, if you don't come down, I'll wake this ifrit, and he'll kill both
of you.
So the two brothers reluctantly come down, and what she does is she says, make love
to me.
So they do, first the one and then the other, reluctantly, but they do so because of the
threat.
She then asks each one of them for a ring, and when each one of them gives her a ring,
she adds those two rings to her collection of 98 rings that she has already collected.
The brothers go home, they realize now they've run into somebody who's far more unfortunate
than they are.
This ifrit thinks that he's secured this woman to him forever with his contraption of
the glass chests and the four locks and all of that, and she has, while she's been with
him, collected 100 rings from 100 men who've made love to her.
So the brothers go home, they've solved their, they've satisfied their quest, and
Charriere, the only guest home, has his wife killed and he kills the slaves himself.
And then, since he now believes there is no such thing as a chaste woman on earth, he
takes a virgin, every night a virgin, which his vizier has to provide for him.
He takes her to bed each night, beds her, and then kills her in the morning.
This way he reasons no woman that he's with will ever have a chance to be unfaithful to
him again.
This goes on for many nights until he is running out of suitable women in the country, and the
country is growing restive because he's actually in a way making war on his own people, at
least on the women of his own people, at which point Char Azad, or Scheherazad as we know
her, volunteers to be the next virgin.
Her father says, no, no, no, no, no, you'll just be dead in the morning, but she insists
until she becomes the next woman to go into Charriere's bed at night.
That night, she asks her younger sister, Dinnerzad, or Dunyazad, depending on which
translation you read, whether she can spend the last night with her.
The king says, okay, Dinnerzad sleeps under the bed, and then after the king and Scheherazad
have made love, Dinnerzad asks if Scheherazad can tell her a story.
She said, you know, she likes Scheherazad's stories.
The king agrees.
The story is timed so as not quite to get to the climactic point by which time the king
has to get a couple of hours of sleep so he can go do his kingly duties in the morning.
Dinnerzad says she would really like to hear the end of the story, and Scheherazad said
I'd love to tell you the end of the story, but it depends on whether I'm still alive
tomorrow night or not.
And the king says he would like to hear the ending of the story too.
So that gets it started.
Every night she manages to start another story, which doesn't quite end, but gets to some
point at which the king says he really would like to hear the ending of that story, and
so it goes on for the pattern that goes on for one thousand one nights.
Each night the death sentence is suspended for one more day so that the king can hear
the ending of the story.
There are many, many things that could be said about this frame, which is a very famous,
illustrious one, but there are two of two things for our purposes in this course that
I think are really interesting to mention.
The first one is the question, what kind of a story does this frame require?
The frame itself is in some ways more limiting than Scheherazad's, since it only has one
narrator and a very limited audience.
Technically, an audience of one, that's Sharia, although Dinerzad is also always there so
that there really is an audience of two.
Scheherazad, we remember, had 30 tellers and 30 listeners, and so the possibilities of
interaction among those 30 people are much, much greater.
Scheherazad's aim, on the other hand, is to stay alive, so she needs to stretch her
stories over as many nights as she possibly can.
And the way she does this is by telling nested tales of the sort that we have talked about
in lecture 12, so that possibly she can have three or four stories going at one time.
We remember how nested stories work.
Someone starts, you start telling a story inside that story, someone tells a story inside
that one, someone tells a story, until finally you can have several levels going at one time.
Scheherazad gets to be very talented at this, and there's one series, which is sometimes
called the Hunchback series, in the 1001 Nights, in which there are 11 stories fitted into
a frame story, so you've got all these stories going on at the same time.
Ideally, when you tell nested stories, the stories inside the frame story should duplicate
the theme or the situation of the frame story, or at least parallel it in some way, and at
their best, the nested stories do that in the 1001 Nights.
And what that means is if the interaction between teller and listeners is more limited
in this collection than it is in Chaucer, the possibilities for narrative complexity
are much, much greater.
I want to give you an example of how this nesting technique works, and how Scheherazad
uses it to keep her story, or really a series of nested stories, going for many nights.
The idea is really never to allow a story to end at the end of a night, which would in
theory give the king a chance to put her to death in the morning since he would have
heard the end of the story.
The example I'm going to give you isn't the most elaborate use of nesting technique,
but it'll give you an idea of how it works.
On the very first night, Scheherazad starts a story about a merchant who one day sits
down to eat his lunch.
When he's finished, he throws away the stones from his dates, only to have an ifrit or jini
appear to say that he has to kill the merchant since one of the merchant's date stones killed
the ifrit's son.
After a lot of pleading, the merchant talks the ifrit into waiting for one year to avenge
his son's death so the merchant can go home and settle his affairs and take care of things
he has to do before he dies.
A year passes and then true to his oath, the merchant returns to the same tree to await
the ifrit who's going to kill him.
While he's waiting for the ifrit to show up, a shake comes by, leading a beautiful,
chained gazelle.
The shake asks the merchant what he's doing here and when the merchant tells him, he sits
down beside him, declaring that he will wait for him, wait with him for that vengeful jini.
As they're sitting there talking, another shake comes by, leading two black greyhounds.
The same conversation is repeated and the second shake also joins them, as does a third
who comes by leading a mule of a bright bay color.
When the ifrit finally arrives, the first shake makes him an offer.
He says, I'll tell you a story and if you think that it's a really good, wondrous story,
you can thank me by giving me a third of this merchant's blood.
The ifrit, like everyone else in this book, is always ready for a good story and so he
agrees.
Notice that we've already, in that first night, begun the nesting process.
The first shake story is actually a story within the story and it has to be finished before
we can get back to the frame story.
Scheherazade's second important technique, in addition to keeping several stories going
at once, is never to finish a story by the time the king needs to sleep for a few hours
before getting up and doing his kingly duties for the day.
In this story she does that too.
The story that the first shake tells is about how his wife got herself enchanted into this
gazelle that he's now leading around.
That story that he tells has a series of really good climaxes in it and at one point in the
story the shake is approaching a beautiful calf with his knife in his hand, ready to
cut the calf's throat, not realizing as we do that the calf is his own enchanted son.
Just as he reaches for the calf with his knife, Scheherazade said, oh it's time for you to
get some sleep.
And Danyazade said, she'd really like to hear the end of this story and that it's a really
good story.
Scheherazade says that ending is even better than the story so far and that this story is
nothing compared to the one she could tell the next night if she's still alive.
The king says he'd like to hear the ending too and so he won't slay her in the morning.
The next night she finishes the first shake's story and starts the second and so it goes.
Each shake of course asks for a third of the merchant's blood and each one is awarded
it as the ifrit rewards them for telling a good story.
The ifrit is as good as his word and he likes a good story too.
After the third shake has finished his story, we get this.
This is from the Richard Burton translation so the language is a little archaic but you'll
get the idea of how the narrative strategy works.
And Scheherazade perceived the dawn of the day and ceased saying her permitted say.
Then Quoth Danyazade, oh my sister how pleasant is thy tale and how tasteful, how sweet and
how grateful.
He replied, and what is this compared with that I could tell thee the night to come if
I live and the king spare me?
Then thought the king by Allah I will not slay her until I hear the rest of her tale,
for truly it is wondrous.
So they rested that night in mutual embrace until the dawn.
After this the king went forth to his hall of estate and the wazir and the troops came
in and the court was crowded and the king gave orders and judged and appointed and deposed,
bidding and forbidding during the rest of the day.
Then the divan broke up and King Shariar entered his palace.
When it was the third night and the king had had his will of the wazir's daughter, Danyazade,
her sister said to her, finish for us that tale of thine, and she replied with joy and
goodly grieve.
It hath reached me, O auspicious king, that when the third old man told a tale to the
jinnie more wondrous than the two preceding, the jinnie marveled with exceeding marvel
and shaking with delight cried, Lo, I have given thee the remainder of the merchant's
punishment, and for thy sake have I released him.
Thereupon the merchant embraced the old man, men, and thanked them, and these shakes wished
him joy on being saved and fared forth each one for his own city.
Yet this tale is not more wondrous than the fisherman's story.
Ask the king, what is the fisherman's story?
And she answered by relating the tale of the fisherman and the jinnie.
And so it goes, as we noted before, if the chance for interaction among tellers and hearers
is more limited than Chaucer, the need for a complicated narrative strategy and technique
is much greater.
The second really interesting thing about this frame is that it is really deeply embedded
in the history of world literature both past and future.
Scheherazade says that she's not making up any of these stories.
And that's true of the entire collection.
Arab writers at this period had access to the stories of the Greeks and the Romans and
the Egyptians and the Berbers and the Persians and the Indians, and scholars have in fact
traced many of the stories and the techniques of this book back to earlier collections.
And they have also then been interested in seeing where these stories go from this point
on so that in some amazingly beautiful ways for our course, the 1001 Knights looks backward
and forward simultaneously.
Perhaps many of the stories and perhaps the techniques may have originated in India.
There's a thought that this collection of stories may have begun there and got to where
it wound up by way of Persia.
We saw in lecture 12 that there were collections of Indian stories in existence for a long time
already.
Collections like the Jataka or the Panchantantra or the Katha Saritsagara, which already had
in place all of the techniques that are being used in the 1001 Knights.
And some of the stories in the 1001 Knights can be found there too.
To remind ourselves to make sure that we remember this of just one of them, the Panchantantra's
frame is a wise Brahmin teaching a group of somewhat dim princes, things they need to
know to rule well.
But the tales are also entertaining.
Their entertainment value sometimes equals or exceeds their teaching value.
Each one of the five books of this collection has its own frame and within many of the stories,
characters in them tell stories.
And so that nesting is very complicated as characters within stories tell characters
and so on.
That book we know was translated into Persian in the 6th century.
It was translated into Arabic in the 8th after which it made its way into Syriac and Hebrew
literature and eventually into all European literatures.
It provided stories eventually for Bokacu's Decameron, for Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales,
and even for some Grimm Brothers' Fairy Tales.
So we know that stories have a way of getting around, especially in the oral tradition.
And by the time the 1001 Knights was put to paper, these stories had been around for a
very long time in many places and in many languages.
So we're not really very surprised anymore when an Indian story shows up in Baghdad or
in Florence or in London.
But the story doesn't stop here.
The first tales from the 1001 Knights were translated into French at the beginning of
the 18th century and from there they went all over Europe as part of an Oriental craze
that lasted pretty much all of the 18th century across Europe.
So that means that generations of children were brought up on these tales so that every
19th century writer would have known them.
And so just to give you a couple of examples from things that we will perhaps take a look
at later in this course, at the very end of Proust's Remembrance of Things Past, when
he knows now that it's time for him to start his novel and he just needs enough time to
finish the novel, he prays for 1001 Knights to finish the novel and that number is not
an accident.
Bits of these stories from the 1001 Knights run through Leopold Bloom's head during his
day in Dublin in Ulysses.
Borges, whom we'll take a look at in our second to the last lecture, says that it was his
favorite book.
Sort of cryptically, he says that it's so vast that one doesn't have to read it.
I have no idea what that means.
But looking even further ahead, John Barth, in a book that he wrote, made up of three
longest short stories, the book is called Camara.
In that book, the first story is called the Dania Zodiad and it's the frame story of
the 1001 Knights told from the point of view of Scheherazade's younger sister.
The author, or at least a surrogate of the author, is allowed to be a character in Scheherazade's
story.
He, in fact, helps her with the stories that she tells the king every night.
Later on, in a book that Barth's called Tidewater Tales, she returns the visit to
him in Maryland where she gets trapped for a while in the 20th century, so she returns
the visit that he got to pay her in the Dania Zodiad.
And from there on, echoes of the 1001 Knights turn up in almost everything Barth wrote.
What fascinated Barth about the book was its narrative structure and the way storytelling
becomes the actual subject of this book.
In other words, this is reflexive literature.
This is a topic that we'll get back to when we do the postmodernists at the end of this
course.
Barth loved the way that stories could be nested, and he and Scheherazade speculate
about a series of nested stories so constructed that when the climax is reached in the innermost
story, it sets off the climaxes in all the other ones, like a string of firecrackers.
He worked these ideas into some of his own stories, in one, a short story called a Menelaiad,
which is Menelaus's story from the Trojan War.
He puts narrative inside narrative, keeps nesting them, and every time he nests another
story, he adds another set of quotation marks.
So as soon as we get deeper and deeper into this nesting technique, the quotation marks
simply keep multiplying until at the very center of the story, we have one line that's
made up entirely of opening quotation marks, an exclamation point, and the rest of the
line is closing quotation marks.
It is one of the most clever uses of nesting techniques in all of literature.
The point is that what we're trying to do in this course is we're trying to see the
literature of the world both in its own context and then part of an ongoing tradition that
borrows whatever it can from wherever it can, and this book is a really perfect illustration
of that overall thesis.
If we go back to the book itself, we can ask the question, what is it really about?
And we can answer that question in a variety of ways.
On the most literal level, Scheherazade is simply trying to stay alive by entertaining
the king with stories that will interest him, and always in such a way that the climax can't
quite be reached before it's time for the king to get some sleep.
That means, first of all, that the stories are entertaining.
They borrowed the best stories from the best sources, and these stories had been around
for so long they had been polished into kind of a brilliant finish by the time they were
incorporated into this book.
And there is every imaginable kind of story in the book, from the romantic to the edifying
to the body to the tragic.
They're all here.
There are animal fables, and there are fairy stories, and there are serious stories about
lovers, and there are stories about men and women who are no better than they should be,
and who spend their time just deceiving each other.
So at very least, we can get from the king what king Shahr, or from the king, we can
get from these stories what king Shahriar got from them.
At the end of the story, Scheherazade presents him with three sons born during the 1001 nights,
when she begs for her life.
Not for her sake, but for the sake of the children.
He tells her that he's long ago given up the idea of killing her, and he marries her,
and they live happily until we are told at the end, death, the destroyer of all delights,
comes to claim them.
So that on the one hand, it is a marvelously entertaining book.
It does.
It kept Scheherazade alive by entertaining the king for a thousand and one nights, and
it can do the same for us.
But the book may, in fact, do more than simply entertain.
Some readers, feminists especially, think that Scheherazade is really trying to teach
the king some lessons in a way helping him to grow up, and in thinking about this, there
are two ways in which we can do it.
Sometimes critics have looked for ways in which the individual stories themselves might
teach king Shahriar some lessons.
That very first story that we just referred to is one of those that actually might work,
where we find that the ifrit forgives the merchant his life in exchange for some good
stories.
And in fact, that's what Scheherazade is asking from Shahriar, to excuse her life in
exchange for some good stories.
The trouble with dealing with the individual stories on this level is that there are so
many different kinds of stories in this book that some of them are going to reinforce lessons
that Scheherazade might want to teach him.
Some are going to reinforce his own anti-feminism, his own misogyny, and so that I don't know
that you can actually work at the level of individual story.
But other critics, feminists particularly, have thought that it's useful to think about
what Scheherazade is doing in sexual terms.
Barth himself was struck by the many parallels between love-making and storytelling, and
he and Scheherazade have some really interesting discussions about this, especially since all
of the stories are told in bed.
We remember from Lecture 12 that in one of the great collections of Indian stories, the
God Shiva tells them to his consort Parvati while she's sitting on his lap in the bedroom,
so the connection between love-making and storytelling had occurred to the Indians as
well.
Fedwa Malty-Douglas, in a book called Woman's Body, Woman's Word, suggests that Shahriar's
practice of deflowering a woman every night and then killing her the next morning is a
metaphor for what she calls an immature male pattern of excitement, satisfaction, and termination.
What she suggests that Scheherazade is doing, not with individual stories, but the process
of storytelling itself is teaching him a new pattern, which she calls the pattern of
extended and continuous pleasure.
Here's the way she sums up her argument in this in her book.
Rather than taking on directly the king's fractured pattern of physical love-making,
Scheherazade shifts the problem of desire from the area of sex, the realm of Scheheriar's
trauma, to the superficially more distant and more malleable world of the text.
Her storytelling teaches a new type of desire, a desire that continues from night to night,
a desire whose interest does not fall and which can therefore leap the intervening days.
In sexual terms, this is a replacement of an immature male pattern of excitement, satisfaction,
and termination, with what can be called a more classically female pattern of extended
and continuous desire and pleasure.
Of course, it is this extension of desire through time that permits the forging of relationships
and with it the non-exploitive approach to sexuality.
In effecting this transformation, Scheherazade functions as a mistress of desire not unlike
the sexually wise women of the erotic manuals, one of whose duties is the initiation of males
into a more sophisticated sexuality.
What multi-Douglas has done in that passage in the argument in her book is to reverse
the connection between sex and storytelling that was discussed by Barth and Scheherazade
in his stories.
He suggested that storytelling is like sex in its structure of exposition and rising
action and climax in De Numa.
Multi-Douglas is suggesting that sex can be like storytelling and that Scheherazade can
alter the king's sexual habits by telling him stories, stories of a certain kind and
telling them in a certain kind of way and then letting him make the connection on his
own.
It's an intriguing idea and it makes Scheherazade into a very, very wise woman indeed.
It does manage by the end of the book to do some things for Sharia that were worth doing.
It stops him at very least from killing another virgin every morning and also stops him from
making war on his own country.
It also cures him of his conviction that there is no such thing as a chaste woman because
at the end of these 1001 nights he marries and lives happily ever after or happily until
death, the great destroyer of delights comes to claim them.
If he learns all of these things, if he learns all of that from Scheherazade by the way that
she tells him stories, then Scheherazade does turn out to be one of the great heroines of
all of literature in a variety of ways.
There are many other ways, of course, in which the book can be read.
The main thing first is just to read them.
For Scheherazade, whatever she's trying to do, nothing will work unless the stories entertain,
unless they give pleasure, unless we get interested in them and want to finish this one or get
on to the next or the next two or three that she's got nested and going at the same time.
John Barth, in a very clever line, says that Scheherazade is in the prototypal publisher
parish position.
She survives only if her stories are really interesting, and she does survive because
her stories are interesting and because they are so well told.
And what this does in our course and in our interest in narrative strategies and narrative
techniques, it pushes storytelling another step forward, shows us another way in which
frames can function.
Chaucer puts a distance between the author and the tellers of the tales, which will
be useful for later writers in our course.
Marguerite of Navarre will use this technique a couple of lectures ahead, and Voltaire and
Candide, a little further down the road, will find it a very useful technique indeed.
This frame requires that the stories themselves be more artful, especially in terms of nesting,
which is going to be very important for later writers, especially post-modernist writers,
as John Barth's fascination with the frame story suggests, and so does Borgesa's admiration
for it.
We have come, in other words, in terms of storytelling techniques, we have come a long
way from Wilde's caveman.
Storytelling has now become a very complex and interesting art form in its own right.
In our next lecture, we are going to take a slight digression from narrative strategies.
We'll get back to it in lecture 20 with Marguerite of Navarre's Heptameron, but next time we
are going to take a look at a Chinese novel in the vernacular, a novel called Monkey or
Journey to the West, which is the story of how Buddhist scriptures were brought from
India to China, and this will be following one of our other motifs in this course, the
development of the novel and some of the common denominators in that development, whatever
kind of culture we are dealing with.
And so in our next lecture, Monkey or Journey to the West.
