Lecture 43 – Faulkner, Two Stories and a Novel
When William Faulkner was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1950, almost all of his novels were
out of print, and despite the efforts of a few critics, notably Malcolm Cowley, to indicate
the scope of his achievement, Faulkner seemed in real danger of falling into that great
black hole of forgotten literature.
Then came the Nobel Prize, and that stimulated a worldwide appraisal that by now has made
him what I would imagine to be the most written about American writer of the 20th century.
To give credit where it's due, the French had actually discovered and come to appreciate
Faulkner earlier.
In the 1930s already, the French were writing laudatory essays about him, and so in a way
they discovered Faulkner before we did, before the rest of the world did, in the same way
that they had discovered Edgar Allen Poe before we did, and the rest of the world did about
a hundred years earlier.
We're still in the process of looking at experiments in literature in the modernist
period, and Faulkner is one of the most daring of the storytellers in the century, particularly
in America.
In this lecture what we want to do is we want to put him back into the context of the world
literature of his period, and then discuss briefly some of his innovations in the short
story and in the novel.
Well, guess what everybody knows best about Faulkner is that beginning with a very early
novel, Sartorus, he started creating what he called Yachtnipetofa County with its county
seat Jefferson, virtually everything he wrote from then on is set in some specific time
period and place in that county.
It was one of the things that Malcolm Cowley had pointed out in 1946 when he edited the
Viking Portable Library edition of Faulkner, that everything that Faulkner had written
fit into a grand scheme which traced Yachtnipetofa County from the time of the indigenous Indians
through the coming of the first white settlers, through the institution of slavery, the establishment
of the great plantations, the Civil War period, and the dislocations that the Civil War and
Reconstruction caused, the shift from agriculture to industry that had displaced most of the
great pre-war aristocratic families of the region up through the beginnings of the modern
period to about the 1940s.
Cowley, in fact, in his Viking Portable edition arranged the stories in order of the chronology
of the history of Yachtnipetofa County, which made it easier for readers to see the big
story of the South that Faulkner had written.
The two both stories and the novel that we'll talk about in this lecture fit into that big
scheme in the place of which Faulkner said that he was the sole proprietor.
Faulkner had read Balzac, and so it may be the idea of a grand cycle of works with characters
who are repeated from novel to novel in the same settings came from Balzac's efforts
to write what he called the great human comedy about life in Paris from about 1815 to 1848.
At any rate, wherever he got the idea, the big canvas on which Faulkner worked allowed
him to produce a really integrated body of work that chose the rise and fall of the Old
South and the beginnings of the New South after the Civil War and then on into the 20th
century.
One other thing that we'd probably need to say about Faulkner before we look at some
of his stories, he had been early on lightly dismissed by some readers and critics because
he seemed both a regional writer, that is, a writer whose interest was confined primarily
to people who were interested in the South, and also because he had seemed in some ways
a sensational writer.
His stories of the South were full of violence and murder and lynching and rape and duels,
and there was a great deal of violence so that a lot of earlier readers had simply dismissed
him by saying he's a sensational, real regional writer, and that's all that needs to be said
about Faulkner.
When Faulkner was given the Nobel Prize, however, in his acceptance speech, he said that his
work was about what all good literature is always about.
He said it was about love and honor and pity and pride and compassion and sacrifice, which
he said all of these things were the glories of man's past and which could help man in
the present both to endure and even Faulkner said he believed to prevail.
Critics after having heard this speech scrambled back to the works to look to see if he was
telling the truth, to see if they could find all these grand virtues that he said that
he had built into his works, and it turned out that he was telling the truth.
It's just that in Faulkner, the human condition never occurs in anything like a pure form.
Heroism and courage and honor and integrity always are so mixed up with baseness and grotesque
comedy and violence and neuroses and the kind of twisted histories of the sins of the father
that you can't separate any of these things, and it makes the good qualities which really
do occur in his books sometimes a little difficult to see.
The great truths are always there and the ones that he mentioned in his speech, but
they're always alloyed with grimmer and messier stuff.
A really good illustration of this is the first short story that we want to take a look
at in this lecture.
It's called Wash.
Wash was first published in 1934, and then two years later in 1936 was incorporated in
a revised form into a novel about the Sutpin family, a novel called Absalom Absalom.
Wash is a poor white who is squatted on an old fishing shack on the Sutpin plantation.
He's lived there since well before the Civil War, and he still does so when the story takes
place, which is perhaps five years after the Civil War.
The story is told from a third person omniscient point of view, and this is a reminder that
Faulkner is generally a little less daring and innovative and experimental in his short
stories than he is in his novels.
So the story is told from a third person omniscient point of view, but we spend a lot
of time inside the mind of Wash, a shiftless white who, we discover, has always admired
Sutpin to the point of adoration.
He has seen in Sutpin values that he has been happy to live in the reflection of, and which
seemed to give some kind of meaning to his otherwise random and insignificant life.
Wash was there to watch when Colonel Sutpin rode away to the Civil War on a horse so
fine that Wash thinks, if God were to come down to earth, he would want to look like
that.
He would want to look like Colonel Sutpin on that magnificent horse.
He's also there when Sutpin comes home after the war, a ruined man now whose sons are dead
and whose plantation has fallen to ruin, and a man who's going to have to start all over
again if he's going to make anything of the rest of his life.
The story, by the way, of the rise and fall of the Sutpin family is the one that's told
in Absalom Absalom.
Sutpin himself knows that he has to start over, so he opens up a little country store
where Wash helps him.
Wash helps him not for pay, but just to be around him, just to be near him.
And because he helps him during the week, he's allowed on Sundays to sit in the arbor
of the old plantation house and to drink whiskey with the Colonel, and, as it turns out, quite
frequently to have to put him to bed later on that Sunday night.
When Sutpin comes home, Wash is living with a granddaughter named Millie, who's about
15 years old.
Sutpin decides that he's going to start a new dynasty, and so he seduces Millie and
gets her pregnant.
Wash is aware of what's going on, and he knows what others will think.
He knows that others will think that he's letting it happen because he wants something
from Sutpin.
He's using Millie for some kind of blackmail.
But he isn't.
He trusts Sutpin.
He believes that Sutpin will do the honorable thing, the right thing, because he believes
in the Sutpins of the world.
He believes in Colonel Thomas Sutpin.
On the morning when Millie's baby is born, Sutpin comes down to the old fishing shack
where they live.
Wash thinks that he's concerned about the mother and child.
As it turns out, the only reason that Sutpin is up early that morning is because his favorite
mare has just had a colt.
When Sutpin finds out that Millie's baby is a girl, he loses interest.
He already has a daughter.
He had wanted a son.
And it becomes perfectly clear to Wash, standing and holding the reins of Sutpin's horse while
Sutpin goes into the shack, and therefore Wash can overhear everything that goes on
inside the shack, it becomes perfectly clear to Wash that Sutpin cares more for the colt
than for his daughter, that neither Millie nor the baby nor Wash mean anything to Sutpin
at all.
It is a totally shattering revelation for Wash.
He had believed in the values and the honor of the Colonel and his class, and now suddenly
in this new light he sees Sutpin and his like is what he calls mere bragging and evil shadows.
This because the Sutpins are the ones who set the rules and the order of living everywhere.
They are the ones who decide how other people live.
So Wash knows it's useless to try to run away because wherever he runs, there will be other
Sutpins.
There are Sutpins all over the earth.
Wherever he goes, he will never escape them.
So when Sutpin emerges from the shack, Wash kills him with a sigh as he emerges from the
shack.
Later on in the morning when the body is discovered, Wash waits inside the shack for the inevitable
Posse to show up, which it does after dark.
And when the Posse is gathered around, all of the, everyone with rifles out, waiting,
calling out for Wash to come out, Wash kills both Millie and the baby and then douses the
house with kerosene and lights it on fire.
And then he emerges from the house and runs out toward the Posse with his scythe raised.
The last paragraph of the story is this, yet still the gaunt, furious figure came on against
the glare and roar of the flames.
With the scythe lifted, it bore down upon them upon the wild, glaring eyes of the horses
and the swinging glints of gun barrels without any cry, any sound.
That gesture and that ending of that story feels like the ending of some kind of Greek
tragedy or at least some kind of Greek story.
It may even, for those of us who know the story, it may even recall the death of Alcibiades
when the Persians lit the palace on fire in which he was living and then waited, having
surrounded the palace with their bows and arrows.
Alcibiades emerged from the palace nude, holding a spear directly into the reign of
arrows as Wash does here into this hail of bullets.
The story can be about many things.
It's about Southern aristocratic degeneracy after the war.
It's a story about the way the past is always a source of evil in the present.
It's a story about one man's waking up to a cluster of just awful truths.
But it's also about Wash Jones.
It's about a no-account man whose final grand gesture, so striking, is so tangled up with
selfishness and obsequiousness and racism and a kind of a mad hero worship that there's
no way to separate them.
That's what Faulkner does in all of his stories.
Eldis Huxley wrote an essay once called The Whole Truth, in which Huxley argued that tragedy
is always a distilled essence, a kind of pure representation of one side of human nature.
Comedy, Huxley argues, always tells the whole truth.
It includes all sides of the human spirit, it includes warts, it includes eating and drinking,
it includes doing foolish things.
It does all of the kind of things that tragedy, includes all of the kind of things that tragedy
overlooks and leaves out.
In that sense, in the sense that Huxley means it, Faulkner's work is always comic.
It always includes the whole truth.
It isn't that the heroic or the endurance or the courage is any the less for that.
It's just that in Faulkner we always have to find it embedded in the whole character,
in the entire Wash in this story, not just the Wash of that last grand gesture.
I think that what Huxley means by the whole truth is maybe even clearer in the next story
we'll take a brief look at.
It's called A Rose for Emily, which is set in Jefferson in 1928.
This story commemorates the death of Emily Greerson, who was descended from one of the
really old aristocratic families of the days before the war.
The story is told by a townsman, so the point of view is first person engaged.
He tells two stories at the same time.
The first story is about Emily, and the second story is about the towns perceptions of Emily.
He uses we throughout the entire story to suggest that he's speaking for all of Jefferson,
what we thought of Ms. Emily, what we think of Ms. Emily, we thought that he uses we throughout.
The town sees Emily as the kind of last of a vanishing species of aristocrats who in
every way refuse to capitulate to modern life.
Her house is a really fine symbol for the woman who lives in it.
It stands on what used to be the most elegant street in Jefferson.
Now it's the only house left, and it's surrounded by garages and cotton gins and gas pumps and wagons.
The story uses the technique of broken chronology, which we talked about when we talked about
Proust.
It moves backwards and forwards in time the way someone telling a story about Ms. Emily
would do, and what the narrator tries to do is to give us a sense of the town's perception
of Ms. Emily over time, the way it fluctuated, the way it changed, the way it developed.
We're told, for example, that in 1894, Colonel Sartoris, who was then the mayor, as a gentlemanly
gesture remitted Ms. Emily's taxes, knowing that she couldn't afford to pay them any
more anyway.
Twenty years later, we're told that a new city council decided that she should pay
taxes, and they went to visit her one evening only to be rebuffed and sent home by the hot
cure of a very grand lady.
We're told that in 1896, there was a bad smell around her house, and the city council had
to decide what to do.
Colonel Sartoris, who was still the mayor at this time, said, you just can't walk up
to a lady and tell her she smells bad, so the city council sneaked up around the house
at night with bags of lime, and they spread lime around the foundations, and after a while
the smell went away.
We're given a picture of Ms. Emily as a young woman standing in the doorway of a mansion,
while her father, legs spread apart and holding a horse whip, drives away Sartoris for her
hand, none of whom he thought was good enough for his daughter.
When the father died, we're told she refused to let him be buried for three days, and when
she finally relented, people had to bury him very quickly.
We're told that the year after her father's death, a Yankee work crew came into town to
put in sidewalks in Jefferson.
Among them was one Homer Barron, who took Emily for carriage rides on Sunday afternoons,
and we're told then that the town began to think of Emily as a fallen woman, a fallen
woman with Homer, and once they could think of her in that way, we're told that the town
kind of enjoyed a chance to look down on Ms. Emily for a change.
When the sidewalks are finished, Homer leaves, and now the town thinks of poor Emily in a
double sense, she's both a fallen woman and a deserted woman.
But then Homer returns.
A little while later, Homer returns, everyone assumes that he will marry her.
But he disappears into Ms. Emily's house, and he has never seen again poor Emily indeed.
After Homer's disappearance, Emily seldom leaves the house anymore.
She can be seen sometimes sitting in an upstairs window, looking, the narrator says, like some
kind of Buddha.
As the years go by, she grows old and fat, and her hair turns in iron gray.
At the end of her life, when she dies, hers is the last house in Jefferson that doesn't
have a house number that has no mailbox because she refused to let either of those things
happen.
For years, she still keeps the town in awe of her, as she does, for example, at the hardware
store when she goes to buy poison.
According to the law, she's supposed to fill out a form explaining what she's going to
use it for.
She refuses to acknowledge either the form or the clerk who winds up selling her the
poison and then fills out the form himself.
He writes on it for rats.
And then finally, Miss Emily dies.
On the day of her death, the last old black servant walks out the back door and is never
seen again.
And when the neighbors and townspeople come to the house, they discover that one of the
upstairs bedroom doors is locked, and they eventually have to break in, and then we get
the last paragraphs of the story.
In those last paragraphs, we're told that, after Miss Emily had been buried, a group
of people forced their way into the locked room.
When they broke open the door and went into it, what they found was a room which, according
to the narrator, was decked and furnished as if for a bridal, though now it was full
of what he says is a pervading dust.
On the dresser, also covered with dust, there were a man's toilet things.
Their silver by now so tarnished that even the monogram was obscured.
They are still looking at that dresser when we get the final paragraphs of the story.
Among them lay a collar and tie as if they had just been removed, which, lifted, left
upon the surface a pale crescent in the dust.
Upon a chair hung the suit, carefully folded.
Beneath it, the two mute shoes and the discarded socks.
The man himself lay in the bed.
For a long while, we just stood there, looking down at the profound and fleshless grin.
The body had apparently once lain in the attitude of an embrace, but now the long sleep
that outlasts love, that conquers even the grimace of love, had cuckolded him.
What was left of him, rotted beneath what was left of the night shirt, had become inextricable
from the bed in which he lay, and upon him and upon the pillow beside him lay that even
coating of the patient and biding dust.
Then we noticed that in the second pillow was the indentation of a head.
One of us lifted something from it and leaning forward, that faint and invisible dust dry
and acrid in the nostrils.
We saw a long strand of iron gray hair.
With a terrible shudder at the end of the story, we realize why the narrator has been
jumping backwards and forwards in time.
He's been doing this to prevent us until the very end from putting all the pieces together
in that last sentence, everything falls into place.
Emily had of course poisoned Homer, preventing him from leaving her for good, and she has
kept his body in the upstairs room where she herself continued to sleep until her hair
had turned iron gray.
The rat poison and the bad smell and Homer's disappearance suddenly all fall into place
and we understand in that last sentence what this story is all about.
Is Miss Emily mad?
Of course she's mad.
But the title, remember, is a rose for Emily.
That is, this is a tribute of the town to a woman who in every way refused to give in,
who refused to compromise, to adapt herself and her expectations to the increasingly diminished
and grubby world around her.
There is real insanity here, of course there is.
But if we think about it, looking back through some of the works that we've talked about
in this course, isn't there some insanity in Antigone and Sophocles' play?
Isn't she just as insane for doing what she did?
Or Clytemnestra in Escalus' plays?
Or Medea in Euripides?
Maybe the suggestion is there has to be a little bit of madness mixed in with all forms
of heroism.
Anyway, the point, and here again, and this is Huxley's point, is that in Faulkner all
of these values that are mentioned in the acceptance speech are all here.
But again in Huxley's phrase, Faulkner always gives us the whole truth, so that so interwoven
that the tragic and the comic almost always occur together.
When we read Faulkner, we experience laughter and sorrow and horror and the grotesque all
at one time.
This is the real heart of the Faulknerian vision.
We can illustrate that yet one more time in a very brief look, a very brief introduction
to one of his novels as I Lay Dying, which was published in 1930.
This novel is treated in more detail in another teaching company course.
And so what we're going to do here is just to mention two things as a way of showing
how this fits in with our course.
The two things that are important for us is one, is like the other stories that we've
just looked at, this novel tells Huxley's the whole truth.
The basic situation of the novel is that Addy, the mother of the Bundren family, has just
died.
Her husband, Ants, has promised to take her body back to Jefferson, which is about 20
miles away, to be buried with her own people.
The Bundrens are a poor farming family from the country, and their pilgrimage from the
country to Jefferson to bury their wife and mother is the plot of the novel.
They turn out to be very unlucky.
The mule cart on which they're carrying the coffin overturns in a flooded stream, and the
mules are drowned, and this happens almost at the beginning of the journey.
All manner of other things delay them along the way, including a fire in a barn where
the wagon and the coffin are kept overnight.
And in the end, it takes them nine full days to get to Jefferson.
By the time they get there, buzzards are circling around the wagon, offending and outraging
everyone who meets them on the last days of the trip.
On the one hand, it's an epic journey through flood and fire to keep a promise.
And as with Wash Jones and Emily Greerson, members of this family do have their moments
of courage and endurance and compassion, even of heroism along the way.
But also, as with Wash and Emily, their motives are mixtures of loyalty and selfishness.
Jones wants to go to Jefferson not just to bury Addy, but also he wants to get some
new false teeth, and he returns home with a new wife and with a phonograph that she
brings along as a dowry.
Dewey Dell, the daughter, wants to bury her mother, but she is also two months pregnant
by a farmhand, and she wants and is hoping that she'll find some kind of drug in a drug
store in town that will take care of her problem.
And once again, personal and public motives interweave so thoroughly that at any given
moment a gesture can be seen in different ways.
It can be grotesque, it can be absurd, it can be immoral, it can be comic, it can be sad,
it can be funny, or in typical Faulknerian fashion it can be all of these things at once.
The second thing I want to mention about this novel has to do with its technique, its form.
To make sure that we see the action from as many viewpoints as possible, the story is
told in 59 sections, each told by one of 15 characters.
Each character tells his or her section in a stream of consciousness interior monologue.
Most of them are by the seven Bundrens, but some are done by neighbors and by other people
whom the Bundrens meet on their way to Jefferson.
It is, in short, one of the most daring narrative techniques we've come across in this course.
Normally Bronte's Wuthering Heights, when we did that some programs ago, seems modern
because all of the people who tell the story are inside the novel itself, without any outside
authority or omniscient author to guide us.
Everything we know, we learn from characters who live inside the novel, and we have to
infer our own conclusions from the stories of the characters who live inside the book.
We've also seen that modernism in literature means, among other things, a radical subjectivity.
I may not know what the world is really like, but I know how it appears to me, how it registers
on my consciousness, and an important part of the modernist agenda has been to capture
that kind of subjectivity in literature.
Faulkner achieves all of this in a particularly brilliant way.
We never get in this novel any outside authority or authorial presence to tell us what the journey
to Jefferson is all about or what it finally means.
All we get are the voices on the journey of the people making the journey, or the voices
of those who encounter the Bundrens on the way, different characters in 59 separate monologues.
And some of the voices are really troubled ones at that.
Vardemann, the youngest Bundren child, is so traumatized by his mother's death that
his trauma shows up in his monologues in some ways anticipating the Benji sections in The
Sound and the Fury.
Daro is the most intuitive of the children.
He is so intuitive, in fact, that he can almost read the minds of the other characters.
But he's also a disturbed enough character that he's actually left in Jefferson at the
end in a hospital for the insane when the rest of the family goes home.
And the voices from outside the Bundren family register a whole wide range of responses,
shock and disgust and moral indignation and some sympathetic admiration, all of which
are appropriate and all of which add a dimension to the story of Addie's burial.
There are also some interesting subplots that happen along the way.
There are, for example, tensions within the family.
There are resentments.
There are remembered hurts.
And it turns out that everyone in the family has at least one secret which he or she needs
to keep from the other members of the family.
All of those secrets are, in fact, threatened by Daro's prescience, by his intuition which
is so keen that he can almost read the minds of the other members of the family.
And that may be one reason why the family so willingly consigns him to an insane asylum
at the novel's end.
It will be good not to have him around to read their thoughts anymore.
The family herself, the corpse, is given a rather long monologue toward the end of the
book in which she tells us some of her secrets, including the fact that one of her children
isn't aunts'.
The father, it turns out, is Whitfield, the local preacher whom she met in the woods for
a while when she realized that aunts wasn't the answer to her lifelong need to find some
kind of action that would violate her own self enough to end her feeling of isolation,
of being cut off from all other human beings.
In one way, her monologue is the key to the entire novel because it helps us to understand
the other characters and their relationships, all of which spring in some important way
from Addie herself.
Warwick Wadlington, in a book he wrote about As I Lay Dying, said that in an interesting
way, this is one other way of coming at Huxley's truth, I guess, that Faulkner started this
book on the day after the stock market crash of 1929, which marked the end of the Roaring
20s, the age of entrepreneurial aggressiveness and individualism as it was recorded by F.
Scott Fitzgerald, and the beginning of the age of cooperation and communal effort as
it was going to be recorded by such writers as John Steinbeck and his The Grapes of Wrath.
So this book, in some ways, straddles two periods.
It's about a family on an epic quest, each one motivated by personal needs and interests,
but it's likewise about a family which is able, when it has to, to subordinate those
personal needs, to weave them into the needs of the entire family, into the communal enterprise.
Addie does, in the end, finally get buried with her people in Jefferson.
You can decide how broadly you wish to interpret that book historically, but I think it's interesting
to realize that the personal and the public, this is another historical explanation for
the same kind of things that Huxley was talking about on a psychological level in the essay
we mentioned earlier.
So the book also does turn out to be a perfect illustration of Faulkner's world.
Its ending is comic and tragic and pathetic and sad and funny and grotesque and heroic
all at once.
As Huxley would have said, Faulkner always tells the whole truth about us.
Next time, we said back in Lecture 35 that even when realism as a movement ended, realism
didn't go away.
It's been with us ever since.
We'll get to illustrate that in our next lecture, which deals with Nagib Mahfouz's The Cairo
Trilogy, which is essentially a series of realist novels.
But Mahfouz is also a mid-20th century writer who has been influenced by many of the writers
we've been talking about in our course in the years just before he wrote his trilogy.
So his will be a different kind of realism than we've had so far, yet one more variation
on the theme.
He will also coincidentally be the third consecutive Nobel Prize winner in a row who
appears in our course.
Until the next time, the Cairo Trilogy by Nagib Mahfouz.
