Lecture 17, Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales
In our last lecture we looked at Dante's Divine Comedy, and as I think I mentioned
there, in this lecture we're going to do Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, which has
sometimes been called the human comedy. It's a solidly medieval poem. It was written
within less than a hundred years of Dante's Divine Comedy, but its subject matter is very
different, and Chaucer's angle of vision is quite different too. The Canterbury Tales is a
collection of frame stories, and we've had some experience with frame stories already in this
course. Technically, even the story of the Cyclops that we did back in lecture five is a frame story,
and so far as Odysseus tells that story to the Phaekians inside the larger story
of his homecoming, which is being told to us by the poet. The same thing would be true of Aeneas'
story of the fall of Troy, that he tells to the Carthaginians and the Aeneid, and we didn't have
a chance to talk about it, but the Mahabharata has a very complex narrative structure, and even the
Bhagavad Gita is actually a story within a story. It's narrated to a blind king just before the
battle starts. And then, of course, in lecture twelve, we did an entire program on a series of
very complicated and boxed-emboxed stories in which you had frames in which all the stories occurred.
The Chaucer may have gotten his idea for his frame from Boccaccio's to Cameron,
which was published about 30 years earlier. We know that Chaucer knew Italian, and we know that
he traveled to Italy twice, and so he may have discovered the book in Italy or elsewhere. Boccaccio's
to Cameron is 100 stories which are told by ten young people. The ten young people are fleeing
from Florence during the time of the plague in order to escape the contagion, and so it takes
them ten days to get to the country estate where they're going, and each day one of the ten young
people is selected as king or queen for the day, gets to choose a theme for the day, and then all
ten stories that day are told around that theme. Ten days, ten people adds up to the 100 stories
that make up the to Cameron. If Chaucer got the idea from Boccaccio, however, he had decided his
plan was going to be far more ambitious and complicated in a couple of ways. For one, he has
30 pilgrims instead of 10. 30 pilgrims meet at an inn in London, and they're on their way to
Canterbury. Most of them don't know each other. There are little tiny groups within the larger
group who are traveling together, but mostly they don't know each other, but they get along well
enough that they decide that they are going to travel together. They'll leave for Canterbury the
next day, and they will each tell two stories each way, two stories going to Canterbury and two coming
back. So that would have made 120 stories if Chaucer had ever completed the project. In fact,
he only completed 22 of the stories, plus a couple of fragments. As far as we can calculate,
Chaucer would have had to live about another 100 years to finish the project at the rate he
was going. Secondly, his tales are longer than Boccaccio's. Boccaccio's are quite short. Some
of them are very short, really not much more than jokes or anecdotes. And so that Chaucer's stories
were going to be longer, and then Chaucer's were going to be in poetry rather than prose,
which is a much more demanding medium. And beyond that, Chaucer seems to have intended
that his frame really function in a way that it doesn't all the time or in quite that same way
in Boccaccio. Chaucer begins the Canterbury tales with a general prologue in which he introduces
us to his 30 pilgrims. Once those pilgrims have been introduced, then we know something about
them so that when they come up to tell their stories, we can anticipate the kind of story they
might tell. We can check to see whether the tale that they tell is actually in character for that
character, and then this tale itself can provide further characterization. There was intended
presumably from the very outset in Chaucer's plan that there should be a really intimate link between
the teller of the tale and the tale itself, so that there would be a very good reason why this
story would be told by that character. Boccaccio scholars have argued that there is some of this
in Boccaccio too, and I'm willing to take their word for it. Oh, I've never quite been able to see
that in Boccaccio. Some days anyway, with some of the tales, it seems to me you could take the
tales and put them into a hat and then withdraw them, and then just redistribute them randomly
without doing much damage to the artistic integrity of the book, with apologies to Boccaccio scholars
who feel differently about it. In Chaucer, the tale and the teller are supposed to be
related in a very intimate way. Finally, Chaucer seems to have had in mind transitions from one
tale to the other, so we know how we're going to get from one tale to another. There's a reason
why one story gets told after another, and those reasons are provided internally in the frame story
itself. Not all of those links between stories were finished, not even for the 22 tales that he
completed. Some links got put in place so that we know how we get from story A to story B,
and but many of them have not been completed, and the little groups of tales that are linked
together by transitions are sometimes by Chaucerians or called either groups or fragments.
For example, we pretty much know what the first set of tales was going to be,
and this constitutes what Chaucerians call group A or fragment A. It's made up of tales which are
told by the knight and the miller and the reave and the cook, although the cook's tale is a fragment,
it's not finished. The way this works out, the way these transitions work, in the morning the
pilgrims all leave for Canterbury, and the host of the inn where they stayed the night before,
who's going to serve as kind of master of ceremonies or moderator for these stories,
decides the knight should tell the story, the first story. This makes sense because the knight is
the highest ranking member in the group, so the knight tells the story. He tells a courtly romance,
a very long and complicated, very elegant courtly romance, which is very much in character, that's
the kind of story that a knight would tell. When he's finished, everyone says, oh that's a really
nice story, we really enjoyed it, and then the host says to the monk, you tell the next story.
But the miller, who has been carrying his wine skin with him and who's been drinking wine during
the entire time, was bored to death by the knight's tale. And so he insists that he tell the next
tale, he wants to tell a lively one, he wants to tell one that's going to relieve the gloom and the
boredom that he experienced during the night's tale. The host says, no, you're not going to tell
the next story, the monk is going to tell the next story, but the miller is a very large man,
he's a little drunk by this time, and eventually he gets his way, so the miller tells the next story.
This means that the host really, by the second tale in the sequence, has lost control of the group
already, and what the miller does, he tells one of the most famous stories in the Canterbury Tales,
it's a very, very body, very funny story, the butt of which turns out to be a carpenter. Now it happens
that there's a Reeve traveling in this group of 30 pilgrims who is a carpenter, he takes it personally,
he thinks that that story was directed at him, so he insists that he tell the next one, which
turns out to be an even bodyer story, the butt of which is a miller, and so that's how these
stories were all presumably going to be linked together, as it turns out the 22 stories are
grouped into nine little groups or fragments, which have the links in place, but once we get
beyond that first group, which we're pretty sure was intended to be the first group, there's no
clear way of deciding which group comes next and which group comes next, it isn't even clear where
they are on the way to Canterbury or on their way back from when these stories are told,
it's been a kind of hobby of Chaucerians for the last 600 years to try to figure out what the order
of these groups should be. Some critics have decided that even beyond the groups themselves,
there was going to be a larger way in which these stories were going to be related to each other.
Lyman Kittridge came up with a hypothesis that he called the marriage group, in which he saw that
the wife of Bath, the clerk, the merchant, and the Franklin all told stories in response to
other people's stories. These characters occur in different groups so that they don't respond
immediately, but as he pointed out when the wife of Bath tells her story, her story is so outrageous
by 14th century standards that it offends the clerk. He's in a different group, but he's been
thinking about the wife of Bath's story, and so that when he tells his story, he tells the story
about the way he thinks marriage should be. He tells the story of patient Griselda,
and then the merchant later on, when he gets a chance, responds to the wife of Bath and the
clerk's story, and then the Franklin responds to the merchant and the clerk and the wife of Bath.
What he saw is that in some ways, all of these groups, even apart from the individual groups,
was going to constitute a kind of dialogue among 30 people that would keep going on all the way
to Canterbury and all the way back so that someone would hear a story and then would have a chance
to think about that story and then think of a story to tell in response. It means that context
has something to do with the stories that get told. The Reeve might not have told the story he
told had he not been offended by the Miller telling the story, the butt of which is a carpenter,
and so this may be true of many of the other stories as well, so that context, the transitions
were going to have a lot to do with how these stories got told and in what order. So that at
any rate, we have here a fragment. It's a very interesting fragment, but it was never completed.
But even in its fragmentary state, as John Dryden said, there is still God's plenty here.
There are romances in these 22 tales. There are legends. There are fablio. A fablio is a story
about a middle or lower class character, usually involving tricks that they play on each other.
There are sermons. There are animal fables. There are mock epics. Virtually every genre that was
known to the Middle Ages and told by a virtual cross section of British society in the late 14th
century. Not quite the entire cross section, because the very wealthiest people are missing
from this group, as are the very poorest. The very wealthiest would not have traveled the
Canterbury this way, and the very poorest couldn't afford to go at all. So the knight is the highest
ranking all the way down to a plowman at the bottom, and the plowman is only going along because he
has a brother, the parson, who's paying his way. These generalizations about the Canterbury tales
can be illustrated, I think, by taking a look at one character and one tale, to look at the
connection between that character and that tale, to see how intimately these stories and the tellers
were going to be put together. We'll choose the wife of Bath, because this is a very famous one.
It's a very good story, but I want to do this just as a kind of illustration, because what I'm going
to attempt to do here very briefly for the wife of Bath, you can do with almost all the other
characters in the Canterbury tales to look for those places where the character and the tale
absolutely intimately link up. We meet the wife of Bath as we meet the other characters in the
general prologue, and what we find out about her in that general prologue is that in every way she's
larger than life. She wears scarlet stockings, she has a glowing red face. We're told that she wears
ten pounds of fabric on her head when she goes to church on Sunday morning. Her hat that she wears
in the pilgrimage is the size of a shield, and she has been married five times. She has been married
five times, and she has been to Jerusalem three times. As far as we can tell, the only pilgrims
who have traveled further than she has would be the shipment and the night, and she's of a size to
match. She's a robust, powerful, large woman. She's a weaver by trade, but interestingly,
from the very outset, she is identified not by her profession as so many of the other pilgrims are,
but she's identified by the fact that she is a wife. She is the wife of Bath, and that will become
clear later when she tells her story. We also find out in the general prologue that she is a very
assertive woman. When the offerings was time to take the offerings forward in church, if she's not
allowed to be the first one to go up to the altar, she gets upset and doesn't go up at all.
So, in a way, we already have this kind of picture of this woman before she gets to tell
her story. There's one little tiny detail that seems extraneous initially, and that is that she
we're told that she's deaf in one ear. It seems like an odd, random fact to tell us, but later on
in the story, we'll find out how that happened and why that's important. The tale that she tells
in the Canterbury Tales is a romance. A romance in the Middle Ages was pretty much a story about
Knight's errant, and it could include the fabulous. It didn't have to confine itself to
events in the here and now, the everyday normal logic of reality. It could have some of the fabulous,
some of the miraculous in it. Hers is set in King Arthur's court, but before she tells the story,
she tells, she launches into a prologue, which turns out to be almost twice as long as the tale
itself. The prologue is really designed to do two things. It's designed to attack the medieval
view of marriage and the medieval view of women, and secondly, it's designed to argue her point
that in some matters, marriage being one of them, experience is a much better teacher than book
learning. The prologue, as I said, is very long. It's twice as long as the tale itself, too long
for us to go through here, but let me just mention a couple of points, and then you can
look for other ones supporting points as you go through. The main point is that in the medieval
view, marriage was always considered a second best estate. It was a kind of consolation prize
for those people who could not be celibacy. Celebusy was the first prize, the celibacy of monks and
nuns and friars and priests. The purpose of marriage, and this is all prompted by teachings of the
medieval church, the purposes of marriage were one, procreation, and two, the avoidance of adultery
and fornication. Paul had already said this, his better to marry than to burn, and this had been
promoted by a lot of church fathers, most notably Saint Jerome, whom the wife of Bath is going to
wind up quoting a lot. Now, the wife of Bath, who we've already found out from the prologue, has
been married five times, which would make her a suspicious character already. Getting married
once is problematic, being married five times looks excessive, particularly by medieval standards.
So what she's going to argue for is she's going to argue first for the estate of marriage itself,
and secondly for multiple marriages, that it's all right to be married more than once.
Throughout this whole defense in her prologue, she cites a lot of scripture and a lot of church
fathers, and we keep wondering as we hear her talking, where did she learn all of this? How
does she know all this stuff? After she's for her own satisfaction, she has argued for the
estate of marriage, and especially for the estate of multiple marriages, saying that's not a bad
thing in itself. If marriage is okay, then more than one marriage would have to be just, if she's
been married five times, that's five times better than being married once. Then when she finishes,
when she's finished those arguments to her own satisfaction, then she argues that experience
is in some ways a better authority than book learning, especially about marriage.
She said, and if there's one thing that she's had experience at, it is marriage. She is called the
wife of Bath, not the weaver of Bath after all, and then she tells us about her five husbands.
She divides them into categories. She said the first three were good, and the second two were
initially difficult until she had tamed them. The first three were when she married them,
she was young and frisky and beautiful, and her husbands were very old and very rich,
and so she said she could control them without much problem. She goes into some detail about how
she works them at night in bed and how she makes sure that she gets something every time she gives
them something, and she even tells us a little bit about how when they find her catcher in some
compromising situation, how she can manage to make a good offense into the best defense, and she
manages to attack them for things they've never even dreamed of doing, and eventually they wind
up defending themselves against things that they hadn't done and hadn't even thought about doing.
So the first three marriages, she said, were good. They were easy. The fourth husband is kind of
transitional because by the time she married him, she is older and wealthier. She's inherited
from her first three husbands, and her fourth husband is younger than she is. As she said, he
was so complacent, so sure of himself that he actually took a mistress, but she says, I made
his life a purgatory, and eventually he came around, and once he did, then that was a happy
marriage too. She said, we got along well until he died and made his soul reside forever after in
heaven. Then she gets to her fifth husband, and the fifth one is really her favorite.
The fifth husband, she is quite a bit older than he is when they marry, and she is quite a bit
wealthier than he is when they marry, and he had been a student so that he has a lot of books.
He brings books into the house, and one of his favorite books is a book that has bound together
almost every anti-feminist treatise that the Middle Ages had produced. They're all bound together in
one volume, and his favorite pastime is at night, is to read to her out of these books.
And so she listens to this night after night after night, these anti-feminist tracks,
and we begin to understand how she knows so much about Saint Jerome and how she knows so much
about the church father's attitude toward marriage and women because she's heard these over and over
and over. One night, she said, she was so fed up with listening to this that she got up, went over,
ripped out a bunch of pages out of this book, threw them into the fireplace. Her husband retaliated,
you know, sort of reflexively by hitting her on the side of the head, knocking her over.
She says she's been deaf in that ear ever since, and now we suddenly realize why that detail about
the deaf in one ear showed up in the prologue. She said she pretended to be hurt far worse than she
was, so she was lying on the ground, whispering, just barely moaning, thinking, saying, I'm going to
die, I'm dying, I'm dying. Her husband immediately overcome with remorse, kneels down beside her
to see if he can help, apologetic, saying he didn't mean to do this, and she keeps speaking more and
more softly until she gets his head right down next to hers, and then she said she gave him a whack
on the side of the head that knocked him into the fireplace. After that, she said, after that,
they got along just fine. It's a matter of training that somehow at that point on, she said, after
that, you know, he gave control of the marriage to her, and after that, she said, we got along
as well as any couple in Christendom, and I was as kind to him as any wife in Christendom.
And she says, you know, he's died and she misses him more than any of them. She really hopes that
he's in heaven and he's happy there because she does miss him. The point of her telling these
stories is that for her, the only happy marriages, her thesis is the only happy marriages, marriage
being a good estate, but the only happy marriages are those in which the wives rule the husbands.
This would have been a terrifically shocking assertion in the 14th century. And then she said
it's based on her experience. She said she knows this. You know, don't pay any attention to what
the books tell you. The books, after all, are written by whom? They're written by monks. They're
written by people who have no experience with marriage. What would they know about marriage?
She says that her experience teaches her this and she will stick by her thesis. She still is,
in fact, at this point, committed to marriage. She is still the wife of Bath. She is still
lusty. She is still colorful. She's no longer young. She says, in fact, in a really touching
aside, she said the flower is all gone and now she'll have to sell a brand at whatever market she
can sell it in. But it is possible that she's on this pilgrimage, in part, to look for a sixth
husband. She's still on the search. She has not given up the idea that marriage is an ideal and
wonderful estate, as long as the woman rules the man. All of this turns out, in fact, to be just
prologued to the tale itself. The tale, as we said, is a romance set in King Arthur's court,
and the story begins when a young knight goes out one day riding, comes across a young damsel,
and he rapes her. He rapes her and then he rides off, presumably forgets all about it.
But she goes to King Arthur and tells him, reports the young knight, and King Arthur,
when he investigates, condemns the young knight to death. The women of the court, however,
ask that that young knight be remanded to them for a year and a day. And they said,
if they can't change him, if they can't make him into a new man in a year and a day,
then they'll hand him back to King Arthur, and King Arthur can put him to death.
The King Arthur agrees, the young knight appears before the women, and they give him one year
and one day to find out what it is that women really want. If he can answer that question
in a year and a day, his life will be spared. If not, then he gets turned back over to Arthur
and he loses his life. So he goes out for a year and a day, searching for the answer.
He gets a million answers, and he's despairing of ever finding the right one, because how do
you pick among all these answers? The year and the day is up, and he's on his way back to court,
assuming that he's going to die when he gets back. When he runs across a loathely hag,
the ugliest, most loathsome creature he has ever seen in all his life. But she says,
I know what your problem is, and I know what the answer is to your question, and if you take me
back to court, I'll save your life, but I'm going to ask a boon. Whatever I ask, you have to give
me if I save your life. He's desperate, he says yes. She goes back to court with him. When they
get back to court, they appear before all the women of the court, and when he's asked, what is it
that women really want, he says, the answer that's provided him by the hag, he says, women want
sovereignty in marriage. The women all say, that's absolutely the right answer, your life is spared.
He doesn't quite say this, they don't quite say this, but what's sort of implied
is that women would like to be treated after marriage the way they were treated before marriage,
when they were in control during the courtship stage, when they were in control of the relationship.
We still have the question of the boon, and so when that comes up, the loathely hag says,
I want to marry you. Well, the young knight was prepared for many things, but not for that.
He tries to resist, but he has promised her, and now he's got the pressure of all the women of court,
who know that she's saved his life, and so the wedding goes forward. Then we skip ahead to the
wedding night, and it's on the wedding night, and the knight is clinging desperately to his side
of the bed as far away from her as he could get, and she, the loathely hag lying beside him, says,
is this the way all of King Arthur's knights behave on their wedding night?
And he says, well, no, but he says to be honest, to tell you the honest truth, he said,
you are so old, and so lovely, and so lowly-born, that he said, you just repulse me, I can't do
any more than I'm doing. At which point, she sits up in bed and delivers him a rather rousing lecture
about the nature of true nobility, and the trait, the nature of character, and the values of age.
She quotes from Dante and from a lot of church fathers. Again, clearly the wife of Bath learned
a lot from that fifth husband. She says that true nobility is a matter of behavior, not a matter
of birth. She says, if she is old, well, old age is supposed to be respected, so he should respect
his wife. And then she even throws in, she says, if she's poor, that's okay too. He didn't actually
accuse her of being poor, but she's on such a roll with this lecture that she just throws that in
for nothing. She said that Jesus chose to be born as a poor man, so he could have been born
as anything wanted, so there must be some virtue in poverty. Then she says, she says, I can give you
a choice. She said, I can turn myself into the most dazzlingly beautiful woman you have ever seen,
or I can stay the way I am. If I turn myself into this dazzlingly beautiful woman,
you will have to take a chance with my chastity, because every other man in the world is going
to be after me. I can stay the way I am, and if I stay the way I am, you will know that I will
be absolutely faithful to you for the rest of your life. The point of the story is clearly here.
This night, since the moment that he raped that young girl at the beginning of the story,
has been totally in the control of women from that moment forward. For a year and a day,
he was in control of the court women. Now he's in control of the loathly hag. And what she has
just done is she has actually given him two different ways that she can make him miserable.
She can either be beautiful and unfaithful, cuckold him, or she can stay the way she is,
and he'd be married to a faithful wife, but one who's so lovably that he can't stand to look at her.
He says finally, he says, my dear, he said, it's too difficult a choice. I don't know how to decide
it. You decide. And she says, does this mean that you're turning over sovereignty to me? And he says,
yes, you decide. And she says, well, in that case, she said, you can have it both ways.
You can have your cake and eat it too. She says, if you're turning the sovereignty over to me,
that's what I really desired. And so I will be that beautiful woman, and I will be faithful for
the rest of our lives. The decision, well, maybe it was just too difficult for him to decide,
and maybe that's why he turned it over to her. We have hopes that perhaps in some kind of way,
that the experience of the year and the day and the lecture have somehow touched something deeper
in him, so that he's actually responded in some better kind of way than just simply saying,
I don't know, I can't decide. Maybe perhaps he has learned something in the process of this year
and a day. She has transformed because she got what she wanted. She got a knight who grants her
sovereignty. But in order to get there, she had to educate him to show him that what's good for her
is good for him too, and then they live happily ever after, serving one another in gentleness and
love, suggesting, we hope, reading this as positively as we can, that she wasn't after absolute rule
so much as she was that her individuality should be recognized, so that she would be valued apart
from riches and beauty and youth. And once she gets that, once he gives her that sovereignty by
recognizing her own integrity, her love can be released as it was for the wife of Bath with
her fifth husband. There's a kind of perhaps mutual surrender that goes on here. This all sounds
wonderful and positive and great, but then the wife of Bath complicates this at the very end of
their story because she ends the story by asking Jesus to send all wives submissive husbands,
youthful and energetic in bed, but husbands who die before their wives, and to cut short the
lives of all husbands who won't be ruled by their wives. That is, at the end, she reverts back to
the sort of outrageousness of the prologue, and she becomes more and more complicated the more
we think about her. On the one hand, she and her story both seem a kind of proto-feminist
recognition of the female side of things, of marriage, of experience. Men write all the books.
Women have bad characters because men write the books, and mostly monks at that. But at the same
time that she is making this kind of proto-feminist appeal, she is also illustrating for the clerk
and the partner and other people on this pilgrimage every bad thing they've ever heard about women,
and she seems proud of it at that. Chaucer, as always, lets us decide for ourselves.
One of the glories of the poem, as Harold Bloom points out, is that Chaucer's
characters are so much like real people, so much more than they have a right to be,
that in a way we have to treat them the way we do real people. They have their contradictions,
and their problems, and their inconsistencies, and we have to deal with them as we do with people
that we really know. Getting back to our original point of narrative strategies, we can see how the
frame impacts these stories. The frame allows a certain distance between the author and the
tellers, and between the tellers and the tales themselves. Chaucer can always say,
I'm not endorsing anything. I'm not criticizing anything. I wouldn't tell the Miller's tale
myself. I'm just reporting what the Miller said, and I'm trying to be accurate. He doesn't judge,
he doesn't intrude, he doesn't interfere with any of the tales that go on. In a way, we've already
seen this happen in the Odyssey. We remember that the most fabulous stories that are told in the
Odyssey are told, not by the poet, but by Homer. The story of the Cyclops, the story of the Lotus
Eaters, the bag of winds, Scylla and Charybdis. All of these things are not said, reported by the
poet, but reported by Odysseus. And what some critics have suggested is perhaps this is done
because the poet himself is not willing to endorse these. He's simply saying,
I don't know if any of this is true. This is simply what Odysseus said. In a way, Chaucer can do that
in this poem as well. The frame gives him some room so that what he can do is he can simply report
these stories, give them to us in all of their complexity and their color, and then we can decide
for ourselves what we think of the wife of Bath, what we think of her story, how we respond to these
things, how we measure these, how we decide how to deal with it. Chaucer is back there somewhere
manipulating and reporting, but he never steps in to tell us what we should think. It's one of the
great beauties of this poem. Next time, we will pursue this idea of frames because the next time
we will deal with what has to be the most famous frame in all of history. It's Scheherazade and the
stories that she tells the king one each night for a thousand and one nights in order to keep from
having her head cut off the next morning. The complexity which will be created there is different
from Chaucer's, but some of the techniques are the same and we'll get to see once again what a
useful device in storytelling a frame turns out to be. Next time, the thousand and one nights.
