Lecture 27, Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights
The subject of this lecture is Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights, which was called the 20th
century's favorite 19th century novel. It may very well turn out to be the 21st century's
favorite 19th century novel as well. What I'd like to do with it in this lecture is
two things. First, to talk about its romantic aspects and in the process to continue to
define Romanticism, which we began to define in our last lecture on Gertes Faust. And then
the second thing is to talk about its narrative technique, because this turned out to be a
very, very brilliant novel in terms of its technique. And the way the technique is set
up in this novel actually anticipates a lot of what follows in this course, anticipates
a certain amount of narrative technique in modern fiction. I suspect that most people
are familiar with the story of Wuthering Heights, although I suspect also that more people
are familiar with it from the 1939 film version, that great film that had Merle Oberon and
Lawrence Olivier in it. I actually looked up on a website about the film and Watt looked
at some comments, and most of the people who commented admitted that they had not read
the book, but they talked about the movie in any case. It's been a long time since
I've seen the movie, but my remembrance of the movie is that it really focuses on the
first half of the novel. The last scene, as I recall, is that really dramatic scene in
which you see the ghosts of Heathcliff and Catherine walking hand in hand across the
moors, which suggests that really what we're talking about is the first half of the novel
and then including Heathcliff's death, which comes from the second half of the novel. And
the fact that we can actually see the ghosts on the moor walking hand in hand at the end
of the film makes the presence of the ghosts, the existence of the ghosts, far more explicit
in the movie version than they are in the book, and we'll talk about that when we get
to the end of the book. In fact, Catherine's death happens about halfway through the book,
and the second half of the novel is really very different from the first half. The second
half is really in some ways a little bit more like a Jane Austen novel, and in a way it
makes a step or two in the movement toward the realist novel than the first half, which
is a purely romantic novel. We've already talked about romanticism when we talked about
Gertes Faust, and what we need to say, just to remind us to make sure that we're all on
the same page, is that in almost every way romanticism was a repudiation of the values
of the Enlightenment, those values that we looked at when we talked about Molière and
Voltaire. Reason and empirical evidence and common sense and objectivity and social norms
and universal values were those values of the Enlightenment, whereas for the romantics
they valued things like intuition and passion and subjectivity. The core around which all
Enlightenment values were organized was the value of reason. The romantic core value is
nature and the processes of nature and the natural world. The Enlightenment was fond
of an intellectual comprehension of the vast machine of the universe. The romantics, on
the other hand, believed in infinite striving, a will to transcend all normal natural boundaries
and an attempt to have the human merge with the powers of nature and the cosmos. We saw
those values in Faust, and we will see them here too. In addition, we have in this novel
the romantic idea that a passion like Catherine's and Heathcliff's is so strong that it could
destroy both of them and then carry on beyond death. That's an idea that would have been
considered either absurd or impossible to the age of reason, or at very least the story
would have been a warning about the allowing passion to overwhelm rational control.
Catherine and Heathcliff in this novel embody primordial forces that the previous age would
have tried to keep in check or to suppress or to deny. Here they're given center stage
and presented sympathetically at that, and those values that are embodied by Heathcliff
and Catherine appeal to the side of us that wants to sing final arias on windy mountaintops
drinking with a lover from the same poison chalice in a final gesture of passion that
lasts beyond death and not to care very much what the world thinks of us. All of those
values are in the first half of this novel. And there are some other romantic values that
are in the first half of this novel as well. For one, there is at least the hint of the
use of the supernatural, suggesting in a way that romantics were not afraid to suggest
that the finite and the infinite intersect in ways that are beyond the grasp of the rationalists
of the last century. When Lockwood, who's our narrator for this novel, when he spends
a night at Wuthering Heights, he's disturbed in the middle of the night by what seems to
him to be the ghost of a young girl trying to get in his window. Later we find out that
this may or may not have been the ghost of young Catherine. Bronte lets us think that
maybe it's a nightmare that Lockwood had. Lockwood had spent the time before he went
to bed looking through the books in the room, many of which had the young Catherine's handwriting
in them, and so it's perhaps possible that it was a nightmare prompted by what he had
done just before going to bed. But it may very well really have been a ghost, and the
possibility that there may be ghosts recurs at the end of the novel when shepherds and
peasants report that they have been troubled by the visions of the now dead Catherine and
Heathcliff walking on the moors. In addition, this novel uses some of the trappings of the
Gothic novel, which was a very popular romantic genre. The Gothic novel usually is set in
mysterious and exotic places, usually in a decaying mansion on top of a high windy mountain,
a mansion which is troubled by guilt, which has been accumulated over centuries, and in
which events occur like clanking chains and walking spirits and other unexplainable events,
which again suggests the intersection of the world of the finite and the world of the infinite,
the world that exists beyond our senses, and the ways in which it can interact with the
everyday world. Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner is not really Gothic, but
it suggests that same kind of way in which the infinite and the finite can intersect.
And some of the better Gothic novels of the period were written by Anne Radcliffe, for
example, The Mysteries of Udolfo, or The Italian, or even Mary Shelley's Frankenstein
has some elements of the Gothic in it. Heathcliff himself, in addition, is something of a romantic
figure, something of a bironic hero. The bironic hero was an invention of Lord Byron, who was
the most sensational and popular romantic writer in the first third of the 19th century. He was
dashing, he was handsome, he was aristocratic, he was a social and political rebel. He lived a
scandalous enough life that if there had been a People magazine in those days, he would have been
on the cover every issue for about 20 consecutive years. He invented a character that he used
many times over and over again in his fantastically popular poems. That figure is always moody
and passionate and superior to other human beings. He is also always isolated from other
human beings either by some terrible and unforgivable crime he's committed in the past, or by the
fact that he is so jaded with too much excitement and too much pleasure that he can't feel anything
anymore. He can no longer hope for any excitement, and so it isolates him from the normal run of
human beings. He winds up in isolation having to rely entirely on himself for his codes of action,
which he never, ever compromises, not for other human beings and not even for God. The bironic
hero in his poems turns out to be fantastically attractive, especially to women who are fascinated
by his indifference to opinion. He is one of the truly free men in all of literature who doesn't
care what anybody else thinks, and who stands outside the normal definitions of good and evil
and does what he chooses, and it's partly that absolute freedom that he embodies which makes
him so attractive. The figure was based on Byron himself, but in its permutations it spread all
over Europe for a quarter of a century. Even Gerta was a great admirer of the bironic hero,
and we can see perhaps little elements of the bironic hero showing up from time to time in Faust.
We also will see little bits of the bironic hero in our next lecture in Pushkin's Eugene O'Neagan,
and in America perhaps the most important and famous of all the bironic heroes is Captain Ahab
in Melville's Moby Dick. So he's a bironic hero. Heathcliff is something of a bironic hero,
and we also find in the novel the romantic belief in the values and the powers of nature.
The novel is set on the Yorkshire Moors, and it involves the interaction of two houses that are
about four miles apart. Wuthering Heights is a really rugged farmhouse that was built in about
1500, and it's built on a hilltop. It's vulnerable to all the forces of nature,
both the benign ones and the hostile ones, and it's here where Catherine and Heathcliff grow up.
Thrushcross Grange is the home of the Lintons. It's about four miles away, but it's set inside
a park. It's about two miles from the outer walls to the house itself, and those two miles are all
neatly cropped and neatly manicured so that nature is kept at arm's length. It's controlled,
it's disciplined, and that contrast in the two houses is very much the contrast of the people
who live inside it. The Urn jaws who live at Wuthering Heights are a real farming family,
and therefore they are in close contact with nature, while the Lintons who live at Thrushcross
Grange are a leisure family, and they are therefore in many, many ways cut off from the natural world.
All of the values of the first half of the novel are with Wuthering Heights, not Thrushcross Grange,
in a way that's very familiar to us from, say, the poems of William Wordsworth.
Strikingly, as children, Catherine and Heathcliff find even Wuthering Heights, the house itself,
too confining, and they spend their days, long days, from morning till night,
roaming the moors in the wildest and strangest natural setting in all of England.
In chapter nine, Catherine tells her nurse a dream, and she says in that dream she had died
and gone to heaven, and then she says this, heaven did not seem to be my home, and I broke my heart
with weeping to come back to earth, and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the
middle of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights where I woke sobbing for joy. So for Catherine,
even heaven would be a disappointing place when you could spend your days on the heath near Wuthering
Heights. She and Heathcliff are in the position in the first half of the novel, as children particularly,
the position of the speaker in Wordsworth's world is too much with us. Catherine and Heathcliff are
like Wordsworth's pagans, suckled in a creed outworn, and they find the fulfillment of their nature
not in the elegant drawing rooms of Thrushcross or even inside the house at Wuthering Heights,
but in the wild grandeur of Penistone, Craig on the Moor. Even Heathcliff's name in some ways
suggests his associations with nature, Heath and Cliff, and because the Linton children, those who
live at Thrushcross Grains, have much more refined names, much more civilized names, Isabella and
Edgar, who are the two spoiled children of the more civilized house. All of these romantic values,
which are very, very present in the first half of this novel, are the romantic values that Catherine
betrays when she marries Edgar Linton, a marriage which has really tragic consequences both for
herself and for Heathcliff. She knows that she and Heathcliff are united by a bond that is so
strong that she has no business trying to take it apart. As she says at one point in the novel,
I am Heathcliff. Heathcliff is me, and then she says, he's more myself than I am.
Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same, and Linton's is as different as a moonbeam
from lightning or frost from fire. Part of the reason Catherine marries Edgar Linton is she has
a plan. Heathcliff has no prospects, and one of the things that she's hoping to do is if she marries
Edgar, she figures she can use Edgar's money to help Heathcliff rise in the world. But even from
the very best of motives, Catherine destroys herself by denying her own inner being, by cutting herself
off from Heathcliff and Wuthering Heights, and in the process she destroys Heathcliff as well,
first as a human being and then literally. This is all the first half of the novel. The second half
of the novel, which is treated more lightly, if at all, in that 1939 film, carries us really into
the next generation. A lot of things happen in the second half of the novel, but by the end,
a kind of piece has been made between the two houses. Catherine, who's the daughter of Catherine
and Edgar Linton, is about to marry Herton Earnshaw, Catherine's nephew, who has inherited
both houses from Heathcliff, who in the second half of the novel has contrived to gain possession
of both of them. Significantly, when they marry, they will go live at Thrushcross Grange, and Wuthering
Heights will be closed up maybe forever. The ending suggests in some ways a kind of closing down of
the romantic perspective in the direction of the civilizing process as we move from Wuthering Heights
to Thrushcross Grange, and from the point of view of Thrushcross Grange, the passion, the wild,
untrammeled passion of Catherine and Heathcliff looks very odd, and from the next generation
removed one generation away and now living at Thrushcross Grange with Wuthering Heights closed
up, they look even more isolated by the end of the novel than they did in the middle of it.
When young Catherine and Herton move into Thrushcross, the memories of the first Catherine
and Heathcliff will be as strange and remote as they are to Lockwood, our narrator, and ordinary
civilized life will have won out over the high passions of Romanticism. So it means that in this
novel, romantic passions and romantic excesses are contained, even though at a very, very high price.
The second half of the novel has in fact seemed to many people more like a Jane Austen novel.
It portrays the manners and modes of the world while assuring that the right man and the right
woman wind up together. It isn't quite realism yet, but it's a definite closing down of the
wild passions and the dreams of Romanticism, which make up the first half of this novel.
In the novel, the bironic hero is laid in his grave, and two young people move into a drawing
room to take up civilized and ordinary life, not that much different from the life that would
have been lived by people in all year's plays or in the poems of Alexander Pope.
So that's one of the ways in which this both is and is not a romantic work. The first half is
solidly romantic. The second half perhaps gives up some of its Romanticism as it moves a step in
the direction of the realism we will arrive at in another couple of lectures. The other aspect
of this novel that has been very intriguing to people down through the years is its point of view.
Point of view in fiction is the perspective from which the story is presented to us.
Traditionally, a novel can be told, and most frequently is told, in what's called a third
person omniscient point of view, in which the author knows everything. The author can be like
God in his or her novel, can know what's going on in all places at all times, knows what all
the characters are doing, and even in fact you can have a dialogue between two characters
in which the author can tell us what's going on in both their heads at the same time because
the author knows everything. The author is everywhere and is like God, that's why it's called
an omniscient point of view, because he's everywhere and knows everything in the novel.
The other third person point of view is usually called third person limited. Third person limited
tells a story in the third person, but it limits its awareness to a single character so that the
reader can never know any more about what's going on than that character does. We are confined to the
sensibility, the consciousness of one character, and so that we know what happens only insofar as
that character knows what's happened and what happens. And when he's talking to someone,
we can't tell what's going on in the head of that other person because we're stuck inside the head
of this one. There's also a first person point of view, which is almost always limited. That is,
in a first person point of view, we share the consciousness of the character who tells his
or her own story. Again, we know only what he or she does, and we have to infer with the narrator
what other characters are thinking or why they do what they do. In the early days of the novel,
third person omniscient was the normative and dominant point of view. All of the novels that
we've done in this course have used third person omniscient point of view, The Tale of Genji,
Monkey, Don Quixote, The Story of the Stone, and in fact, even our one non-novel prose fiction,
Candide, used a third person omniscient point of view. When Henry Fielding more or less invented
the English novel in the 18th century, he made the third person omniscient point of view normative
for the English novel with Tom Jones, and it was going to stay that way up until the very end of
the 19th century when Henry James was going to do all of his really fantastic work with point of view.
In this history of point of view in fiction, however, Wuthering Heights is a stunningly
original exception. The story that we get in Wuthering Heights is told to us by Lockwood,
who's a sort of foppish dandy from London, who happens to rent Thrushcross Grange for a few months
in the winter of 1801. During that winter, he gets ill, and while he's convalescing, a servant at
Thrushcross Grange named Nelly, named Nelly Dean, tells him the story of Catherine and Heathcliff
and the two houses. He tells us that after every piece of the narration that she gives to him,
he runs into his room and writes it down in her words so that he can pass it on to us using her
own words so that we have Nelly Dean's words passed on to us by Lockwood. Nelly had been
a servant with the Earnshaw family since the time she was a little girl. She is just older
enough than Catherine that she has been a witness to and a participant in all of the events that
she talks about. When Catherine married Edgar Linton, then Nelly Dean went with her to Thrushcross
Grange. So she's been a servant to this family for all these years. She knows the family very
well, and so she is in fact a witness to everything that she tells Lockwood. She narrates the story
to Lockwood up to the point just before Heathcliff's death, and then Lockwood returns to London
for the spring and summer. He comes back in the fall to hear of Heathcliff's sort of fantastic
and self-willed death, and of the impending marriage of young Catherine and Herton Earnshaw,
and of Nelly's skeptical reports of the ghosts of Catherine and Heathcliff that walk the Moors
at night. Now Nelly, when she tells her story to Lockwood, incorporates into it narrative bits
from Catherine and from Heathcliff and from several other characters who live in the area,
plus a few letters, plus a few documents, all of which she gathers together into her narration
and then passes it on to Lockwood, who passes it on to us. Lockwood comes across some additional
material of his own. The notes, for example, that Catherine wrote into the books when she was a
little girl in what used to be her room, that's the room that he stays in when he's forced to one
night because a snowstorm prevents him from getting back to Thrushcross Grange. What's missing in all
of these narratives, all of these bits of information we get is an authorial point of view
to tell us what's really happening and how to evaluate it. Every word in the novel comes to
us from a character in it, each of whom is speaking from his or her own point of view
and evaluating what he or she sees on the basis of his or her own expectations and experience.
In a way, those lessons of perspectivism that we talked about when we did Don Quixote,
which we said were both a theme and the method of that novel, have now become the very method
of the novel, particularly of this novel. Specifically, every single detail in the novel
comes to us from multiple points of view, leaving us to decide which is more reliable.
That waif, that the ghost of that little girl that Lockwood sees out his bedroom window,
he dismisses it as a nightmare caused by indigestion. Heathcliff, on the other hand,
takes it very seriously, believing it to be the very ghost of the young Catherine. Who's right?
How do we know how to decide? On the night when Catherine Linton dies, Heathcliff behaves in a
very, very extravagant and wild way, and Nellie, Nellie Dean, and Isabella Linton react very
differently to the way he behaves. Nellie, in a disapproving way, Isabella in a kind of approving
way. We have to decide who's the more trustworthy guide. Which one do we believe? Which is the
right evaluation of Heathcliff's behavior? At the end, there are various accounts of the ghosts
that may or may not walk the moors. Which explanation is the more plausible? Which is more
likely to be true? In whom can we place our confidence? Who do we trust? How do we know
what to decide about the ending of that novel? Part of the reason why these questions come up
is that the author has disappeared. And this, of course, the disappearance of the author,
giving us simply a collection of narrative points of view, will become part of the definition
of the modern novel. Even more perplexing are our two narrators, our two principal narrators,
Lockwood and Nellie Dean. Lockwood, as we said, is a frivolous man. He's a kind of phop who speaks
in the kind of cliches of London of his time. He gives no evidence of any real intellect or any
sympathetic understanding. And he seems throughout the book out of his depth in the story that he's
telling. He misunderstands a lot. He misses a lot. And what he does notice, he tries to assimilate
into his own categories of understanding, which we come to understand pretty quickly,
are very superficial. At the outset, when he first shows up at Wuthering Heights,
he imagines himself as a kind of fashionable misanthrope, disgusted in a kind of genteel way
with people, so that when he meets Heathcliff, he thinks they will get along as soulmates,
since he recognizes very early on that Heathcliff is a misanthrope as well.
What he never grasps, never seems to grasp, is the amazing and tragic and agonizing experience
that lies behind Heathcliff's misanthropy. Heathcliff seems, to us anyway, has a much
deeper capacity for both love and hate than Lockwood does, and hence Lockwood's misanthropy,
which is merely fashionable and shallow, will never ever be able to grasp the depths of Heathcliff.
Nellie Dean, who's the source of Lockwood's narrative, is even more troubling. We discover
throughout Lockwood's narrative, which remember, he tells us, he's written down in Nellie's own
words, we discover through his reporting to us of her narrative that she is a conventionally
religious woman, she's a woman of common sense, she's a known nonsense, healthy kind of woman for
whom illness always strikes her as a kind of willful weakness, all vagary and indecision is a sign
of character flaws, she always wants everything tidy and in good order, and she very, very strongly
believes in social propriety. Now, none of these things are bad in themselves, and in fact, if we
met Nellie Dean, we might actually like her, she might seem to us a good kind of person. But we
need to remember who's telling this story, because the kind of person she is will determine the way
the story gets told, that she passes on to Lockwood, and that he will pass on to us. She was present
for the amazing events of the first half of the novel, and was even a participant in them.
Chapter nine is a really, really crucial chapter, and this is one on which
so much of our decision about what we make of Nellie Dean hinges. Catherine is telling Nellie
why she can't marry Heathcliff, and she says to Nellie, she says, I can't marry Heathcliff because
it would degrade me. Now Nellie, but not Catherine, knows that Heathcliff is in the room and has heard
that. She sees Heathcliff tiptoe out right after Catherine has said that, meaning that he has heard
everything that Catherine has said. It's only after Heathcliff has left that Catherine tells Nellie
that she loves Heathcliff in a way that she'll never love Edgar, that the two of them are one
soul, one person. I am Heathcliff, she says. Now Nellie never tells Catherine that Heathcliff
heard the first part of what she said, and she never tells Heathcliff about the second. Heathcliff
disappears that night to return three years later in very different circumstances. We never do find
out in the course of the novel what he did in those three years, or how he got so wealthy during that
time. But in the meantime, of course, Catherine has married Edgar so that when Heathcliff returns,
the inevitable tragedy occurs. The point is that here, as in so many other places, Nellie Dean
isn't a mere witness, but she's a participant who by her actions and decisions alters the course
of events. Had she told Catherine that Heathcliff had overheard her comments, Catherine might have
rushed out to correct them. Or had she told Heathcliff of what Catherine had said after Heathcliff
left, Heathcliff might not have run away, and the entire story might have been different.
So part of the way Nellie Dean tells her story is probably designed to assure both herself and
Lockwood that she did the right thing, that everything she did was okay, that all of the
tragic events would have happened anyway, whatever she did, and her sense of propriety
and her conviction that Catherine should marry the respectable Edgar Linton
instead of the disreputable Heathcliff was right, justifiable, that any civilized person
would have done the same thing in the same circumstances. At the end, she and Lockwood agree
that the story has a happy ending. Herton Earnshaw will marry the young Catherine,
Heathcliff is dead, good triumphs over evil, the conventional over the rebellious, reason over
passion, and we have moved from the world of Byron to that of Jane Austen, all's well it
ends well, they decide. It's just that country folks still swear that the ghosts of Heathcliff
and Catherine walk the Moors at night, and even one of Heathcliff's old servants,
a very deeply religious man named Joseph said that he has seen them on the Moors.
A shepherd says that he and his flocks were frightened one night by the specters of Heathcliff
and a woman walking the Moors. Lockwood and Nellie Dean dismiss the stories as superstition,
which they would because of the way they see things and the way they want the story to come out.
But we have to ask at the end of the story, do the ghosts walk or don't they?
Can a passion like that of Heathcliff and Catherine, which Lockwood doesn't understand,
and of which Nellie disapproves, can a passion like theirs live beyond death?
What do we decide and how do we decide it? As we learn to understand the limitations of Nellie
Deans and Lockwood's perspectives, we learn to see that in some ways they have flattened out this
amazing story to fit their own capacities and their own expectations. And we may come to think
that there is far more to the story than either of them comprehends. Let me conclude with two
remarks from two different critics on this aspect of the novel. The first one is from J.
Hillis Miller, a book called Fiction and Repetition, and he says this.
The reader must interrogate the passages for possible irony. This irony potentially arises
from discrepancies between what Lockwood knows or what he makes out of what he sees
and what the author knew and made or what the reader can make out of the passages as he interprets
the handwriting on the wall. He's very right about that. And then the second one is by Graham
Holderness in the Open Guides to Literature book on Wuthering Heights says this. He says,
isn't the sequel, and by sequel he means the second half of the novel, isn't the sequel a
rewriting of the tragedy as romance accomplished not by the novelist but by her narrators?
Aren't Lockwood and Nellie the real authors of this fiction, while the novelist continually
supplies evidence to dispute the consolatory calm of their conventional conclusion? Which
do we prefer? The novel that settles and reconciles everything into the reassurance of a happy ending
or the book that refuses to lay its ghosts, allowing them to return and trouble the precarious
equilibrium of such an appeasement? For both novels are there within the same set of covers.
So what we have here is not just one great story but two, as Holderness points out,
and we have a stunning technical innovation in the use of point of view and storytelling,
suggesting one of the directions that modern fiction will go as we will see in future net
lectures. Next time we'll be in Russia for to consider a writer whom the Russians still consider
their national poet, their Shakespeare, Alexander Pushkin. Like Emily Bronte, he will illustrate
some facets of romanticism. His character will also be in part a bironic hero, but like Bronte
in his narrative technique, he will move storytelling another step toward realism,
which we will get to two lectures ahead with Flaubert's Madame Bovary, next time Alexander Pushkin.
