Lecture 46, Beckett's Plays
Over the past nine lectures, since the lecture on Marcel Proust, we've been working in what
we've been calling modernist literature, which for purposes of our course, we have
defined in two rough but related ways.
Except for, the first is that except for Mifous and Achebe, whose novels are pretty much realistic
novels, all of the last writers have been experimental in terms of their inherited forms of literature.
They view such techniques as broken chronology and stream of consciousness and fantastic
realism, interior monologue, and extreme subjectivity in point of view.
And in drama, we've seen the use of alienation techniques that remind audiences all the time
that they're in a theater watching a play.
Even Mifous, who wrote a realist novel, used stream of consciousness to get at the ways
in which traditional values collide with modern ones in the mind of Kamal, especially in that
second volume.
So experimentation in the way literature is written and how it works is part of what
we've been using as our definition of modernism over these last nine programs.
The second part of the definition has to do with subject or theme, or perhaps a better
way to say that would be the attitude of the writer toward his or her material.
Most of the literature that we've looked at in what we've called the modernist period
has been secular, vis-a-vis religious.
It's used science for standards of validity, vis-a-vis religion or tradition.
It's dealt with people in cities rather than people in the country.
And it has pretty much agreed with Nietzsche that there are really no external reference
points by which we can discover truth.
All I can know is the way the world looks to me, which is therefore the largest claim
that I can make in a work of literature.
We've also become very much aware that different peoples in different parts of the world use
different paradigms to explain the human experience, and so there may be fewer universals in human
experience that we at one time thought there were.
We also in the lectures on Proust and Pirandello saw attacks on some of the basic assumptions
of thought during the history of most of the world.
The great isms of the 20th century, Freudism and Marxism and Darwinism in particular undermined
a lot of the foundations of traditional thought.
We noticed that even the I, the self, the ego, which we think of as persisting through
time and being relatively stable, may be something very different from what we usually think
it is.
All of these things lead to the possibility that everything that we believe in might very
well be a construct, something made up by ourselves as a way of organizing our experience.
These shifts of course were much bigger than literature, they were going on throughout
the entire culture, and in some ways they actually required writers to create new literary
forms to record, experience what seems very different from what it had seemed in the past.
In this and the next two lectures, we'll be talking about the movement that succeeded
modernism, which is still called something like postmodernism.
There really are some differences between the literary works from before World War II
and after World War II, or somewhere around 1950, the division date between modernism and
postmodernism as a shifting one, at least in the avant-garde movements.
We'll take a look at one of those differences in this lecture, which is on Samuel Beckett,
and then we'll take a look, we'll add to that definition in the last two lectures on
Borges and Salman Rushdie.
The one we're concerned with here in this lecture is the attitude of the author, or
maybe better his or her assumptions, the givens he or she starts out with, which all move,
I think, a step or two beyond those of modernism.
Modernism challenged the basic assumptions of virtually all literature up until that
point, including the belief in a God who cares about us, a belief in an orderly universe in
which we are the center of creation, and even the self, the most constant of givens for
most of human history.
But they were all doing so in reaction against the literature that had come before them.
Their point was to refute concepts that no longer seemed relevant to the modern sensibility.
Postmodernists, and I realize I'm overgeneralizing here because there are many different kinds
of postmodernists, but postmodernists generally, I think, assume this breakdown of the fundamentals
of thought and the literature of the past, and then move on another step beyond that
assumption.
It seems to me, in fact, that the basic assumption of most postmodernist writers are those of
Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus, the French existentialists, who argued that we live in
what they call an absurd world whose meanings, whatever they are, are unknowable to us.
We therefore exist knowing nothing more than that we exist.
Past writers could view humans in a variety of contexts, religious or scientific or natural,
each one of which defines us, tells us who we are, why we're here, and each one implies
a set of rules for conduct and responsibility.
The French existentialists argued that there were no external definitions of human nature.
Rather, we have to define ourselves and we do this with every single decision that we
make with every action that we take.
Some postmodernists, we'll run across one in our next lecture on Jorge Luis Borges,
who says,
There very well may be a God, and the universe very well may make sense in some way, but
it's so big, and it's so far beyond our comprehension, that we'll never get it, we'll never understand
its logic or our place in it.
All of these assumptions were brilliantly captured in the very first novel of John Barth, a writer
whom we referred to in our lecture on the One Thousand One Nights.
His first novel was called The Floating Opera and its protagonist was a character named
Todd Andrews who approaches his life the way we would approach a term paper, or at least
the way we used to when we were in high school.
He gathers information and he writes it down on note cards and then he files the cards
by topic so that eventually he will be able to come up with a thesis about the meaning
of life.
This in itself is an existential kind of process.
Notice he doesn't assume any definition of himself, rather he does empirical research
to find out who he is.
At one point he gathers together all of the research that he has done so far and then
he comes up with a set of five principles based on his research, which he plans to use
to live by from this point on.
These are his five principles.
One, nothing has intrinsic value.
Two, the reasons for which people attribute value to things are always ultimately irrational.
Three, there is therefore no ultimate reason for valuing anything.
Four, living is action.
There's no final reason for action.
And five, there's no final reason for living.
Having come up with these five principles, he decides on the basis of those principles,
which represent a lifetime's research for him, he decides to commit suicide, since there's
no good reason not to.
Well, he tries and the attempt fails.
He's going to blow himself up on a boat and he turns the gas on and then somebody turns
the gas off and it doesn't work.
And so after some more reflection, he goes back and amends the last principle so that
the last principle, which originally read, there's no final reason for living, now reads,
there's no final reason for living or for suicide.
What he's doing in this novel is dramatizing the point that was made by Camus in the myth
of Sisyphus, who argued that the only philosophical question worth discussing is suicide, whether
life is worth living or whether it's not.
And that, I think, is the world of most post-moderns.
It's a world without intrinsic values or definitions in which each of us has to make
our way in an existential void without the help of all of the props that earlier protagonists
could use to define themselves and define themselves in the world.
Peter J. Reed, writing about Kurt Vonnegut, who was an American post-modernist, provides
us a really nice summary, I think, of what a post-modernist world feels like.
He's describing the world of Vonnegut in this passage.
Vonnegut presents a coherent description of our world, one which may not explain the
grand design, but which does offer some answers and assist our understanding.
This vision could be loosely described as existential in that within it, existence generally
precedes essence and that no identifiable meaning or purpose to existence is presumed.
The workings of the cosmos remain inscrutable, where man comes from, why he is here, where
he goes to, remain unanswerables.
So man continues self-consciously alone, reluctant to accept the fact of his being without knowing
why, anxious to find reason, purpose, and order in the universe and in his relationship
to it, but seeing instead only that things happen, unpredictably, pointlessly, and often
cruelly.
Furthermore, efforts to change what happens, to make things go in an ordered way, generally
prove futile.
Things just happen anyway.
That I think is a fairly good summary of a worldview that most post-modernists would
accept.
One last part of this definition of post-modernism, with which we will begin our consideration
anyway, the Norton anthology of English literature ends its 2000 edition with a story by Salman
Rushdie called The Prophet's Hair.
The point of ending thousands and thousands of pages of English lit with that particular
story is, according to the anthology itself, that it is a perfect post-modernist story.
The story is about a Muslim living in Kashmir, but he is not a traditional Muslim, he is
Muslim but he is living a very, very westernized kind of life along with his wife and children.
That westernized way of life is one of the things that gets satirized in the story.
But the most famous relic in the Muslim world comes into his possession, and when it does,
it drives him to try to revert to traditions from the past, and he tries to impose some
traditional Muslim disciplines and habits and behaviors and ways of life on his wife
and children.
Without going into detail by the end of the story, as a result of his efforts to attempt
to restore the past and his family's reactions to that attempt, he and his children are dead
and his wife is in an insane asylum.
One point, whatever else Rushdie may be saying in this story, one point for sure is that
From where we are, there is no going back to the certainties of the past.
We are where we are, and we have to move on from here, without trying to recapture foundations
of belief and actions that may have been those of our parents, but simply won't work for
us anymore.
Formally, the story satirizes everything, and it uses a combination of genres.
It uses realism and fantastic realism as it's used by Kafka or Marquez.
It uses satire, it uses fable, it uses outrageous comedy to make its point.
The question of form was one that we'll take up in the last two lectures on postmodernism,
but our point here is that according to most postmodernists, we have nothing outside ourselves
to rely on anymore.
We're in our own observed universe, and we are on our own in that observed universe,
and what we make of it and what we make of ourselves is up to us.
So that brings us finally to our subject for this lecture, Samuel Beckett, who is a postmodernist
in the way that we have so far defined that term.
When he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1969, the committee said that his work had recognized
the central dilemma of the century, the dilemma being that there is a stark contradiction
between the human effort to discover meaning in the universe and life, and the awareness
on the other hand that there is no meaning that we haven't created ourselves.
All of his novels and plays depict a world which is devoid of meaning, and they're full
of characters who either try to find or create meaning, who wait for some explanation that
never arrives, or who have actually given up the quest and who fill up their time by
staying busy, trying to keep themselves from the horror of the realization that they are
entirely and absolutely alone.
In 1949, in a dialogue about art, Beckett wrote that what art had come to in the mid-20th
century was, one, the realization that there is nothing to express, two, that there is
no desire to express anything, three, the awareness that even if one wanted to express
something it couldn't be done, and fourth, the obligation to express something, the paradoxes
are intentional, and they go some way in defining the world of Beckett's novels and the world
of his plays, and it's the plays that we'll focus on in this lecture.
For one thing, Beckett reinvented drama one more time in the 20th century.
Back in lecture 39, which was our lecture on Pirandello, we talked about a quotation
from Joseph Wood Crouch, who, in discussing the plays of Chekhov and Pirandello, said
that Chekhov had gotten rid of plot, Pirandello had gotten rid of character, so that there
could be no more drama in the future, since, as Aristotle had said, the two most important
elements in drama are plot and character.
Well, Crouch meant this tongue-in-cheek, but interestingly, Beckett actually created this
kind of drama.
It has no plot, nothing really ever happens on a Beckett stage.
There are no characters in our usual sense or understanding of that term, and yet we
still have a play.
Absurdist dramatists like Eugene Ionesco had already dramatized the existential dilemma
of modern humans by parodying the structure and order of traditional drama, by disrupting
those cause-effect sequences that audiences depend on for the suspense that allows us
to track what's happening on stage, and by making what happens on stage purely random
and unexpected.
Beckett takes that Absurdist drama one step further by dramatizing uncertainty, incoherence,
and non-meaning.
His first and most famous play is Waiting for Godot, which opened in Paris in 1953 and
then New York in 1955, and I guess everyone knows, even if you haven't seen the play,
we all know pretty much what that play does.
It shows two tramps, nicknamed Didi and Gogo, who spend time on stage while waiting for
someone named Godot who never shows up.
They fill up their time while they're waiting by calling each other names, by fighting and
then making up, by doing vaudeville routines and doing a couple of really neat old Charlie
Chaplin or Laurel and Hardy routines with their hats.
They think about committing suicide and they talk about it, they eat carrots, they wonder
about the meaning of things all to pass the time of day while waiting for Godot.
The second act duplicates the first, at the end of which a messenger arrives to say that
Godot will not be coming.
We come to understand that this is how they have spent yesterday and the day before that
and how they will most likely spend tomorrow.
Waiting for Godot offers at least some modicum of human comfort.
The two tramps are undoubtedly mistaken about Godot's arrival and hence findings finding
some meaning or direction for their lives, but at least in the meantime they have each
other to hold on to.
Time passes more easily, if not more meaningfully, if there's someone to share it with.
But Beckett's next play, Endgame, which was written four years later, is much, much more
bleak.
In that play, four characters occupy a small enclosed room.
The first words of the play are finished, it's finished, nearly finished, it must be
nearly finished.
Throughout the play, characters wait for something to happen, but of course it never does, whatever
it is that they're waiting for.
No one is happy inside the room and the relations among the four characters are very strained,
but outside, as one of them says, there's only death.
Three of them are going blind, one is deaf, one is half crippled, one has stumps for limbs.
And we realize in watching this play, we have reached the end of some kind of road and there's
no way out.
And there are no real connections among the characters either.
Each exists isolated, locked off from one another, and they don't help each other the
way Didi and Gogo do in Waiting for Godot.
One metaphor that runs throughout the entire play is that of the chess game, which is also
suggested by its title, Endgame.
And chess, of course, as we know, is a game of attrition.
By the end of the game, the board is nearly bare, all the screening pieces are gone, they
have been removed so that a key piece can sweep away all that's left.
The central character in this play is a character named Ham, who in metaphor, in this metaphor
of the chess game, is usually assumed to be the king, whose check signals the end of the
game, Endgame.
And remember the first words are finished, nearly finished, it must be finished, it must
be nearly finished.
And I think even more important than the individual moves within a chess game is the idea of a
game itself.
A game is always self-contained.
It always refers only to itself and not to anything outside it.
The metaphor, thus in some ways, reinforces the kind of isolation that Beckett pictures
in this play.
And in a kind of Pierandello-like way, reminds us that drama is a game, too.
It's a play.
It is play, which is also self-contained and self-reflexive.
In 1961, he wrote a play called Happy Days, about a married couple in which the wife Winnie
is buried up to her waist in sand for the first act, and is buried in sand up to her
neck in the second act.
Her husband, Willie, is very, very poor company, so she spends her time doing ritualistic things.
She combs her hair, she brushes her teeth, she looks into a mirror, and she talks, and
talks, and talks, and talks.
She keeps up an endless stream of words for two acts, most of it banal and silly and
trivial, which seems to be warding off for her awareness of the hopeless situation in
which she finds herself.
In her world, there turns out not even to be any real rotation of night or day, there's
only a bell which rings, which tells you it's time to sleep, and another bell it rings telling
her it's time to wake up.
And meanwhile, the light on the stage stays glaringly bright all the time, presumably
unchanging forever.
There's one other play that I want to mention of Beckett's a little bit later, but I think
you get the idea of his plays.
Absurdist drama was very good at giving us stage pictures that stay in our mind and contain
a lot of the meaning of the play.
In Absurdist drama, words were designed largely to be irrelevant or simply to keep the characters
from having to think.
It's the stage picture that we carry away as we leave the theater, and in some measure,
that's true of Beckett's plays too.
What we remember at the end of a Beckett play is we remember two tramps waiting under a
tree for Godot.
We remember Ham and the other three characters moving around in what seemed predictable and
repetitive ways in the enclosed room in which they live.
We remember Winnie buried in her sand, trying cheerfully to make the best of what is clearly
a desperate situation.
And I think the idea that everything that any of these characters do is repetitive is
really important in a Beckett play.
And it's all emphasized by the characters' dim awareness that they are in fact in some
kind of a play.
That is, they have the feeling that they're in a play which has run for a long time and
will probably run for a while longer.
In Godot, one tramp says to the other, what we're doing is worse than being in the theater
or in the circus.
And one asks the other one what they did yesterday, and he says they're waiting for Godot, and
he says what do we do tomorrow?
And he says we're going to wait for Godot, and we'll come back and do that the day after
that and the day after that and the day after that, which of course you would do if this
play is going to continue to run for a long time.
Endgame begins with the removal of a sheet from two Ashbonds and another sheet from Ham
who sits in a chair, as if the sheets had been there all night waiting for the play to start
and as soon as the sheets are removed, the play can begin.
At the end, Ham makes a curtain speech and then he covers his face.
End of play, end game.
And throughout the play, characters talk frequently as though they know that they're in a play
that's being repeated every night.
Nell says why this farce?
Why do we have to go through this farce day after day after day?
And when someone asks what time it is, somebody else says it's the usual time, which of course
it would be if the play is performed at the same time every night.
So that means it's the usual time for this bit in this particular play.
What time is it?
It's the usual time.
Toward the end of the play, Ham says our revels now are ended, quoting Prospero from Shakespeare's
The Tempest after he has finished his performance for his daughter in Ferdinand.
And at the very end, Ham tells another character not to listen to what I'm going to say now
because he said I'm going to say an aside.
And he said what's an aside?
He said, did you ever hear of a side, an aside before?
I'm warming up from my last soliloquy, he says, and in both cases, the aside is very
much a theatrical term and he says he's warming up for his last soliloquy.
And he also says that he thinks they have all been through this so often that he thinks
they're beginning to understand it, which again would be something that would happen
if you went through this same set of behaviors and rituals and performances each night.
There are within that play two, itself, two vaudeville performances, which are hammed
up and commented on by performers as they're going through them.
And another little telling thing is that every time somebody tries to look out the windows,
they say there's nothing out there, there's nothing you can't see through those windows,
which of course, if they are theater windows, you wouldn't be able to see through.
There's nothing behind them.
When Winnie in Happy Days breaks her mirror, she says, uh-oh, I've broken my mirror, but
then she says, oh, that's all right.
I don't worry about this.
I do this every time, she says.
And every time the bell signals that it's time to wake up, there's always a new one
in my handbag, and which suggests that it's probably put there by some stagehand, ready
for the next performance, which suggests too that she's on a stage performing the same
speeches and the same actions every night in the same sequence at the same time.
The point of all of this, of course, is that as a chess game means only itself, it means
nothing outside it, so does a play.
In a post-modernist world, a play or a game is what we do to pass the time to keep ourselves
from thinking.
In Endgame, the stage set is a room with two windows that are so high that if you want
to look outside the room, you have to climb a ladder to look out.
And it's been suggested that that stage set looks like the inside of a skull, a skull
which has various impulses and thoughts locked up inside it.
Since Ham, the central character, is blind, he can see nothing outside the windows, and
as we're told, there's nothing to see outside them anyway, which suggests, in again, a visual
kind of way, being forever locked inside one's own consciousness, which may be another image
for the solipsistic humans in a post-modern world.
Once Ham asks another character to look inside a dustbin in which his father lives to see
if his father is still alive, the other character looks and says he is, and Ham says what's
he doing, and the answer is he's crying, and Ham said then he's alive.
So in Beckett's world, to live is to weep and to wait for the end of the play and the
end of the game.
One game is one way to describe what it feels like to be sliding towards death in a world
that doesn't mean anything, which is part of the point of the other plays as well.
The last play I want to mention is very briefly, it wasn't written for the stage at all, but
it's written for the radio, it's a play called All That Fall.
A radio play has been suggested by critics as being a perfect medium for Beckett, since
it consists of words surrounded by silence.
Going through our speakers, that's what we get when nobody's speaking, you get just silence.
And words surrounded by silence, surrounded by the void, seems an apt metaphor for the
kind of world that Beckett gives us.
This one is about a Mrs. Rooney, who goes to a train station to meet her blind husband
Dan on his birthday.
She walks to the station and on the way she meets a series of people, and then she gets
to the station, the train is surprisingly late considering it's only a half hour run
from the place where her husband got on.
On the way home, she asks her husband why the train was so late, and he keeps avoiding
the question, directing this conversation off to other things.
On the way home, they're overtaken by a young man named Jerry, who returns something that
Mr. Rooney had dropped, presumably some kind of a ball.
And he tells Mrs. Rooney that a child had fallen from the train underneath the wheels,
and that's what caused the delay.
As always, Beckett uses minimalist plots, but the ending of this one is a bit of a
surprise, and a lot of people have tried to figure out whether the child simply fell
from the train, or was in fact pushed by Mr. Rooney.
It turns out that if you read the play, when you read the play, you'll see that a case
can be made out for either one, and you need to decide yours for yourselves about that
when you read it.
But whether he pushed her or not, the play is like all of Beckett's plays, it's a play
about death, about the sadness and decline and fall, which is suggested by its title.
As Mr. and Mrs. Rooney walk home, they hear someone playing Schubert's Death and the
Maiden on a phonograph inside the house on the road.
On the way to the station, Mrs. Rooney reflects on their beautiful young daughter, long since
dead, who would be coming into her forties had she lived.
And the title of the play specifically comes from a text which is going to be the text
for the curates sermon the next day, and the text is, the Lord upholdeth all that fall,
and raiseth up all those that be bowed down.
That text evokes gales of laughter from the Roonies.
So the play, as all Beckett's plays are, has some humor in it, it has some charm in it,
but it's also probably in part Beckett's own sense of outrage at the entire universe.
Michael Robinson in a book about Beckett called The Long Sonata of the Dead, in talking about
this play specifically says this about all that fall.
A god who conceives such a world in the full consciousness of what he has created must
either, in his desire to hear the cries of another, be the most monstrous of tyrants
or else, and this seems the more likely as he continues to refrain from extending an
upholding hand, he is not there.
The sounds of this Saturday afternoon in June belong to an extinguished world falling towards
nothing, yet certain, as Mrs. Rooney says, not to reach it in our lifetime.
And our cries, like the words from the loudspeaker, are uttered to the silence of the cosmos
where we wait alone.
And then Robinson ends with a quotation by Mrs. Rooney from the play itself, all is
still, no living soul in sight, there is no one to ask.
The world is feeding, the wind scarcely stirs the leaves and the birds are tired singing.
The cows and sheep ruminate in silence, the dogs are hushed and the hens sprawl torpid
in the dust.
We are alone, there is no one to ask.
In our next two lectures, also on postmodernism, we will look at two other writers who are
in some ways, perhaps, if not more cheerful than Beckett, at least more sanguine about
where we live and who we are, but who nevertheless share with Beckett, I think, the assumption
that we are alone and that we have to define ourselves and our values as we go.
In a really kind of interesting way, this really almost brings us back, at least in
part, to an idea that we've already encountered in this course a long time ago in Sophocles,
who also thought that human morality and human integrity is a human concern and that we don't
need to expect any help from the cosmos or the gods in helping us construct it.
Next time, Jorge Luis Borges' Labyrinth.
