Lecture 35, Higuchi Ichio's Charles Play
I think that we've seen in the lectures that we've been doing, in which we've been doing
the realist movement, that realism was a vast international movement.
But within it, it allowed all kinds of variations.
We've seen the ways in which Flaubert and Dostoevsky and Twain and Ibsen and Chekhov
and Tagore have used the rubrics of realism, but used them in slightly different ways.
In this lecture, we come to yet another realist, this time from Japan, who is also simultaneously
typical and atypical.
Her name is Higuchi Ichio.
One came to Japan from the west after 1853 as part of Japan's enforced westernization,
which began as we remember when Commodore Perry sailed his squadron into Ido Bay and forced
Japan into opening contact with the rest of the world.
After Japan had initially recreated itself once along Chinese lines, it had closed itself
off from the rest of the world.
While the west was going through the Renaissance and the Enlightenment and Romanticism and
the French and industrial revolutions, Japan had maintained its sort of splendid isolation
ruled by Shoguns and Samurai and maintaining cultural patterns that had gone back at least
a millennium.
Now, with the new westernization came brick buildings and western dress and factories
and railroads and the newest western literature, which in the second half of the 19th century
meant the end of the Romantic period and the beginning of realism.
Once again, as it had done with Chinese models a thousand years earlier, Japan adopted and
adapted this time from the west.
The best known, having said all this however, the best known Japanese realist writer at
the end of the 19th century really had very little to do with all of this.
Her father came from peasant stock and he had just barely lifted himself out of peasant
status and into the very bottom edges of an entrepreneurial class when he went bankrupt
first and then died, which left the family in absolute grinding poverty.
The father had wanted his daughters to have an education along western style lines now
that education was being reformed in Japan, but the mother thought that an educated daughter
was first an anomaly and secondly would make her daughters unmarriageable so that Higuchi
Achiyo's new schooling in these new restructured western schools was a very, very brief one.
As a compromise, the father sent her to a kind of girls finishing school where she studied
not the new western literature coming in, but she studied classical Japanese poetry
and studied the tale of Genji.
So most of her education had nothing to do with the westernization going on and so she
couldn't really have been influenced very much by the western realists.
She kept a diary so we know that she didn't in fact read her first western works in translation
until after she had started writing her own stories.
While she was writing the one that we'll talk about today, Child's Play, she was reading
simultaneously, she was reading Macbeth and Little Lord Fauntleroy and Crime and Punishment,
which is at very least an eclectic introduction to western literature, but at any rate it
was too, reading those at that point was too late for her to absorb their techniques and
subjects into her own writing.
So in a kind of ironic way, the best known, at least to us in the west, the best known
Japanese realist writer really had no access to western realism at all.
The story that we're going to look at, Child's Play, was phenomenally successful in Japan
and the reviewers who did know about western realism immediately called her a naturalist
and put her in the school of Zola and Ibsen and Chekhov since there are so many similarities
between her work and theirs.
Her stories were about middle and lower class characters and hers are about the poor people
who live in a really ragged section of Edo, that's now Tokyo, at the edge of the very
famous Pleasure Quarter, which was a section of the city that was dedicated to the pleasures
of men wealthy enough to be able to purchase escapes from family and business life.
So her subjects are the people who serve this quarter, who do their manual labor, who help
create its dazzling illusions, but who themselves are very poor, barely hanging on and trying
to raise their families in the lights shining from these elegant houses where the most famous
courtesans of the day serve their very wealthy patrons.
We can tell, and you will be able to tell when you read her story, you can tell that
she isn't a western style realist because of her point of view.
As we've said over and over again in these lectures on realism, realism tried to evaporate
the author out of the story, tried to make the story seem authorless, tried to give what
appears to be an unmediated view of reality.
We've said this before, we've quoted this before, but it's worth saying again, Flaubert
said that a novelist in his novel should be like God, he should be present everywhere
and visible nowhere, and that's not the way Echio works.
The first three pages of her story, Child's Play, give us a kind of guided tour through
Yoshiowara, which is the pleasure quarter of Edo, in a very chatty and detached and slightly
rye tone.
I always think that those first three pages are sort of like taking one of those bus trips
that you take when you come to a new city, and when you get in the bus and you drive
through sections of town, and either the driver or a guide is talking to you the whole time
telling you, pointing out things and making little jokes and trying to keep you interested
along the way.
This is the first paragraph as she introduces us to the Yoshiowara.
It's a long way around to the front of the quarter, where the trailing branches of the
willow tree bid farewell to the night time revelers, and the body house lights flicker
in the moat, dark as the dye that blackens the smiles of the Yoshiowara beauties.
From the third floor rooms of the lofty houses, the all but palpable music and laughter spill
down into the side street.
Who knows how these great establishments prosper?
The rickshaws pull up night and day.
The dark moat, by the way, just as a footnote to that, the dark moat, which matches the
smiles of the Yoshiowara beauties, beauties remind us that in this period, Chinese beauties
still blacken their teeth.
Throughout the entire story, we get these kinds of comments from the narrator, which
stresses the authorial presence.
She's always with us as she takes us through the story, guiding us, helping us notice things,
and then making slightly rye and ironic comments about things as she goes through.
And in fact, Ichiyo's realism comes not from Western models, but from Japanese ones, especially
a writer named Ihara Saikaku, who in the 17th century had helped create popular literature
in Japan, and who wrote some of Japan's first popular novels, which in his case were set
in and around the pleasure quarter of Osaka, which at that time was the most important
city in the country.
His first novel was called, in translation, The Life of a Senjuus Man, and it was about
the experiences of a pleasure seeker in the pleasure quarter with many, many different
women in a manner that sometimes borders almost on the pornographic.
In a way, that book is almost a parody of the tale of Genji.
It doesn't have the Buddhist frame that Genji does, and it's set not in palaces and in
aristocratic houses, but in the pleasure quarter of Osaka, and the characters aren't princes
and nobles, but they're merchants who frequent that pleasure quarter.
The book was a stunning success, and it was followed by many others, most of which were
set in parts of the city that had never been recorded in literature before.
In the pleasure quarter, in the business district, in the houses of merchants, and the characters
in these stories were drawn from the merchant class and lower.
The stories are picaresque in ways that we've mentioned earlier.
They're not very tightly plotted.
They move from scene to scene in what seems sometimes random ways, and the narrator is
always there to supply rye comments as we go.
Sometimes making fun, sometimes making ironic little comments, pointing out things that
he thinks that we might think would be funny.
But his books did give a really lively picture of life in the city in a way that was new
to Japanese literature at the time.
Now, a new edition of his works had been published in 1894.
Ichiyo found them in a library, and she read them all.
We know this from her diary.
She admired them, and so that when she started writing her own stories, she modeled hers
on those of Saikaku.
So her own chatty narrator is a kind of her version of this worldly and witty narrator
of Saikaku, which in his day was considered realistic literature because his books dealt
with ordinary people in parts of the city and life that had never been part of classical
Japanese literature.
Saikaku also used a technique in all of his books in which he used type characters or
caricatures.
We've talked about this technique when we did our lectures on Molière and Voltaire.
A type character is one who embodies the significant characteristics of a group or class, but is
not individualized very much.
In Molière, we talked about his use of doctors.
He has a type for the character of the doctor.
All of the doctors in Molière are pedantic.
They're full of Latin names for things.
They're intellectually dull, but they have pretensions of importance.
And that's his type for the doctor.
Caricatures usually seize on a single quality of a person and then exaggerate it so that
all of the characteristics of that person are defined in terms of the one characteristic,
the one exaggerated one.
Again to use Molière as our example, a miser in Molière is defined exclusively in terms
of his hoarding wealth, and all other aspects of his character are subordinated to that
one.
Saikaku in his novels uses a combination of type characters and caricatures.
All of his merchants are in some ways alike.
All of his merchants' wives are in some ways alike.
All of his courtesans are in some ways alike.
And his people on the street all tend to be type characters.
Each one seizes on one representative quality and then exaggerates it to make it the kind
of defining quality of that type of character.
And Achille will do the same thing.
She will learn how to do characterization from him, but she will use hers in a much
different kind of way.
Japanese critics, when they discovered Child's Play and the other works that she had written,
were less impressed with the Japanese genealogy of Achille's works than they were with the
supposed Western ones, however.
Once she had published, she was besieged by offers to write for journals and speak at
conferences.
What she was doing looked so much like what Western realism was all about that other writers
wanted to learn from her, wanted to hear her speak to them and tell them how she had done
it and what the tricks were.
But while she managed to write a little bit more after the story that we'll look at in
this lecture, she knew that she was dying of tuberculosis and she was too ill to respond
to any of the offers.
And she did in fact die of tuberculosis at age 24, another one of those sort of tragic
shortening of literary lives that the 19th century is so full of.
Her story that we're going to look at now, Child's Play, is a story about a group of
children on the very edge of adulthood growing up in that part of the city that borders on
the Pleasure District.
At the outset, they're still children.
At the end, they have to give up their childhood to assume adult responsibilities.
The two central characters in the story are first Midori, who actually lives in the Pleasure
Quarter.
Her parents have sold both her and her older sister to the most prestigious brothel in
the Pleasure Quarter.
Her sister is the most sought after courtesan of the day and the parents are given jobs
as caretakers in the brothel.
When the story starts, Midori is still a young girl.
She's still free to play with children in the adjoining quarter, but she is already
so beautiful and so bright and so talented that her promise is that when the time comes,
she will rival her sister for customers in the Red Light District.
The other central character is a young man named Nobu, who's the son of the Buddhist
priest in the Poor District.
Nobu and Midori are attracted to one another in an adolescent way that in romantic novels
would inevitably lead to love and to marriage and a happy future.
Here it can't happen that way.
By the end, both of them, plus all the other children in the story, will have to assume
adult roles that will end their period of freedom and happiness.
By the story's end, Midori has begun to menstruate, so that it's become to be her time to move
into the Pleasure Quarter as a courtesan.
Nobu at the end of the story goes off to the seminary to become a Buddhist priest.
And Midori's best friend, a young man named Shota, who's a grandson of a notorious skin-flint
pawnbroker, has to assume his grandmother's business, so that Shota and Midori, who have
been best friends as they've been growing up, if Shota ever sees Midori again, he will
have to pay very dearly for her services in the Pleasure Quarter.
So the story is a really sad and beautiful story about the last moment of youth, sort
of like Indian summer, just before everyone has to grow up, and life will never be the
same again.
Like Saikaku, Ichiyu uses type characters and caricatures in her story, but she uses
them very, very skillfully in a way that's very different from the way Saikaku uses
them.
Nobu's father is a Buddhist priest.
When we first meet him, he's chanting Asutra, that is a portion of the Buddhist scriptures.
The narrator tells us that chanting this scripture should have blown away all the earthly dust
in the priest's heart, but then she goes on to say this about him.
But smoke rose from fish broiling in the kitchen.
In the cemetery, diapers had been seen drying over tombstones.
Nothing wrong here in the eyes of the Order, perhaps.
Those who fancied their clerics above worldly desires, though, found the doings at Ryuji
Temple rather too earthly for their tastes.
Here the fortunes of the head priest were as handsome as his stomach.
Both had rounded out nicely through the years.
The man's glow of well-being beggared description.
Not the sunny pink of the cherries, not the deep pink of the peach.
From the top of his freshly shaven peat to the bottom of his neck, he shone like burnished
copper.
When he whooped with laughter, bushy salt and pepper eyebrows floating heavenward,
the noise of the old man's excess could have toppled Buddha from the altar.
The new Western dispensation in Japan had relaxed the requirements for the Buddhist
priesthood, but even under those new circumstances this one seems way over the top.
Instead of the sort of emaciated spiritual seekers we've come to expect, like the one
in the Chinese novel Monkey, or the one in the Story of the Stone, this one is very
fat, very healthy, and very married.
His favorite food, we're told, is big oily eels.
By tradition those are associated with sexual prowess, and every night he sends his son
Nobu to go get one for him.
And while Nobu was too young quite to catch all of the sexual connotation of what he's
doing, he knows there's something really fleshy and gross about these things that
revolts him, and he's embarrassed every night he has to go get one for his father.
And we also notice that the sutras at the temple are chanted against a backdrop of fish
smoke and diapers drying on a line.
This seems most un-Buddhist in some kind of way.
The priest in fact looks a lot like the monk in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, who should
be lean and shabby, but decidedly isn't.
Even this priest's eyebrows seem wrong, as the narrator notes there's black salt and
pepper eyebrows, the bushy eyebrows which rose toward heaven as he whooped with laughter.
In the story we find out that he's set up a tea stand for his very good looking daughter
so that she will stand in the tea stand and he exploits her charms to get young men to
come in and buy tea.
And every time there's a festival his wife goes out to huxter souvenirs and mementos at
which he is very good, and the priest himself is always busy with his accounts.
This is what we hear about him just a little bit later.
But his holiness was the busy one.
Loans to collect, the shop to oversee, funerals to arrange, not to mention all the sermons
every month.
When he wasn't flipping through accounts he was going through the sutras.
If things didn't let up he'd wear himself out, he would sigh, as he dragged his flowered
cushion onto the veranda where he fanned himself, half naked, and enjoyed his nightly hooch.
The order of events in that description makes his holiness seem really, really ironic.
And that's how Echio uses caricature in her story.
All of the adults, or almost all of the adults, there's one exception to this, but almost
all of the adults in the story are caricatured in this way.
One boy has a father who's known as groveling tetsu.
Groveling tetsu has to stay on good terms with everybody just to survive.
So when his son gets beaten up by a rival gang, whose leader is the son of a man who
employs tetsu, he makes his son go and apologize to the father for getting beaten up by the
son so as not to jeopardize his livelihood.
Shota's grandmother, the pawnbroker, is as cold as the locks that she keeps on everything,
and she's defined absolutely entirely in terms of her grasping avarice.
We never find anything else about her except that.
So in the story, the caricatures are all reserved for the adult world.
And what is suggested by the use of caricature in describing the adults is that there is
no innocence in that world.
Whatever innocence there still is in this world is in the world of the children.
And we're aware from the outset that that innocence, such as it is, is doomed.
The story simply catches them in autumn, the season in which the whole story is set, in
the last moments before they enter the adult world of greed and compromise and humiliation.
The children, on the other hand, in its yew stories, are not caricatured.
They are individualized, they are treated with great tenderness by the narrator.
Throughout the story, we see them with each other, sometimes getting along, sometimes
not getting along, but we see them as children enjoying their last moments of freedom.
When the Indian summer ends, Midori will take her place as the much desired courtesan in
the pleasure quarter.
Shoda, the grandson of the pawnbroker, is last seen going on his grandmother's rounds,
collecting her debts from creditors.
And the narrator notices that now when he goes on the rounds by himself, he doesn't
sing anymore the way he used to when he went as a little boy with his grandmother on her
rounds.
And arching over all of this is the relationship of Midori and Nobu.
In April of the year just before the autumn in which this story is set, they had really
noticed each other for the first time after years of being simply childhood friends.
Their attraction is mutual, but they're still too young to know how to express their interest
in each other, except in teasing.
They do tease one another in that kind of way that shows their very interest in each
other, but they don't know how to express their feelings for each other beyond that.
And Nobu actually spends a lot of his time trying to stay away from Midori because he
is so confused by his feelings about her.
In a beautiful scene, and this is sort of typical of the way Achiyu does these little
scenes in the book, once when Nobu is running an errand in the pleasure quarter, he's overtaken
by a rainstorm just outside Midori's house.
Three things happen to him simultaneously.
One, a string on his clog breaks, his umbrella blows away and he drops the package he's
carrying.
Midori is seeing all this from inside her house, so she takes a piece of cloth, an expensive
one as it turns out, and runs out into the rain to give it to Nobu so he can fix the
clog.
But the feelings between these two are so strong and both of them are so new at this
that while she stands there holding the fabric and he stands there in the rain, neither of
them knows what to say next or how to make the next move.
They stand there for a while and then her mother, Midori's mother, calls her to come
in out of the rain, and so what she does is simply throws the fabric in the mud and then
runs back into the house.
Nobu, the narrator tells us, his heart breaking at the gesture, patches his clog with a string
that he has, and then he walks away, leaving the fabric in the mud next to the walk.
That fabric lying in the mud, sinking slowly into the mud beside the walk, is a kind of
powerful symbol of the relationship between Nobu and Midori and of the way their lives
are programmed in such a way that they won't ever be able to cross in any meaningful kind
of way.
At the story's end, Nobu, who's embarrassed by his parents, particularly by his father,
and who doesn't believe, doesn't feel that he belongs in this world at all, goes off
to the seminary.
On the day that he leaves for the seminary, Midori finds a paper, Narcissus, on her doorstep,
which she treasures and keeps, even though it makes her sad to look at it.
We guess that that's a farewell gift from Nobu.
The story is full of moments like this, the moment of the little patch of cloth sinking
into the mud beside the walk, the paper Narcissus on the doorstep.
The title of this story in translation is Child's Play.
The Japanese title is Takakurabe, which means literally comparing heights.
That title comes from a tenth-century poem in a Japanese novel.
Robert Linley Lyons-Danley, who's the translator of this story in a book about a chiou called
In the Shade of Spring Leaves, tells us the meaning of the title.
The poem is about a part of a story about a boy and a girl, two children, of two men
who travel together and who therefore grow up together.
Quite frequently they meet at the same well and they spend a lot of their childhood playing
together at a certain well.
As they grow up, the boy decides that he wants to marry her, and she decides that she wants
to marry him, so that when her father tries to marry her off to other suitors, she keeps
refusing.
And then one day, the boy sends to her this poem, and this is a poem which is cited by
Danby, but he also cites Helen Craig McCullough as the translator of these poems.
The poem that the boy sends to the girl says this,
My height that we measured at the well curb has, it seems, passed the old mark since last
I saw you.
After a while, the girl writes back a poem, and this is what she writes back to him.
The hair parted in the middle that I measured against yours now hangs below my shoulders.
For whom shall it be put up, if not for you?
The point of the title, Danby tells us that in that novel, the boy and the girl get married
and live happily ever after.
So the point of the title, Measuring Heights, is also sort of sad and ironic.
It's about what might have been in a different world, in a different time, in a different
place.
It can't happen here in the pleasure quarter and in the poor people's quarter adjacent
to it.
Other critics have reminded us that as a way of thinking about what happens in this story,
is to remember that Louisa May Elcott's Little Women was written in 1868, which is about
27 years before this one.
In that novel, growing up is a promise, not a threat.
The virtuous girls in that story, who are all required during the course of the novel
to give up their childhoods too, to pass out of that world of childhood, are given generous
rewards for giving up childhood.
They'll be rewarded with splendid husbands and careers for giving up that world of childhood.
Here, Midori's beauty and intelligence and high spirits will be rewarded with customers
who will pay to spend a night or a week with her.
First Love happens in this story too, but it fails to blossom the way it does in romantic
literature.
The symbols of First Love here are a piece of fabric sinking into the mud or a paper
narcissist left on a doorstep.
At the end of the story, as Midori is now passing from that world of the poor people's
quarters into the world of the pleasure quarter, and she's being more and more sequestered,
more and more prepared for the role that she will take as a courtesan.
The author steps into her mind and gives us just a little glimpse in what's happening
to her, what she thinks about.
The scene that we come in on, her old friend Shota, has noticed that she is depressed,
she's sad, she seems distant, she seems different than she ever has in the past.
And then the passage goes on like this.
But when he asked her what it was then, she couldn't answer.
There were just sad things, vague things, feelings.
She couldn't put them into words.
They made her cheeks burn.
Nothing she could point to, and yet lately everything discouraged her.
So many thoughts, none of them would ever have occurred to the Midori of yesterday.
This awkwardness, all of a sudden, how was she to explain it?
If they would just leave her alone, she'd be happy to spend night and day in a dark
room.
No one to talk to her, no one to stare.
Even if she felt unhappy, at least she would be spared the embarrassment.
If only she could go on playing house forever with her dolls for companions, then she'd
be happy again.
Oh, she hated, hated, hated this growing up.
Why did things have to change?
What she would give to go back a year, ten months, seven months even.
And then, because the story is about Midori and Nobu, but it is also about all the rest
of the children as well, we get a final comment about all the children toward the very end
of the story that says this.
A moment ago there were children there down the street, ring a ring a rosy, pocket full
of posies.
Suddenly it's quiet now, before you notice, only the sound of rickshaws loud as ever.
And that, the reminder of the rickshaws is a really beautiful touch, because we remember
we read the first paragraph of the story, and the very first paragraph of the story,
she reminds us that whatever else happens, you always get the sound of rickshaws coming
in and out of the pleasure quarter day and night all the time.
And so at the end, that hasn't changed.
The rickshaws are still coming in and out of the pleasure quarter.
It's just that where there were children playing on the street just a moment ago, now it's
very quiet.
We can see how the Japanese world would have hailed Ichiyu as the embodiment of realism.
And we can see her as a part of that movement, even if her models were different and her
techniques are not quite identical to those of the rest of the realists we've looked at.
With Ichiyu, we finish our treatment of realism as a movement.
Even though, as we've said several times, it's never quite disappeared.
We still have realist novels, we still have realist plays, we still have realist art.
Since it's never disappeared, we will come back and we will get a chance to look at some
later realist works in the course.
For example, Nagib Mufooz of Egypt or Chinua Achebe of Nigeria.
But as a movement, we are done with realism now and in the next lecture, we will take
up one of the figures who both rejected realism in the ways that we've been talking about
it for the last half a dozen lectures and introduced a whole century of experimentation
in the literature of the world designed to bring literature into closer alignment with
the brave new world of the 20th century.
We're talking about Marcel Proust, the remembrance of things past, who will once more reinvent
the way stories get told and he will in the process open the door to an entire century
of experimentation which will make the last unit of this course one of the most exciting
that we have done in the entire course.
That will be our next lecture.
