Our subject in this lecture is Alexander Pushkin, and in particular we're going to be looking
at a novel in verse that he wrote called Eugene Onyagin.
Like Emily Bronte, Pushkin is a kind of transitional figure who's half-romantic and partway on
the way to the characteristics of realism.
And like Lord Byron, whom we'll have a chance to talk about a little more in this lecture,
he's also a kind of transitional figure between the 18th and 19th centuries.
Byron is Russia's national poet, or the closest that they have to one, the equivalent
for them of Shakespeare, or Dante, or Robert Burns for the English, or the Italians, or
the Scots.
He wrote in a variety of genres, and he's credited with inventing the Russian literary
language, at least by some critics.
And once again, that puts him into company of people like Dante who did that for Italian,
and Shakespeare did that for English.
Like Lord Byron, he lived a pretty sensational life.
He was an aristocrat who was in and out of trouble, much of his life with authorities
for his liberal views.
He lived a romantically adventurous life, just about as romantically adventurous as Byron's.
And in fact, he was killed at age 37 in a duel over either his wife's infidelities over
or over other men's behavior toward her, depending on which account you read.
In that very short life of his, like Byron, he wrote an amazing amount of good literature.
It's become so much a part of the Russian literary consciousness that people there are
likely to know more about him than any other Russian writer, to be able to quote from his
poems, many lines of which, as with Shakespeare's, have become proverbial, and to remember him
as a writer who provided some plots for some very fine operas by some fine composers.
Glinka, and Uzorksky, and Rimsky-Korsakov, and Tchaikovsky, who actually set two of
them, the Queen of Spades, and our work today, Eugene Onyagin.
For people outside Russia, he may be a little like Emily Bronte, in that, as we said about
Bronte, probably more people know Wuthering Heights from the movie version than from the
book, and so it's possible that outside of Russia, more people know of Pushkin because
of the operas that he inspired than they do the works that inspired them.
In Pushkin's time, Russia was in the midst of its kind of enforced westernization.
It was a phase that had been begun by Peter the Great in the late 17th and early 18th
centuries, and had been then continued by his successors in office.
Peter had wanted Russia to face west, and during his and the successive reigns, Russians
were forced to give up many of their own traditional ways for the ways of Europe.
Peter's own palace in St. Petersburg was modeled on Versailles, the palace of Louis
XIV, and St. Petersburg itself was designed as a rational city built on western models
rather than Russian ones.
And the westernization, of course, included literature.
French language and literature became really normative in Russia during this period.
Most of the aristocrats of Pushkin's time would have spoken French better than they
spoke Russian.
According to the story, Pushkin's last words after he had been killed in the duel just
before he died were supposedly spoken in French rather than in Russian.
So that Russia became a kind of melting pot for European ideas and philosophy and manners
and literature, all of which was available to a talented writer like Pushkin.
The literature that came flowing in during this time included a number of different things.
It included, first of all, and this one becomes particularly important for Eugene O'Negan,
it included the sentimental novel.
Now the sentimental novel had been more or less created by Samuel Richardson in Pamela
in England in 1740, and then it was continued by Jean-Jacques Rousseau in Julie, or the
new Eloise in 1761, and then by the fabulously popular and successful The Sorrows of Young
Verter by Gerta in 1774.
What made a sentimental novel sentimental was the fact that the focus was not so much
on events as they were on feelings, and feelings were cultivated, sentimentality, sensibility
were cultivated in great measure.
Sam Johnson said about Pamela in England, about Samuel Richardson's Pamela.
He said, don't read Samuel Richardson for the plot.
If you read him for a plot, you'll hang yourself, read him for the feeling.
These novels, full of intense and high feeling, were coming into Russia as part of the wave
coming in from the West.
It also included literature of the French Enlightenment, including especially the literature
of Voltaire, who had been a correspondent of Catherine the Great during her reign.
But above all, it meant that coming into Russia at this time was the literature of Lord Byron,
the romantic poet whose fabulous popularity was really peaking during the time that Pushkin
was doing most of his writing.
We talked about the Byronic hero in the last lecture, and that hero's influence on European
literature is literally uncalculable, incalculable.
He is everywhere.
But what Byron did toward the end of his life is he began what many people today consider
his real masterpiece.
It's a poem, a long poem called Don Jewin.
Now, that's really Don Juan, as we would say that, but it has to be pronounced Don Jewin.
First of all, because of the British tendency to anglicize names.
And secondly, because of the rhymes in the poem, Jewin is always a two-syllable rhyme,
so that it has to be pronounced Jewin.
Byron forces us to pronounce it not Don Juan, but Don Jewin.
Byron began his Don Jewin in 1818, and he worked on it off and on for the next six years.
By the time he died, he had finished 16 sizable cantoes.
The first two cantoes were published in 1819, and they were the ones that inspired Pushkin
to begin work on Eugene O'Negan.
We'll come back and talk a bit about verse forms and what Pushkin learned from Byron
about writing verse, and about some of the other characteristics of this poem, but first
just a word or two about this Eugene O'Negan poem.
The central character is something of a Byronic hero himself.
He's a young aristocrat in St. Petersburg, whose beauty and wealth and social graces
have allowed him a very rich life, so rich, in fact, that at a very young age he's already
burned out.
He's jaded.
He's sated with pleasure, and he's unable to really feel anything anymore, and so burned
out, deciding he needs a change of some sort.
At the beginning of the poem, an uncle dies, leaving him a country estate, and so he goes
to live there, thinking that perhaps getting away from a life that doesn't intrigue him
anymore, and also to see whether country life will offer him any refreshment, any emotional
refreshment.
Maybe living in the country, he will absorb some of these good romantic things, and he
will refresh himself.
Well, he goes to live in the country, but he doesn't really find much emotional refreshment
there.
He also doesn't find very many people who are worth spending time with, and lacking
any real alternatives, he winds up making friends with a very gentle, romantic poet
named Lensky.
Lensky writes poems about sublime feelings and about love.
Lensky is in love with a woman named Olga on a neighboring estate, and one time when
he goes to see Olga, he takes Onyagin with him, and there Onyagin meets Olga's shy,
bookish, and not entirely beautiful older sister, Tatyana.
Tatyana has read a lot of sentimental novels, and she immediately falls in love with this
jaded, worldly, handsome, reckless Eugene Onyagin.
Because she's read so many of these sentimental novels, she does what heroines sometimes do
in those novels.
She immediately sends a letter to Onyagin, which is a naive and trusting letter, offering
herself to him as his wife.
She expects an immediate answer, but then one day goes by, and another day goes by,
and another day goes by, and another day goes by, and there is no answer.
One day, when Onyagin visits the house, he tells her that he was moved by her letter,
but he tells her also that he was not made for marriage or for happiness.
And then he gives her a little lecture.
It's a fairly stern lecture in which he tells her to be more careful in the future, since
a less scrupulous man might have taken advantage of her naivete.
Well, Tatyana takes this as best she can.
She languishes, of course.
You're supposed to languish if you've read a lot of sentimental novels.
But on her birthday, Lensky talks Onyagin into going back to the house with him by assuring
him that it's just going to be a family gathering, just a few people there.
And since that Onyagin says he can put up with a few people, not a large party.
Well, when he gets there, it turns out to be a huge party with many guests.
And Onyagin feels so betrayed by Lensky that he spends the entire evening flirting with
and dancing with, flirting outrageously, and dancing with Olga, Lensky's fiance.
Now it's Lensky's turn to be angry, and so he challenges Onyagin to a duel.
Onyagin knows that he shouldn't take him up on this fight, but the second that Lensky
sends in order to bring the challenge turns out to be a man who would take a refusal to
fight as a gesture of cowardice, and so Onyagin feels forced to accept the challenge.
In the event, he kills Lensky, and after a while, he goes back to St. Petersburg.
Meanwhile, Olga falls in love with somebody else and gets married, and Tatyana is sent
to St. Petersburg into the marriage market.
Some time later, Onyagin is at a party when suddenly the doors open and this amazingly
beautiful and poised woman enters.
She's the center of everyone's attention, and everyone stops what they're doing to
simply stand and look at her.
He asks the man next to him, who is that, who is that?
And the man next to him says, she's my wife.
And it turns out to be none other than Tatyana, and now it's Onyagin's turn to be smitten.
He spends the entire season following her from party to party, hopelessly in love with
a woman that he had one time refused.
And finally, pale and ill, he writes her a letter, and then he waits, and a day passes,
and another day passes, and another day passes, and she doesn't answer his letter.
He nearly goes mad, he spends the entire winter as a kind of recluse, and then in spring,
he goes to her house, and he falls at her feet, and he begs her to answer him.
And now it's her turn to give him a lecture.
She reminds him that when she had loved him, he had answered her with a lecture, and she
will do the same to him.
She says she doesn't blame him.
He acted honorably for what she is grateful.
But she also wonders whether his love for her now isn't caused as much by the fact that
she's married and has a high position in society.
She's actually a princess now, and that his vanity would be stimulated by the idea of
seducing another man's wife and a princess at that.
She admits that she still loves him, but she also says that she intends to remain faithful
to her husband, and then, having finished telling him all of this, she gets up and leaves
the room.
O'Neagan, stricken, is still standing there when her husband enters, and then Pushkin
says, I think this would be a good place to leave them, and the poem ends.
In a way, the poem itself, just what we've talked about so far, is a kind of a come-upence
for the Byronic hero, getting back some of his own, and it also suggests that there is
going to be a good deal more distance between Pushkin and his Byronic hero than there usually
is between Byron and his, where they are very close to one another.
But the debt to Byron is very deep in this poem.
But in order to get at the rest of that debt, we are going to have to talk a little bit
about Byron's Don Jewin.
Although Byron created the Byronic hero, and he illustrated many, many facets of European
romanticism, and we've actually used him as some of the basis for our definition of romanticism
in these lectures, Byron never considered himself to be a full romantic, at least not
in the same way that Wordsworth and Coleridge were, because he always really thoroughly
disapproved of their poetry.
His own models, his own poetic models, were really more from the 18th century than from
the 19th century, because he liked the 18th century attention to form and to wit, which
were more congenial to his own poetic practice and his temperament than were that of these
new poets like Wordsworth and Coleridge.
In Don Jewin, he used a verse form called the Atevarima.
It's a very complicated Italian verse, perhaps invented by Boccaccio, which provided a very
complex structure and a kind of aristocratic elegance to every single one of the verses
of the poem.
The poem is a narrative, more or less, about the life of Don Jewin, or Don Juan, as we
might say, but it's really as much about the narrator as it is about its hero.
For many verses at a time, the story gets laid aside while the poet chats with us about
love or politics or geography or life or whatever happens to be on his mind.
What makes it work is the fact that the narrator turns out to be a very charming, witty fellow,
a good person for the reader to spend time with, and he's also willing to make fun of
himself as he gives us a mostly comic vision of the early life of one of the great lovers
in all of history.
Now, Atevarima is a very, very complicated form.
It rhymes A-B, A-B, A-B-C-C. In other words, it's an eight line verse form, but it only
uses really three rhymes.
Two rhymes have to carry you through six lines, and then you get to change lines with the
couplet at the very end.
In English, this is a difficult verse form, because English, at least in relation to Italian,
is a rhyme poor language.
But Byron turns this difficulty to good account by seeming always to struggle to make the
verse come out right, and what he does is he has to invert word order sometimes, sometimes
he has to put a word in an awkward place to get the rhyme right, and sometimes he comes
up with some of the most outrageous rhymes possible in history.
All of this is simply part of the fun of looking at showing how difficult it is to write this
verse form.
Here is one verse.
This is verse eight from Canto I, and it's about the city in which Don Jewin was born.
In Seville was he born, a pleasant city, famous for oranges and women.
He who has not seen it will be much to pity, so says the proverb, and I quite agree.
Of all the Spanish towns is none more pretty, cadiz perhaps, but that you soon may see.
Don Jewin's parents lived beside the river, a noble stream and called the guadal quiver.
Now, in that verse, he actually does about three things there.
One is, you notice at the end of the second line, he has to start a new clause with the
word he, which is an awkward place to put it.
If you read it the way it's written, it says, in Seville was he born, a pleasant city, famous
for oranges and women.
He, the he sticks out at the end of the line because he needs the word he to rhyme with
agree and see, and so it forces him to put that word, beginning a new clause at a very
awkward place in the line.
It also forces him into a couple of inversions, changing word order around.
In Seville was he born, instead of he was born, and of all the Spanish towns is none
more pretty, none is more pretty, we would ordinarily say, and then he gets to the seventh
line and he sets up river as his rhyme word, and we think, oh, he's never going to be able
to find something to rhyme with river.
River is it going to be difficult?
He has to find not only a word that rhymes, but one that makes sense in terms of the poem,
and then he comes up with guadal quiver, which is amusing because he actually found a rhyme.
We suspect he had this one up his sleeve all the time.
That's why he set up river, just to make us think it was going to be a lot harder than
is.
So all the way through this poem, he keeps us aware of the poet who's writing this, both
by the chatty digressions and telling us things about his own life and talking to us about
life and politics and things, and then the fun he has pretending to have difficulties
in managing such a complicated verse form.
Now, Pushkin learned all of this from Byron.
Like Byron, Pushkin wrote his over a period of years between 1823 and 1831.
Like Byron's, his works came out in installments, one canta at a time, and like Byron's, each
canta was eagerly awaited by his reading audience, wanting to find out what happens next.
And to spend some delightful time in the presence of this poet.
Because like Byron, the narrator is a character in this poem.
Most often he's the most important one.
He talks with us, he shares his experiences, he reflects on what's happening in the poem
or the world, and he charms us because it gives us a chance to spend time with a very
witty, worldly, knowledgeable, interesting fellow.
We come to care about him as much as we do about any of his characters in the poem.
This will give you an example of how these digressions work.
The very first canta starts with Onyagin summoned to the bedside of his dying uncle
in the country.
But then it immediately digresses off into the narrator's own experience in St. Petersburg
and his dealings with Onyagin, and then a lot of other things, and sixty verses later
the story hasn't even gotten started yet.
We're done with the first canta and the story hasn't even gotten started.
So when we get to canta too, we have to begin the plot all over again, because it hasn't
moved in that first canta.
Except that in Pushkin they aren't called cantos, they are called chapters, because
the subtitle of his work is a novel in verse.
He wants to think of these not as cantos in a lyric poem, but as chapters in a novel.
Like Byron, Pushkin had all kinds of reservations about what was going to become known as romanticism.
And like Byron, his sympathies were more with the form and elegance and wit of the eighteenth
century than with the democratic, nature-loving, passionate, lyrical outcries of the romantics.
He did however approve of one thing that the romantics did, and the romantics were willing
to scrap old forms and not pay much attention to them and to invent new ones.
And here what he did, what Pushkin did, is to take the novel and the lyric poem and combine
them into something that is really quite new.
Even though Byron is his model, the verse form he invented for this turns out to make
the Atevarima look very simple by comparison.
It's called the Onyagin stanza, even though very few poets down through history have actually
tried to use it.
And it is an amazingly complex form.
Let me just describe it for you, just to see how this works.
It is a fourteen line stanza, which rhymes A, B, A, B, C, C, D, D, E, F, F, E, G, G.
So in other words, it's fourteen lines, but you have seven rhymes in those fourteen lines,
so that first and third line rhyme and the second and fourth line rhyme, the fifth and
sixth line rhyme, seven and eight rhyme, nine and twelve, ten and eleven, thirteen and fourteen.
And then, if this isn't complicated enough, lines one, three, five, six, nine and twelve
have to be feminine rhymes.
Now a feminine rhyme means that the rhyme syllable is unaccented.
Usually a feminine rhyme is a two syllable rhyme in which the accent falls in the first
syllable and then there's no accent in the second syllable, so that living, living and
giving would be a feminine rhyme.
So this is the verse form that he invented for writing Eugene O'Negan.
Vladimir Nabokov, in his translation of this poem, wrote a commentary that goes along with
that the entire work came out to be four volumes.
And what Nabokov says about this verse form is he said, it turned out to work very well
for Pushkin.
It's hard to write, but it has some real virtues.
He said that usually what happens, the first four lines of any verse, give you pretty much
what's going to happen in the verse.
And then the last two lines, which is a rhymed couplet, sort of sums up what's happened in
the verse.
But what that leaves is it leaves eight lines in the middle that he can just chat with us.
He can have conversations with us.
He can talk with us.
He can go on about what he's thinking about.
And as Nabokov says, it also makes the poetry feel a little bit more like prose and therefore
in a way leans it in the direction of this novel in verse that he called it in the first
place.
Let me give you one example from O'Negan and to show you what he did with his verse
form.
This is about Tatyana and about her early reading habits.
Here's the verse.
But novels, which she early favored, replaced for her all other treats.
With rapturous delight she savored Rousseau's and Richardson's conceits.
Her honest father, though old-fashioned, last century's child, grew not impassioned about
the harm that books might breed.
He, who was never known to read, regarded them as empty thrillers and never thought
to bring to light which secret volume dreamt at night beneath his little daughter's pillows.
His wife had had a crush herself on Richardson, still on her shelf.
There's a lot going on in a verse like that.
Tatyana devours sentimental novels about lovers while her old-fashioned father is oblivious
to the harm that they might do because he's never read anything himself.
And her mother is secretly still in love with the sentimental novels of Richardson, so she's
not going to do anything.
So Tatyana is going to become what she becomes, at least in part, because of what she reads.
Still, with a witty and chatty author making rye and ironic comments along the way, as
he does in all of the stanzas, our primary relationship in the poem is likely to be with
him, not with his characters.
This is generally true of lyric poetry, where we establish a relationship with a lyric voice.
And it was a kind of tradition in the novels, at least since the time of Henry Fielding.
Henry Fielding wrote a third person omniscient point of view, as we talked about last time.
And in that third person omniscient point of view, he spends a lot of time chatting
with us, so that we establish a fairly complex relationship with the authorial voice by the
time we get done.
And Don Juan, that happens in Don Juan as well, and it happens here.
So our primary relationship is likely to wind up being with the poet, the voice of the poet.
If we ask, you know, when you read this poem, what should you expect?
What's it about?
Well, let's say, there are several possible answers.
The first one, and most obvious one, is it's about time.
It's the way time moves inexorably, the way time gives no second chances.
And that's true both for the characters and for the narrator, who over eight years has
changed quite a bit.
At the end of the sixth chapter, he stops to tell us that he's just turned 30, and
so he says goodbye to one part of his life, and he welcomes another.
Throughout, he shares the idea that the past cannot be recovered.
Things renew themselves, but we don't.
At the end, Onyagen might wish with all his heart to be able to go back to where he was
when he was in the country, but he can't.
Still, this sounds sad and gloomy, but because of the verse form and the temperament of the
narrator, it's not depressing.
ADP Briggs, in a book called Alexander Pushkin, a critical study, says this about this poem.
It is the essence of Pushkin's achievement that he shows us how best become reconciled
to adversity.
His works time after time remind us that in the last analysis there is no happiness,
no freedom, no peace, no permanence, no order, and no moral law protecting the good.
Yet, they do not seem to do so because their overall spirit is so wholesome, beautiful,
and joyful.
There is no flight into escapism.
There is no suggestion of the arduous, though ultimately restorative processes of catharsis.
The poet shows us the universe in all its beauty, but without ignoring the horrifically
finite and unsatisfactory nature of human life.
At the same time, he shows us how to avoid despair.
The secret is in reconciliation, distraction, and creativity.
It is necessary, natural, and when all is said and done, easy enough to become reconciled
to the human condition to go on living without any great hope of its improvement and yet
with real enjoyment of its short-lived pleasures.
That's well said, and I think you'll really discover that that's true when you read this
poem.
Like Don Jewin, this poem ends sadly, but it's the sadness we can handle.
We can absorb it.
We can make it part of the wisdom of our lives.
It is also, and more modern critics have pointed this out, the poem also has a lot to say about
the relationship between art and life.
John Bailey in a book called Pushkin, A Comparative Commentary, says that a novel in verse always
will keep us reminded of the medium, as novels tend to want us to overlook the medium, to
look at the world that's being presented to us, not at the words.
This poem, because of the verse form, because it is so tricky, because it is so complicated,
because we are always standing in a kind of admiration of the poet who can pull this
off, always keeps reminding us of the verse form itself.
And it's appropriate that a novel in verse, which is about the relationship between art
and life, should call attention to itself as a work of art, because every single character
in this book has been shaped by his or her reading, as Don Quixote was by his.
Tatiana is in part what she is because of all the sentimental novel she read.
Her expectations are those of the heroines in them.
Lenski has absorbed a lot of German and English romantic poetry, and that helps him make him
in part the way he is.
Even Olga, who's the least literary figure in the work, is shaped in some ways, if not
by her reading, at least by ours.
What Pushkin tells us is he says, just imagine the most conventional heroine in all the books
you've ever read, and that's who she is.
So he's relying on our reading to help us understand Olga taking some shortcuts with
characterization.
Most importantly, Eugene Onyagen himself has been formed by his reading.
After he's gone back to St. Petersburg, Tatiana, who's still mourning for him, she's still
sad about his rejection, she takes a long walk in a very distracted state of mind, and
she winds up, without quite knowing where she's going, she winds up at his country house.
The housekeeper invites her in and shows her around, pointing out where Onyagen slept
and where he ate and where he sat, and all kinds of things about his personal habits
in his life.
She says to Tatiana, she says, come back some other time, I enjoy the company.
So the next time Tatiana goes back, she goes back and specifically goes to look in his
library.
What she wants to see is what he reads, and so she goes through the library very carefully
looking at his books, which ones he has, and then especially noticing the ones that
have been read, the margins, the notes he's put in the margins, and she's struck by something
very odd about his literary taste.
She notices that there's a huge preponderance of books by Lord Byron on the one hand and
novels about coldness and alienation and bitterness on the other.
She notices all the passages he has marked, and as she reads through these books, looks
through these books, she begins to wonder whether he really has any character at all,
or whether he's simply a pastiche pasted together out of a lot of modern literature.
This is the verse in which she poses this question to herself.
And step by step, Mitanya, learning his mind, at last begins to see the man for whom she
has been yearning, by willful destinies decree more clearly than by face and feature.
A strangely bleak and reckless creature, issue of heaven or of hell, proud demon, angel,
who can tell, perhaps he is all imitation, an idle phantom or poor joke, a muscovite
in Harold's cloak, an alien whim's interpretation, compound of every fattish pose, a parody perhaps,
who knows.
William Todd in his article on Pushkin in the Russian Handbook of Literature says that
the entire work explores the extent to which worldviews are dominated by literary and cultural
stereotypes.
And it asks the questions about how adequate those stereotypes that we get from art, how
adequate they are for dealing with life.
In our world, we would probably want to say that we get most of our stereotypes from movies
and television, but books were, of course, the big one in Pushkin's day.
And then what Pushkin does is he tries to bring the world of art closer to the world
of life by depicting his characters and events in the kind of settings in detail that would
later characterize the realist novel.
That is, what Pushkin does is he takes characters and situations from Byron and sentimental novels,
and then he locates them in a real St. Petersburg and then allows the real world to comment
on the literary stereotypes.
At the end, the inexorable logic of the real world defeats the stereotypes.
At least it does for Onyagen himself, who never seems to outgrow the character he's
acquired from literature.
Tatyana, on the other hand, seems to have grown up, to have grown away from the sentimental
novels that formed her sensibility in the beginning.
And in this way, like Emily Bronte, Pushkin absorbs a lot of romantic material and incorporates
it, but at the same time, he points forward to the realist movement, which is already
on the horizon by the time of his death.
And the realist movement he points forward to will criticize the romantic movement in
precisely the same way he does here.
The ending of this novel inverse distances itself from romantic stereotypes and parodies
the endings of sentimental novels, suggesting that perhaps this is more like the way the
real world operates than the world as it's described by the romantics.
In our next two lectures, we will get to that realist movement.
Next time, we'll take up the book that more than any other determined the direction for
Europe of the literary movement called Realism, Flaubert's Madame Bovary.
