Lecture 26, Gertes Faust.
The subject of this lecture is one of the greatest works in the history of German literature,
Gertes Faust. Last time we were in Europe, we were in the age of the Enlightenment. This
time we're going to take a look at what may be the most important work in the history
of German literature, Gertes Faust, which will also allow us to make a transition from that
age of Enlightenment that we talked about the last time we were in Europe into the
Romantic period in the Western world. Gertes was, as I guess everyone knows, was a sort
of late 18th, early 19th century genius. He was kind of a last universal man. He was
a poet. He was a novelist. He was a playwright. He was a letter writer. He was an essayist.
He was simultaneously the greatest German neoclassical poet and the greatest German
romantic poet, which in itself is no small achievement. And he was also a scientist.
He did important work in botany and optics. He was a painter. And for 10 years he served
as prime minister at the court of the Duke of Saxony Weimar, where he spent most of his
adult life. Already by the turn of the century, and particularly as he got older, he got to
be such a huge monumental figure that everybody who was anybody tried to get an interview with
him. Just to be able to say you'd sat down and talked to Gerta. Napoleon actually got
an interview. And when he walked out, he was supposed to have said, now there is a man.
So that's coming from Napoleon. This is high tribute. His collected works run to about
140 volumes, and much of it was sensationally popular at its own day. And it has continued
to influence generations of writers thereafter. But the one piece that even in a lifetime
full of really important works, the one work that stands head and shoulders above the rest
of them for Gerta is Faust, which was a kind of lifelong work for him. The story of Faust
as it came to Gerta was a very old story. And based on a historical figure, the one
Johannes Faustus, who was a German scholar, who was a contemporary of Martin Luther, and
who during his lifetime had achieved a reputation for dealing in the forbidden arts. He died
in 1540, and already by 1587, just one generation later, there were popular versions of his
story in print, in most of which he sells his soul to the devil in exchange for knowledge
and power. The most famous version of the Faustus story prior to the time that Gerta
took it up was Christopher Marlowe's at the turn of the 17th century when he did his play.
But by the time Gerta came to it, there were many, many versions all over Europe. They
ranged all the way from plays to cheaply printed thrillers to even puppet shows on the Faust
story. There were maybe 30 versions of it in existence at the time that it came to Gerta,
and he took it up. The one thing that all of those versions have in common prior to
Gerta's adoption of it is that in all of them Faustus is damned, either for transgressing
some human boundary, for going farther than it's proper for human beings to go, or more
literally for actually selling his soul to the devil. Even Christopher Marlowe, who has
a lot of sympathy for his Faustus, sympathy which is generated by Faustus' impatience
with human limitations and with the kind of restrictions put on him by the medieval world,
even he sends his Faustus off to hell at the end of the play in a very, very dramatic
scene when a gang of devils comes and hauls him off to hell. A very, very stunning ending.
The ending will be one of the major changes that Gerta makes in the Faust story, although
not the only one, as we'll see in just a moment.
Gerta worked on his Faust for about 60 years. The earliest parts were probably written somewhere
around 1770, and then he finished it in 1832, just before his death, as a kind of capstone
to his entire career as a writer. Fragments of Faust were published first in 1790, and
then part one was published in 1808. During the next 24 years he published bits and pieces
of part two, and he finished the sequel in 1832 just before he died. And when he finished
it, he announced to the world that he had finished part two, and then he had it sealed
up in a safe to be published after he died. And then he said, when he had it sealed up,
he said that he thought that this would occupy the critics and readers for quite a few years,
trying to figure out where the unity was between parts one and part two. I'm reminded anyway
whenever I read this little proclamation of Gerta, of what James Joyce said when he finished
Finnegan's Wake, he said that he thought he had written a book that would keep the critics
busy for at least about 200 years, and so far he's been right, so far he's been right.
But when a great genius of the order of Gerta or Joyce tells us that this is a complicated
work, we can take their word for it. It's a complicated work. Gerta's Faust is a massive
work, both in terms of its bulk and in terms of the ideas that it takes on. Generically,
it is a closet drama, which was a genre that the romantics didn't really invent. Milton
Sampson Agonisties as a closet drama was written probably 150 years earlier, but the closet
drama was a genre that the romantics really liked. Shelly's Prometheus Unbound is another
really important closet drama. It's called a closet drama or a poetic drama because it
was not written to be staged. The stage has to be in the mind of the reader. This is a poem.
It's written in dramatic form, but it was never intended really to be put on stage. Part one
of Faust has been staged from time to time, but it really, really taxes the resources
of any ordinary theater, and the second part would be almost impossible to stage, and even
if you could figure out some way of staging these two parts together, it runs to about
12,000 lines so that it would be about 10 or 12-hour play if you put the two parts together.
That would require a Faustian audience, as well as a Faustian theater, to deal with a
play that's that long. What I want to do in this lecture is to focus just on the first
scenes of part one, stressing some of the really important changes that Goethe made
in the story as he inherited it. Some of these changes suggest a change in sensibility from
enlightenment to romanticism, and the romantic movement will be in for the next two or three
lectures in our series, and then at the very end to raise some questions and look at some
of the implications that are suggested by Goethe's treatment of the Faust story.
In the earlier versions, in all of the earlier versions, the primary contract is always between
the devil and Faust, in exchange for power or knowledge or wealth or something, some
specific good. For a certain number of years, Faust deeds his soul to the devil, who always
comes to claim it at the end of the story. Goethe changes the focus of this, changes
the emphasis by framing his story with a prologue set in heaven in which Mephistopheles, who
is a devil, comes to visit God. Mephistopheles says he's just dropping in, he says he likes
to see the old by now and then have a little chat, and he arrives just at the moment when
three archangels are finishing a grand hymn of praise of the creation, saying what a wonderful
thing this creation was. Mephistopheles politely waits until they've finished with their song,
and then he says, you know, he doesn't really know much about the rest of creation, but
the part that he's been assigned to, the part that he does know something about is humankind,
and he says, my understanding is that if humankind is any indication as to the value
of creation, it was a botched job, it was really not anything like what the angel said it was.
He says humans could have been happy as animals, except for reason, which makes them too odd
a combination. He said it's like crossing an angel with a beast, and you put those two
things together and they're never going to get along with one another. Reason prompts
human beings to dream big dreams, which the animal part prevents them from fulfilling.
So he says human beings live in a constant state of unhappiness and frustration, always
wanting things that they can't have. A metaphor, a beautiful metaphor that he uses, he said
they're like grasshoppers who can see the stars and who leap at the stars, but who never
reach the stars. Because they're concentrating on the stars, they invariably land in a pile
of dung and wind up worse off than they were before they leaped at the stars. He said that's
what reason does for humans. It makes them more beastly in the end than they would have
been had they been pure beasts.
Mephistopheles says he actually feels sorry for human beings. He doesn't like tempting
them very much. In fact, he doesn't say he says he don't really have to tempt them very
much because of the way they are, they make pretty much their own mistakes without tempting.
As a number of critics have pointed out, Mephistopheles is the kind of devil who, had he been the
one in the Garden of Eden, wouldn't have bothered to tempt Adam and Eve. He just would have waited
until they ate the fruit on their own, and then he would have said to God, see, told
you so, told you so, told you it was a bad idea.
God says, after listening to Mephistopheles go on about the horrors of the human part
of creation, God says, do you know Faustus? It's clear that what God is doing is he's
holding him up as a kind of model, as a kind of vindication, saying, what do you think
of that, that species, that specimen? Mephistopheles says I know him, I know him very well, and
he's a perfect illustration of what I've just been talking about. He's half mad with
wanting things he can't have. He's half crazy with disappointment and frustration. He's
a perfect illustration of all that I've been saying. God says, no, you just misunderstand.
Human beings will make mistakes as long as they strive, but Faustus is okay. He says,
if you want to, tempt him. Do what you want. Try anything out on him. See if you can divert
him from what God calls the primal source, that is, from what he should be as a human
being. Mephistopheles not only accepts the invitation, but he actually makes a sort of
wager with God on the value of creation, so that if Mephistopheles can show that Faust
is a failure then by implication the entire creation is a failure as well. Now the model
for this prologue in heaven is obviously the book of Job, where God offers Job to the
adversary to show that no matter what the adversary does to him, even in bad times Job
will stay faithful. Here the emphasis is different. The point of this prologue is the value of
all of creation. If Mephistopheles can show what a mistake humans are, then all of creation
is a failure. God bets on Faust to prove that creation is in advance over the chaos that
it replaced, and it's that chaos, of course, which is Mephistopheles' element which he
would like to see restored. He thinks that creation was a step backwards from the chaos
which was his element to begin with. The play itself, once we get to the play and the prologue
is over, the play itself starts in Faust's study, where we come in on Faust on the verge
of despair and on the verge of suicide. He is in really, really bad shape. As we find
out very quickly, as he tells us, and he has a lot of long monologues at the beginning
of this play, he has doctorates in everything. He has a doctorate in theology. He has one
in law. He has one in medicine. He has one in philosophy. He has one in science. And
as he says, with all these doctorates, I do not know anything. As he puts it, every
discipline is simply made up of a specialized vocabulary. So once you know the words, you
think you know something. When, in fact, all that you know is, as Hamlet says, is just
words, words, words. Faust wants more. He wants to be involved experientially in the processes
of life that cannot be captured in words or in the study. Characteristically, when he
sits down to try translating the New Testament into German, he begins with the Gospel of
John and he starts out with that very first verse, which traditionally is translated in
the beginning was the word. Well, Faust looks at that and he thinks it can't be word. It
simply can't be word. He's got a problem with words anyway, so that he translates that
first line as, in the beginning was the act or in the beginning was the deed. So again,
it's action, it's involvement, it's experience that he's looking for. He wants experience,
he wants action, he doesn't want knowledge. He's so depressed that he's on the verge
of suicide. And in fact, he has the poison chalice already in his lips when he hears
the Easter bells begin to ring at midnight. He stops and sets the cup down thinking it
can wait for a later date, not because he has any faith left in the Easter bells, but
because the Easter bells remind him of a time when he was younger, when he was happier,
when he didn't have these problems. And he decides to wait at least a day or two until
he gets through Easter. He's so depressed that he seems to validate for us everything
that Mephistopheles said about humans. He does look like that grasshopper. This is one
little small part of some of the long monologues that Faust has to introduce himself to us
at the beginning of this play. And what he says is this, where fantasy once rose in
glorious flight, hopeful and bold to capture the sublime, it is content now with a narrow
sight since joy on joy crashed on the rocks of time. Deep in the heart there dwells relentless
care and secretly infects us with despair. Restless she sways and poisons peace and joy.
She always finds new masks she can employ. She may appear as house and home, as child
and wife, as fire, water, poison, knife. What does not strike still makes you quail.
And what you never lose for that you always wail. I am not like the gods. That was a
painful thrust. I am like the worm that burrows in the dust who, as he makes of dust, his
meager meal is crushed and buried by a wanderer's heel. The painful thrust he is talking about
is the fact that he had tried to conjure up an earth spirit to work for him. And the earth
spirit simply rejects him, says, you're just a human being. You're not important. You're
not interesting enough. And Faust knows that he is really nothing in the state of creation.
So it's in this state that Mephistopheles comes to make an offer. And interestingly,
again, this is another change. Faust doesn't conjure Mephistopheles or even invite him
in. Mephistopheles shows up in his own to start winning his wager with God. It takes
several sessions of negotiation between Faust and Mephistopheles to finally figure out what
it is exactly that Faust wants of Mephistopheles. What he winds up at the end of about the third
negotiating session, what he winds up asking for is all kinds of human experience. If it's
possible for a human to experience, he wants it. He wants all experience, good and bad,
ecstatic, devastating, every possible human experience. That's what he wants. In his vision,
as he says, he imagines that every experience that he has will simply be a springboard to
the next one. He'll say, okay, now that I'm here, now I want to do this. Now that I'm
here, I want to do this. And he will keep going. And as long as he keeps going, as long
as he keeps wanting more, Mephistopheles will have to keep providing him with the next experience.
If he says, if I ever get to one that I like so much, that I want to stop here, if I say
I'm happy, I want to stop right here, if I ever get there, then Mephistopheles, you
can have my soul that very moment. As he puts it in one of the final bits of negotiation,
as just before they make the contract, he says, right, if to the moment I should say,
abide, you are so fair, put me in fetters on that day, I wish to perish, then I swear.
Then let the death bell ever toll, your service done, you shall be free, the clock may stop,
the hand may fall, as time comes to an end for me.
Now this is a stunningly new element in the Faust story. Notice that Faust doesn't ask
for a specific good. He doesn't ask for riches, he doesn't ask for knowledge, he doesn't
ask for power. What he's asking for is experience, growth, process, never being content with
where he is, but always wanting the next moment, the next experience. And this, of course,
is one of the ways in which we can mark a very clear transition from the Enlightenment
to the Romantic Age. It's kind of an ultimate breaking out of all those tidy rational boxes
and rules and knowledge based on empirical evidence, and an entry into limitless aspiration,
into a desire for transcendence, into subjectivity, into feeling, into passion, into intuition
rather than logic, experience rather than book knowledge. And stunningly, and this is
another really, really interesting element in this contract, it is also notice a rejection
of morality as a basis for judging the hero. Notice that Faust is asking for all experience,
all growth, all possible deeds and acts, whether they're considered good or evil, isn't part
of the contract. God has in a way already prepared us for this when in that prologue
he says, men make mistakes as long as they strive. What God looks for clearly in Gerta's
version of the story is he's looking for the striving, the effort, to keep growing,
to keep acting, to keep moving. What God looks for and what he seems to find in Faust, one
of the reasons he holds him up as a model, is what Sir Kenneth Clark says Gerta found
in plants. In part of Gerta's work in botany, he had hypothesized a kind of will in plants
that simply keeps a plant pushing for as long as it can, for as far as it can, in as many
directions as it can, until it can't go any further and then it dies. This is of course
a pre-revolutionary theory, this is before Darwin, but it gives plants almost a will
to keep growing, to keep developing, to keep doing whatever they can. And it's that kind
of will that Gerta gives to Faust in this play. The terms of Mephistopheles' wager
with God and then Mephistopheles' with Faustus are not good versus evil, but active versus
passive, it's movement versus non-movement. So the ultimate good for Faust is not going
to be riches or power or sensual pleasure, but it's going to be the fullest possible
experience of life itself, good and evil, and the constant growth that goes with it.
Faust says to Mephistopheles that when I stop growing, I'm willing to die, just like Gerta's
plants. The rest of the play of course is Mephistopheles trying to find that ultimate
moment for Faust, trying to find that place where Faust says, I like it here, let's stop.
And Faust going on, always wanting more, going from experience to experience, each one setting
up the next one in a kind of process of perpetual growth and development. And for the next rest
of part one and for part two, Faust does send Mephistopheles on a merry chase, full of adventures
that are sometimes intellectual and sometimes sensual and sometimes glorious and sometimes
depraved, none of which turns out to be the ultimate one for Faust. The most important
episodes in part one are about Faust's relationship with Gretchen or Margaret, but there are others.
And then in part two, the adventures become far more abstract and far more allegorical.
As Faust helps the Holy Roman Emperor win wars and consolidate his kingdom, he gets
Helen of Troy as his lover with whom he has a child, they name it Euphorian, and he clears
the lowlands so that people can build farms and live happily on into the future.
There's an amazing amount of stuff that goes on in this poem. This poem is one of those
inexhaustible poems that people have worked on for a lifetime, and at the end of it produced
a little monograph on some tiny little aspect of the poem. One of the things that Gretchen
does in this poem is he manages to use almost every verse for him that was known to Germans
at the time in this play, and then matching the style of the verse he's using with the
episode in the process so that he can show off in some ways how versatile and poetic
German can be as a poetic language. For example, that opening soliloquy of Faust in his study
is done in the style of a poet named Hans Zox, who lived in the first three quarters
of the 16th century, and his verse for him was very popular when Faust lives, so that
in a way he's matching the verse for him to the time when Faust would have actually
been in his studying saying this. And in this way, what Gert is doing is anticipating some
of those really famous linguistic experiments, like the one that Joyce does, James Joyce does
as Ulysses. You remember the one in the obstetric hospital where he does the chapter is divided
into nine sections, one for each of the nine months of gestation, and then each one of
the sections is a chapter in the development of English prose so that as you read the nine
chapters, the nine sections of the chapter, we move all the way from the earliest medieval
English prose all the way up to modern English prose. So this gestation period for English
prose is kind of metaphorized as the gestation period that happens in the obstetric hospital.
This is the kind of thing that Gert manages to do in this play as well. So if you can
read German, you will have access to one aspect of the play that's been just the despair
of translators over the years trying to figure out how to put this aspect into a translation.
And of course in the play there's also a lot of satire. There's satire on people and places
and writers that Gert didn't like, and on German taste and manners, most of which we
are going to miss unless we're working with a text with really, really good footnotes.
And even if we do have a text with good footnotes, this is not the kind of thing that appeals
very deeply to most people since many of the objects of satire are unknown to us and the
subjects of the satire have faded long ago. And many of the episodes in part two are also
allegorical. That is, they carry the false story forward, but they're about something
else as well. And again, we need some good footnotes to help us get through these parts
of it. In short, it's a very complicated work. It's the kind of work that we would expect
from a genius, and he did warn us after all. He did warn us, so it was going to take us
some time to figure out what part two had to do with part one.
Meanwhile, the play is still throughout controlled by the wager between God and Mephistopheles.
And whatever we miss in a play in which everybody misses at least something, nobody's ever going
to get quite all of it, we can at least keep track of the major point, which marks a huge
shift in sensibility that in many ways has defined us and the way we think and behave
up to the present day. This is a quotation from a book by T.J. Reed, a book on Gertrude,
and he's talking about this way in which what happens that moment when Faust makes his contract
with Mephistopheles, we have moved into an entirely new world of sensibility. Here's
the way he puts it.
The idea that activity is man's defining characteristic and that its tireless continuation
has an intrinsic value even before we consider its particular goals is a challenging newcomer
among the great themes of literature. It may have been present as a strand in other traditional
themes that man should restlessly pursue truth or the fulfillment of his potential rather
than complacently possess it is an idea found in more than one enlightenment thinker. But
to have made it explicit and given its center stage in a great poem is part of Gertrude's
originality.
Gertrude's monumental treatment of the theme stands challengingly at a pivotal point in
history. It questions the assumptions of virtually all the philosophies and theologies of the
past, according to which human nature was being, a changeless essence whose resonance
on earth only temporarily and regrettably involved it in transient doing and other forms
of change. These things were allegedly a mere husk from which the essence would in due course
be liberated into a higher realm, a static once and for all heaven, nirvana, oneness
with some fixed ideal. What he's suggesting here of course is that he's thinking in largely
religious, read as thinking in largely religious terms when he says this. And the idea is
that whether you assume that we come from heaven and go back to heaven or whether we
start here and then go back to heaven, the point is that we're strangers here. We don't
really belong here. The amount of time we spent in transient doing is, as he says, is
just a temporary hiatus, a temporary interruption of what our real life is, our real life being
something eternal, something permanent, something in nirvana, something in heaven, something
in eternal oneness. As we remember from last, in our last lecture, Daiyu and Baoyu are living
out their earthly lives only as a kind of temporary interruption. This is a little tiny
space in the land of illusion which only temporary interrupts what they really are. They really
are heavenly beings, and when their little brief moment on earth is done, they go back
to become heavenly beings. That's one of the things that Reid is talking about here. Now
what does Gerta propose in its place? This is the rest of Reid's quotation. He says,
against this, Gerta sets the idea of man's nature as inherently doing. This and its associated
forms of change, movement, development, and growth, are not mere preliminaries or obstacles
to the attainment of his true nature. They are that nature. Man is a creature of time
and the world, not a refugee from them. In this dynamic and anti-transcendent conception,
the long haul of humanist individualism, which began again in the Renaissance after centuries-long
interruption, achieves the full confidence of its convictions.
What Reid is suggesting here, there are two revolutionary things in that moment of that
contract between Mephistopheles and Faust. The first one is that it says that what man
really is, whatever he is, it's in this world. It's in time. It's not some eternal place.
That in itself is a revolutionary idea. The second is that humans shouldn't be striving
towards some goals, towards some essence, but rather the essence of being human is growth,
its development, its movement. It's simply to keep moving all the time. We still, I think,
live in the wake of that great shift in sensibility.
Next time you're at a party and somebody tells you that he and his wife aren't together
anymore, that they had to split because he felt stifled and he didn't have room to grow.
He just needed some room to grow. The wrong question to ask is to ask him what he means
to be when he grows up, what he's trying to become, what he'd like to be. We don't
ask that question any more than we would ask Faust or Gerta's plants. There is no fixed
end. There is simply growth, the desire to keep going, to live, to experience, and to
grow. That really is a truly revolutionary moment in the history of thought in the Western
world. The contract between Faust and Mephistopheles has a couple of darker sides, too, which
Gerta also gets into his work.
As if personal growth is the purpose of life, then what happens to people who get in the
way of my dynamic push forward? Faust is going to leave behind him in the two parts of the
play, a real trail of victims of which Gretchen is merely the first. But we have been told
from the very outset God doesn't hold that against Faust. And I don't think I'll spoil
the ending for you by telling you that in the end Faust is saved. Mephistopheles loses
both his wagers, both the one with Faust and with God. And there are some big consequences
from that moment in Faust's study when he makes this contract. Spinning out from here
are going to be Thomas Carlisle's transcendentalism and hero worship, in which Faustian heroes
are freed from the bonds of ordinary life and ordinary morality to do what they need
to do. And beyond that is Nietzsche's Superman, who can live beyond good and evil, and which
leads through roundabout and twisted paths right into the ideology of German fascism.
There's also Raskolnikov in Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment, wondering whether he's
sufficiently gifted to be able to be a Napoleonic, Faustian, Nietzschean Superman, who can live
beyond the bounds of good and evil, and testing that out by killing, waiting behind a door
to kill a wretched old pawnbroker. All of this and much, much more comes from that moment
in Faust's study when he makes his contract with Mephistopheles. But to end on a more
positive note, T.J. Reid also notes that Faust can in some way serve as a kind of healthy
alternative to what in the Western world has become since the Industrial Revolution the
mad rush to acquire things. The ideology of the Industrial Revolution is that if we have
more things, we'll be happy. There's a bumper sticker that says the one who dies with the
most toys wins. Reid ends his book with this quotation on this aspect of Faust.
Against it, that is, against the idea that having things is the goal of life, Gerta sets
his image of a man as impatiently transcending gratification, pursuing instead goals which
recede and change as he moves and which, if they were ever to afford satisfaction, would
somehow have to preserve, as Faust's last vision does, the feel of the pursuit itself.
For the pursuit is the goal. Man is defined by movement. This goes further than the old
Aristotelian definition of happiness as lying in the pursuit of worthwhile goals and singles
out the element of continual striving as the source of value in that process. It provides
the ultimate term of comparison for Hegel's and Marx's concepts of alienation, and it
remains relevant and thought-provoking now that the industrial processes need less and
less of the human energies they once monopolized, so that people may yet be free in a rethought
society to follow activities that will be ends in themselves and to achieve growth of
more than just the economic kind. It's marvelous and admirable on the part of Faust that with
all the chances he has, he never chooses personal wealth or power. His goals are different.
His goals are the pursuit of experience itself for its own sake, and that's one of the positive
contributions of this profoundly important work to modern sensibility and thought.
Next time, we'll continue with our study, our consideration of Western Romantic movement
to consider Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights, which will both illustrate some other aspects
of Western Romanticism, and it will also come back to one of our main focuses in this course,
that is our concern with storytelling and the way stories get told because Emily Bronte
makes some brilliant innovations in her Wuthering Heights next time.
