Lecture 22, Cervantes Don Chiodi.
In this lecture, we arrive at what is unquestionably the most important novel in the western world.
It's the equivalent of the tale of Genji in the east, and in some ways, perhaps even
more important in the western world for reasons that we'll have a chance to talk about.
In terms of time, the Don Chiodi is almost an exact contemporary of Shakespeare.
Cervantes and Shakespeare were almost precise contemporaries.
1605 was the year of the publication of part one of Don Chiodi, and that was also the year
that King Lear was produced for the first time, so it was a great year for literature.
In terms of other works that we've been looking at, it's about 50 years after the Marguerite
of Navarre's Heptamaran, and about 50 years beyond the time period where we were in when
we did Monkey.
We've already done two novels in this course, so this isn't the first novel, but it is
the most productive novel in history for reasons that we'll get a chance to talk about in
a bit.
In the first two lectures, when we talked about novels, we really didn't define the
novel.
We assumed that we mostly know what a novel is, and I think mostly we do know what a novel
is.
But now, since many of our next lectures will be about novels, and since in some ways they
all proceed from this one, this might be a good time to define what a novel is.
In its very simplest terms, a novel is an extended narrative in prose, which in its
earliest stages attempts to give a more or less realistic picture of everyday life.
The word novel comes from the Italian word novella, which includes, as part of its definition,
the idea of realism.
That is, it's a narrative whose account of life squares with our own apprehension of
the way the world really is.
So that Boccaccio's 100 stories in the Decameron could have been novellas in this sense, and
Marguerite of Navarre's in the Heptamaran would have been novellas as well.
The contrasting genre at the time that the novel arose was the romance, which in the
Middle Ages was also a narrative in prose, but which could include the fabulous and the
events that occurred in a romance could be somewhat remote from our sense of ordinary
life.
In the Middle Ages, romances were mostly about knights errants who slay dragons and monsters
entangle with sorcerers, and in general, the logic of the narrative defies somewhat the
logic of the ordinary prose ague everyday world.
We remember we've done one romance in this course.
We talked about the wife of Bath's tale, which is set in King Arthur's court.
You remember that one featured a loathly hag who could transform herself into a dazzlingly
beautiful woman once she had taught her husband a few home truths about women and about marriage.
The romance was the most popular literary genre of the Middle Ages, and so Don Quixote
is a good place to define the novel since it stands in such clear contrast to the romance,
and in fact, and this is the real part of the genius of the book, is the romance genre
is built into the novel itself, that is, inside the novel of Don Quixote there is a romance
or a series of romances.
In the plot, Don Quixote is a middle-aged manna, a kind of minor aristocrat with virtually
no money and no land, who reads so many of these romances that, as the narrator tells
us, his brain dries up, and he comes to believe, one, that everything he has read in those
romances is true, and secondly, that he himself was born to revive the profession of knight
errantry in the modern world.
In other words, what happens to him is the line between the fictional and the real gets
blurred.
As it might do today for someone who reads too many Batman or Spider-Man comics or sees
too many of the movies, or a few years ago watched too many James Bond movies or read
too many of the books, and begins to think that these events are both true and that
I could emulate them in my own life.
That's what happens to Don Quixote.
So what happens is that the romance as a genre is inscribed into Don Quixote, into the novel
from the very outset.
Because the contrast of the novel, on which at least part one is entirely based, is the
contrast between the romances, what happens in the romances, and what really happens
to Don Quixote when he tries to become a knight errant in the modern world.
The novel itself also contains enough explanation about the kind of books that he read about
those romances themselves in the explanations that Don Quixote will give to Sancho Ponza
that we can get a pretty good idea of what those romances were like, even without having
to go back and read them.
So from the very outset in this novel, there are going to be two perspectives on everything
in the novel.
There will be the romance perspective, that is Don Quixote's, because everything that
he sees, he interprets in terms of the romances that he has read.
He experiences reality around him as a romance, and so that we might call that the romance
perspective in the novel.
The novel perspective, the novelistic perspective, that is the more realistic version, is the
narrators who tells us that what Don Quixote thinks are giants, are really windmills, or
that what he takes for a mighty army is really a flock of sheep.
It's important from the outset, I think, to remember about Don Quixote, that he isn't
pretending to see everything he sees coming out of his books.
He is a true psychotic, which means that he experiences reality in a way different from
the way the rest of us experience it.
When we are in the very first adventure, he comes to an inn, at the end of a long day's
ride, he comes to an inn.
Now the inn has a group of prostitutes waiting outside the front door, waiting for the mule
drivers to show up, whom they will service that evening, and there's a pig herder who
comes by, and the pig herder uses a horn to call his hogs by.
It's just what we might expect from a country inn in Spain in about 1600.
But what Don Quixote experiences is not an inn, but a great castle.
For him, that inn is a great castle.
The prostitutes waiting out in front of the door are high-born damsels waiting to welcome
the famous knight errant when he arrives at the castle.
The pig herder's horn is a famous, is a herald announcing his arrival.
For him, that's what they are.
He's not pretending this.
That's what they are for Don Quixote.
After that first adventure in which Don Quixote is by himself, Cervantes gives him a squire,
Sancho Ponza, who's in every way the exact opposite of Don Quixote.
He's short and fat, whereas Quixote is tall and skinny.
He's illiterate, whereas Don Quixote is widely read.
He is a practical man versus the fantastic idealism of Don Quixote.
Sancho is persuaded to come along because he's absorbed just enough of the romance tales
that Don Quixote has told him to understand that in them, after a long lifetime of service,
occasionally a knight will be made the ruler of an entire kingdom.
And what he almost always does is he rewards his faithful squire by giving him a part of
a kingdom or an island to govern for himself.
Now, Sancho has a wife and two children at home, and he's a peasant, and he wants that
island.
He wants to govern that island.
After the very first adventure, which turns out to be a total disaster, Sancho comes running
up, kneels at Don Quixote's feet, and asks to be made governor of his island.
He obviously hasn't got quite the grasp of the whole narrative as yet.
Even better in terms of the structure and the design for the novel is that once Sancho
is along, the common sense or novelistic perspective is built into the novel from now on, so that
every adventure is seen from two different perspectives by the two central characters.
Typically, Don Quixote will start out an adventure.
The most famous one is the one of the windmills, so we might as well use that one.
Don Quixote will stop his horse, reign Rosinante in, and will say, Sancho, behold, yawn giants.
I was born to slay those giants.
Sancho will look around and say, what giants?
Because what he sees are windmills, and then he will try to tell Don Quixote those are windmills,
and it would be totally foolhardy for you to charge that windmill with your lance.
But Don Quixote goes ahead and charges it anyway, and when the windmill, the blade begins to
turn and it knocks Don Quixote off his horse, then he explains to Sancho that at the last
possible second, an evil sorcerer, who is his inveterate enemy, changed the giants into
windmills to deprive Don Quixote of the glory of defeating them.
Sancho mostly doesn't believe this, but he knows so little of the world of Night Arentry,
and his master is so much better read about such things than he is, and he really, really
does want that island, that he goes along with the explanation, and sometimes, especially
in part two, he half comes to believe it himself.
It's one of the kind of wonders of this book.
Part one of Don Quixote was published in 1605, and so far as we know, as far as Cervantes
was concerned, that was the book.
He had written his book, he published it, and that part one is full of an amazing variety
of scenes.
It's full of stunning comic invention.
It is just a simply great comic read.
It is the more, frankly, comic of the two halves.
The pair typically get themselves into scrapes that are caused by Don Quixote's misreading
of reality, and then they get battered around by the consequences of that misreading.
One episode in particular, it's two chapters, two long chapters, chapters 16 and 17 in part
one, are about the misadventures that fall on Don Quixote and Sancho during one night
that they spend in.
That two-chapter episode is so rich that it's been mined by writers ever since.
Henry Fielding and Joseph Andrews, for example, lifts the entire episode out of Don Quixote
and moves it into the English Inn in the 18th century in Joseph Andrews.
The point of part one would seem to be that by taking these romances too seriously, Quixote
loses touch with reality.
And by misreading the world in terms of those romances, he gets himself in his squire comically
beaten up repeatedly.
There is also, of course, a certain amount of satire on the romances himself, suggesting
how unlife-like they really are.
But in 1614, an anonymous author produced a sequel.
To this day, we don't know who that author was, but somebody else came out with a volume
two of Don Quixote.
Cervantes was really offended, not only because his creation was stolen, but because in that
sequel Don Quixote is a far more buffoonish character than he is in Cervantes' work.
Cervantes was aware of the fact that Don Quixote is after all not a bad man.
He's in fact a very good man whose purpose is to try to make the world a better place.
So what Cervantes did is in 1616 he came out with his own sequel.
He tried to demonstrate that this is the real sequel, this is the one that really matters,
this is the true story, and he killed off Don Quixote at the end of it so to preclude
the possibility of any more sequels.
We don't know who the author of that spurious sequel was, but we owe him a debt because
without him there probably wouldn't have been a part two of Don Quixote.
And while the first part is more consistently funny and contains most of the best-known
episodes of the book, the second part has proven far more interesting for serious readers
and for literary critics and for scholars.
The second part, for example, raises such really interesting issues as the nature of
sanity and insanity.
Quixote is clearly insane, but the cynicism and the brutishness and the selfishness and
the meanness of the world in which he moves, all of whose inhabitants are presumably sane,
are so much inferior to Don Quixote himself that after a while we begin to wonder about
the relative values of sanity and insanity.
W.H.
Auden very famously said about Don Quixote once that his type of insanity is that he
distinguishes himself from the world by wanting to be not just a hearer of the word, but a
doer of the word.
That is, having read all of these things, he wants to translate the goodness of those
books that he has read into action, to translate the values of those romances into the practical
everyday world.
His method is clearly eccentric.
He's trying to revive night air entry in a world in which it's long been obsolete,
but his motive is pure and nobody can question that.
And in part two we also begin to notice, and this is one of the real wonders of this book,
we begin to notice that Sancho begins to absorb a little bit more and a little bit more of
his master's vision of the world, becoming in some ways a better person because of his
association with a madman.
In the same way we also notice that Quixote begins to temper some of his most rash misreadings
of the world because of his association with Sancho.
It's the critics have sometimes called this process the quick sodification of Sancho Ponza
and the Sanchification of Don Quixote.
In a way it's like a marriage, these two very different people growing closer and closer
together in vision and understanding as they spend time together.
Quixote, as the idealistic hero, was the one who inspired the musical version, the man
of La Mancha, in which the vision of the mad Don Quixote at the end is transferred to
Miratornes, the maid at the inn, who will carry it forward.
On that, part two raises some other interesting questions about the way we view reality, the
way we look at the world.
In every episode, Don Quixote and Sancho are looking at the same things.
They're looking at windmills, they're looking at flocks of sheep, they're looking at strange
lights moving across a nighttime landscape.
And what we begin to understand as we understand these two characters is that what matters
is not so much what a thing is, but the way we read it.
And the way we read it turns out to be the result of every single experience we've ever
had and every choice we've ever made so that every interpretation that each of us makes
about reality tells people as much about the interpreter as it does about the thing itself.
Carol B. Johnson in a book called Don Quixote, The Quest for Modern Fiction says that Don
Quixote reads reality the way he does because of who he is.
He needs the romances to be true, which is why he reads the way he does.
He needs romances to be true because he's psychotic, which he has become because of
the way that he has responded to the pressures that life has laid on him.
Sancho reads everything differently because his experiences and needs are different, which
of course is true for all of us as well.
And that's what critics mean when they say that as we're reading a book, the book reads
us as we read the book.
Much of who we are and what our choices have been and what we are will be revealed in the
way that we read and the way that we interpret what we read.
This aspect of the book and this theme of the book can help us as well to account for
some of the amazing number of ways in which this book has been interpreted and read down
through the years.
For the first century of its life, Don Quixote was read as a comic work about a man who's
out of step with the reading of reality of his contemporaries.
That one makes sense, we understand that, because the late 17th and early 18th centuries
believed in a kind of social conformity.
For them, Don Quixote is clearly mad, a deviant from the norm, who was comically punished
for his deviation.
For romantics, on the other hand, who believed in rebellion against social norms, found Don
Quixote a morally superior being who was in the end crushed by a mindless and sheep-like
conformist society.
This is the reading again, which is given by the man of La Mancha.
Quixote's inner vision gives meaning to his life as he wills himself into existence.
In our own century, we tend to see the book as about what we've been talking about as
we might call perspectivism, which endorses neither the real nor the novelistic world
of Sancho, nor the ideal and romance vision of Don Quixote, but shows that the real meaning
of anything lies not in the thing itself, but in the way that we interpret it, which
will always be based on our own individual experience, history, and choices.
As the windmill and flocks of sheep and strange lights are to Don Quixote and Sancho, so the
book is to us.
Each one of us will probably read our own Don Quixote, but we need always to remember
that the text is reading us as we are reading the text.
Another interesting aspect about this book is it goes back to something that we've been
dealing with off and on ever since lecture 12 in writers like the Indian writers in Chaucer
and the authors of the 1001 Nights or Marguerite of Navarre, and that's about framing, because
this novel turns out to have a really, really interesting frame.
One of the early problems of the novel was its authority.
It's a made up story on the one hand, but it seems to be about the world that we live
in.
So the question is what kind of truth do we have here?
What is the truth value of a novel, which purports to deal with the real world, but is
after all a made up story?
Most early novels tried to make themselves feel like true stories, and that was a way
to kind of ease the mind of those who wanted to read factual and informative things.
The best example for this is Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, which seemed so lifelike
that people who read it thought it was a true story.
As one critic said, it has so much detail in it, you can't imagine that anybody would
take the trouble to invent all of it, it must be true.
And many of those people who read Robinson Crusoe initially were really indignant when
they found out that it was a made up story.
Other novelists tried to incorporate bits of real history into their novels to make
them seem true.
The Tale of Genji does this, linking itself in some ways to specific emperors and historical
periods.
Very early on, novelists learned that little convention, which we're all familiar with,
of naming a character by using just an initial and a dash, which suggests that this is a
real character whose identity is being protected in this way.
And again, that gives a certain sense of truth value, a certain illusion of truth value to
what is otherwise a made up story.
Don Quixote also uses many of these techniques, but it uses them at least partly tongue in
cheek.
The first eight chapters of Don Quixote are written presumably by an editor who has combed
through archival records to bring this history to light.
He said he has gone to every place he can look, he can think of to look, he has gone
through hundreds and hundreds of pages in order to find everything he can find out about
Don Quixote.
He suggests how careful he's been by worrying about what Quixote's real name is.
Don Quixote is, of course, his nightly name.
It's a name that he gives himself.
But he said that in the archives he has found his original name spelled as Quillada or Quisada
or Quiana, and he worries about this.
He says he wants to be accurate.
He wants this to be historically accurate.
In chapter eight, the narration simply stops.
It stops at a really, really critical point.
The exact moment is that Don Quixote has just raised his sword, is about to bring it down
on the head of a man who's mounted on a mule.
That man has just grabbed a cushion out of a carriage and held it over his head to kind
of protect himself to ward off the blow.
And just before the sword is brought down, the editor says, well, that's all the material
I have on Don Quixote.
I ran out of material.
I don't know what happens next.
Well, you know, if we look at the book, we can see there's a lot more coming up.
But at the beginning of chapter nine, he tells us a long story about finding a manuscript
in Arabic in a bookseller stall in Toledo, which he buys.
But since he doesn't read Arabic, he has to hire someone to translate it from Arabic
into Castilian, and then he passes that translation on to us.
So what we have for the rest of the work, then, is we have an Arabic historian's account
rendered into Castilian and then passed on to us by an editor, so that there are three
points of view in every episode.
And each one of them, the Arabic historian, whose name we have is Sid Hamid Benengali.
The translator and the editor comment on the events as they go by.
And that means that the perspectivism, which we said was one of the themes of this novel,
also turns out to be the technique of this novel.
The editor recognizes, for example, that an Arab historian writing the story of a Christian
knight will have a certain perspective.
So will the translator.
And so there are caveats and questions everywhere about the veracity of any particular event
or the way it's been recorded.
As the ultimate beneficiaries of all his work, the Arab historian, the translator, the editor,
we readers will also have our own angle of vision, which is conditioned by our own experiences
and our own history and our own choices.
Every so often, for example, Sid Hamid Benengali says that he really doubts the truth of what
he's about to tell, but he said, I'll tell it anyway because that's the way it's come
down to me.
The translator occasionally says that this is what the text says, but he can't believe
that it actually happened this way.
And the editor occasionally expresses doubts about both the historians and the translator's
accounts, suggesting that we would have to think about this event in an entirely different
way.
This is an extremely sophisticated narrative strategy, and it reminds us, as I just mentioned
a moment ago, that what we've been calling perspectivism is foregrounded in all kinds
of ways in the novel, not just as a theme, but also as its technique.
Finally, about Don Quixote.
As I mentioned at the very outset, this has been probably the most productive novel in
history, and by that we mean that it has generated more literature than any other novel in history.
The novel has been reinvented many times since 1605, but each time it has been reinvented,
it has been reinvented by someone going back to Don Quixote and finding a different aspect
of that work and then using it as a starting point for the new novel.
Henry Fielding pretty much invented the English novel with Joseph Andrews and Tom Jones in
the 18th century.
He acknowledged his debt to Cervantes by indicating that he was writing an imitation of Cervantes
and, as we said before, he borrows big chunks of Don Quixote to incorporate into Joseph Andrews.
In the 19th century, it will be Flo Baer who will pretty much invent the realist novel.
We'll get to that in a lecture farther down the road.
When he invented the realist novel, Flo Baer said that Don Quixote had been in his blood
since before he could read.
And if we think about it, Madame Bovery is really a rewriting of Don Quixote about an
impossible dreamer trying to carry her dreams into the world and then getting brutalized
for them by the petty bourgeois context in which she tries to live out her dreams.
Toward the end of the 19th century, Joseph Conrad along with Henry James and others
was going to create what we might call the psychological realist novel or the impressionist
novel is what Ford Maddox Ford called it, so that what Joseph Conrad did is he wrote
Madame Bovery in Lord Jim, changing the protagonist back to male and then sending him out into
the world with a vision of the books he had read just as Emma Bovery and Don Quixote had
done before him, and he too gets destroyed for his vision.
As a tiny footnote to this, this one I just find really interesting, F. Scott Fitzgerald
was a great admirer of Joseph Conrad and he wrote The Great Gadsby in imitation of Lord
Jim, so that, looking back at the genealogy of this, Gadsby is an American version of
Jim, who's an English version of Emma, who's a French version of Don Quixote, and so it
goes all the way back there. And finally, when the post-modernist novel is invented
by writers like Jorge Borges, he once again goes back to Don Quixote and, as he says,
the one thousand to one nights to find his inspiration. His inspiration, his moment in
Don Quixote, is a moment that happens in part two of the novel. Don Quixote is visiting
a printing house, and the printing house is running off copies of part one of Don Quixote,
and Don Quixote stops to take one of those copies, and in part two he stands and reads
part one. As Borges says, this is a pivotal moment in the history of fiction. When a fictional
character reads a book about himself, it implies, first of all, one thing that Borges was really
interested in, it implies a possible logical infinite regress. So you have a character
in a book, reading about himself in a book, in that book there will be a character reading
about himself in a book, and so on, all the way down to infinity, logically, in the same
kind of way that we get our sense of infinite regress off a Quaker Oats box, which has the
Quaker holding the box of oats, which has on it a picture of the Quaker holding a box
of oats and so on, logically to infinity. So that's one thing that Borges says that
he was intrigued by at that moment when Don Quixote, in a book, a fictional character in
a book, is reading a book about himself. And for Borges, and this will turn out to be really
important for the postmodernist generally, for Borges it also suggests that the line
between the fictional and the real may not be as clear and precise as we always think
it is. He said the same thing happens in Shakespeare's Hamlet, when Hamlet stages a play within
a play, we have a fictional character putting on a play which we know to be fiction inside
a fiction itself, and he said that same moment, that same moment of vertigo that we can get
when we think about Hamlet putting on a play inside a play, we can also get when we think
about Don Quixote reading a book about Don Quixote in a book that we happen to be reading.
The point for Borges is that we might think that if the line between the fictional and
the real gets blurred, even for a moment, then we ourselves might possibly be fictional
characters in someone else's novel, or at least our ontological status isn't quite
as firm as we usually think it is. And while we're on the subject, it's worth mentioning
I guess because we'll come back to this when we get to our last three programs in this
series, and that is, as we'll discover then, the postmodernists of whom Jorge Borges is
usually considered to be one, postmodernists are very concerned about this relationship
between art and life. And what Borges points out here is this question about the relationship
between art and life becomes very complicated in Don Quixote. If you think about the beginning,
Don Quixote has read a lot of books. So that's art. And then what he does is he tries to
imitate those books in his life. So at the very outset, you have life trying to imitate
art. But then that life that he lives out in imitation of art gets turned into a book
itself. And so that book, now we have art imitating life, imitating art. And then to
make this even more complicated, what happens in the second part of Don Quixote is that
almost everybody whom Don Quixote runs across has read part one of Don Quixote. And what
this means is that the relationship between art and life and how one influences the other
gets very, very complex in the second part of this book. It also, in a sort of existential
way for Don Quixote, limits his choices somewhat because everybody that he meets thinks that
they know him. They think everybody understands who he is and believes that they know who
Sancho is. And as a consequence, they expect these characters to behave in certain kinds
of ways. And so that their range of action is somewhat more limited. It's maybe one of
the things that makes Don Quixote a little restless, a little sad in the second half
of this novel. But what we're talking about here is art and life. And that question is
very complex in this book. So the point is that Don Quixote has served as a starting
point for every kind of novel in the Western world ever since. Like Shakespeare, Cervantes
has supplied us with an inexhaustible text, a text which has been used to mirror every
age's concerns, every age's values, every age's questions ever since. In 1999, when
everybody was doing millennium lists, the best or the most important of the millennium,
the Washington Post, when it did its millennium list, declared that Don Quixote was the most
important novel of the millennium. And it's really, for all the reasons we've been talking
about in this lecture, is a really good choice. Next time, we'll be off to France, where we'll
see where drama has gotten since the time of Shakespeare, in talking about one of the
greatest French comic playwrights, Molière. We'll also be entering into one of the most
important ages in Western history in a variety of ways, the age of reason, sometimes called
the Enlightenment or the neoclassical period, which we'll define next time as we take up
Molière.
