It's winter in Leningrad.
Leningrad, we recall, used to be St. Petersburg, which was the home of Pushkin and the setting
for Eugene Onyagin.
It was the home of Dostoevsky in the setting for the Underground Man.
But it's now Leningrad, and it's in the late 1930s, and it's the middle of winter, and
outside a prison in Leningrad, there's a long line of women waiting outside.
Many of them are carrying parcels, or letters, or some kinds of messages, and every day they
come back, even though there's never any acknowledgement from the prison itself.
The gates never open, the doors never move, no one comes out to acknowledge that they're
standing there.
And they return every day to not knowing whether the sons and husbands and fathers
and brothers that they're coming to see have been sentenced to death or are even dead or
alive inside the prison.
One day, one woman recognizes another one in line as a poet, or a former poet, before
her works were suppressed.
And the woman says to the poet, she says, can you describe this?
And the poet says, yes, I can.
And then she adds, something that looked like a smile passed over what had once been her
face.
The scene for us is all too familiar from pictures that we've seen in many countries
in many kinds of situations.
This one happens to be Russia during the Yazov terror of 1937 and 1938.
The poet standing in line is Anna Akhmatova, one of the best-known Russian poets of the
20th century.
The poem that she wrote in response to that lady's asking her can you describe this turns
out to be a poem of many parts called Requiem, and that will be the subject of this lecture.
The specifics of the situation are that in 1934, the secretary of the Communist Party
in Leningrad had been assassinated, leading to the great purges of 1935 through 1938, which
were designed to exterminate what Joseph Stalin called enemies of the people.
By 1939 there were perhaps 10 million Russians in prisons and prison camps, and another several
million had already been executed.
Historians tell us we'll probably never have anything like an exact count of how many people
were actually executed during those years.
And so that meant that in Russia there was hardly a family that hadn't lost a son, a
brother, a husband, and in every city in Russia, outside every prison, there were a long line
of wives and mothers and daughters and sisters.
In Leningrad, among the women waiting outside the prison was Anna Akhmatova, hoping for
news of her imprisoned son.
By the time she was standing there waiting in line, her first husband had already been
executed, and so had her second one, her current one.
Some of her friends had died in prison camps, and her son was in the prison in Leningrad.
Because she puts it in the prologue to Requiem, she says, in those days, innocent Russia
rised under bloody boots and under the tires of the Black Marias, Black Marias here being
the police cars that carried off those people who had been arrested.
Before all of this started, before all of this happened, Akhmatova had been a rising
poet known in the first decade of the 20th century for love poetry that had been written
in a kind of new modern style.
The modernist movement that she was associated with in Russia was called Akmiism, and like
many movements across many parts of the world at the same time, the purpose of Akmiism,
the design of Akmiism, was to try to make poetry more concrete, more dependent on images
than on verbal music or on explanation.
In London, at about the same time that Akmiism was in flower in Russia, two American expatriates
Ezra Pound and T.S. Eliot were involved in a movement called Imagesm, which wanted to
replace what they saw as Victorian vagueness and what Pound called the tyranny of the metronome
with dry, clear, hard images that carry the poems, meaning without needing a lot of explanation.
We know the story, I guess, but it's worth telling because it illustrates something of
what all of these movements in poetry were after.
Eliot had written a draft of The Wasteland, and he gave a draft to Ezra Pound and said,
would you proof this for me?
You read it and see what you think.
Ezra Pound, although he was a less well-known poet than T.S. Eliot, took the poem home and
he blew penciled about half of it, leaving behind only a series of fragments or images
which have to be pieced together both by characters inside the poem and by readers.
And so while there were individual variations in different parts of the world, all of these
movements were designed in some way to ring the excess out of poetry, to make it lean
and tough and to let the images do the work, requiring more work from the readers, but
making poetry richer and more complex, saying more with less, to use a phrase that some
of them actually used.
T.S. Eliot was so impressed with the editing job that Pound had done that when he published
the poem, he kept most of Pound's editing, and he dedicated the poem to Ezra Pound and
to whom he called the better poet.
It was in this kind of movement that Atmanhova did her early work, and the effects of that
early movement are still apparent in a poem like Requiem, which was written quite a bit
later.
It's also, as a kind of footnote to all of this, it's why Emily Dickinson, when we did
her a few lectures ago, why she seems so modern.
While she still uses traditional stanzas and meters and rhyme, she too allows images to
do most of the work of the poems, like the one that we looked at in the very last poem
we did of hers, which pictures the moss growing up the gravestone until it covers up the names
that are on it.
Atmanhova also illustrates one other feature, I think, about modern literature, and that
is the increasing alienation of writers from their culture.
It is possible, and it has been said by people, that all great literature is subversive in
some way.
Every piece of literature in some ways attacks some part of the dominant culture that annoys
or irritates the writer or gives some kind of pain.
As an analogy, some people have said that an oyster only makes a pearl because it's
irritated by the sand.
One reason why writers write is because of the irritation caused by some problem.
Without sand, we get no pearl.
Without the irritation, we have no work.
And in some ways, we have seen that in some of the works that we have done in this course
along the way, Cervantes taking on the most popular literary form of his day, and some
of the most widely held views of meaning and interpretation in his world.
Voltaire, we remember, took on both the church and the state, as well as the entire philosophy
of optimism.
But from the romantics onward, there seems to be a growing gap between the dominant culture
and the writer, who stands more and more alienated from his or her culture as we move on into
history.
Faust and Catherine and Heathcliff are real rebels against their own ages, and Emma Bovary
and the underground man and Huck Finn and Nora Helmer are in some kinds of rebellion
against their own times, as is Tagore's young wife in that story punishment, which we did.
Joyce and Kafka criticized Dublin and middle class Prague of their times, and Proust and
Pirandello recreated the novel and drama to demonstrate the isolation of the individual,
even individual who lives within a community or within a family.
So from the romantics on, the artist more and more frequently sees him or herself alienated
from his or her culture, standing outside the circle of the dominant culture and then
lobbing verbal grenades into its center and allowing them to blow up and see what happens.
The artist says in this way, every time an artist stands outside that circle and criticizes
it from outside, an artist says that in some ways culture itself is diseased, is sick.
It's what Eliot certainly said in The Wasteland, and Kafka and Dostoevsky and later Samuel
Beckett will say the same kinds of things about their culture.
And I think that Anna Atmatova is in this group.
Her world has decidedly gone mad and is sick in ways that are even easier to document than
those of other writers we've mentioned.
The sickness of Russia in her age is illustrated by the long lines of women standing outside
the prisons of Russia, and as we'll see, she includes in those lines not just the women
of 1937 or 1938 or 1939, but all of the women of all times who watch as husbands and fathers
and sons and brothers are executed, are crucified, disappear.
The world has been sick in this way for a very long time, the poem suggests.
She says that she's speaking for all of the Russian people in a kind of silent rebellion
against their leaders who have betrayed the real Russia.
This seems to me at any rate, a kind of tradition of Russian literature.
It is a tradition, as we've said, in other cultures as well, but it seems to me, perhaps
even slightly stronger in Russia, that one of the functions of literature is to speak
for people whose voices have been stilled or people who for one reason or other can't
speak for themselves.
Dostoevsky did something like this, and Atmatova certainly does something like this, and later
on Alexander Solzhenitsyn will do something like this.
That's not unique to Russia because unfortunately there have been many, many totalitarian states,
but in perhaps in some ways, this is a slightly more decided element in Russian literature
than it has been in the literatures of some other peoples.
The poems that make up Requiem were written between 1935 and 1961.
In the 1940s somewhere, Atmatova decided that they could be made into a kind of cycle in
which each individual poem could still maintain its integrity as a lyric poem, but would
tell, if you organize them and put them together in a certain way, could tell in oblique or
indirect ways, could tell a narrative of this entire experience that she had gone through.
The circumstances of the composition between 1935 and 1961 are another really ghastly reminder
of conditions in Russia in this period.
In 1922, Anna Atmatova had been declared an unsatisfactory poet whose work did not advance
the cause of the revolution.
So she was forbidden to publish, and she was in fact made an internal emigre, that is,
she was officially forgotten, she was given a small but irregularly paid pension, and
the only publishing she was allowed to do over the next 18 years were a series of essays
on Pushkin, who was always her favorite poet.
The bands against her were lifted very briefly in 1940 and then clamped down even harder
again, because in that time she was also expelled from the Union of Soviet Writers, and it wasn't
until after Stalin's death in 1953 that she could gradually begin to publish poems again,
which she had been writing carefully and secretly over a 40-year period.
Once she got into print, she received instant acclaim from all over the world.
Robert Frost came to Russia to visit her in 1962, and in 1964 she was awarded the
Tarmina Prize, Poetry Prize in Italy, and Oxford University gave her an honorary doctorate
degree in 1965.
During those 40 years of enforced silence, including those in which she wrote Requiem,
she continued to write, but writing was so dangerous that no manuscript could be allowed
to exist, since if it was ever found, would have been confiscated by the police, and that
would have made her situation even worse than it already was.
So she, during those years, some of those years, she lived with a woman novelist, Ladia
Chukovskaya, who would help her memorize them.
She would compose these things in her head, and then she and Ladia would memorize them,
and as soon as they had them memorized, then they could move on to something else.
The poems, even when they were memorized, had to be whispered back and forth for fear
of hidden microphones that would overhear what they were saying.
If the poem were actually written down, the manuscript was burned immediately as soon
as they had memorized it, so that the poems that make up Requiem actually survived until
the 1960s in the memory of the two women who held these together in their memories until
they could safely be written down.
It wasn't actually until the partial fall of the 1960s that these things could be written
and published.
That by itself is an amazing and frightening story.
The poem is intensely personal on the one hand.
It marks a specific time in Russian history, but it is also intended as a kind of general
cry for Russia and for all of the women's sufferers across all of history.
The particular moment of this poem is defined in the prologue.
We've already quoted part of it, but what she says is she says, the stars of death stood
above us, and innocent Russia writhed under bloody boots and under the tires of the black
Mariahs.
The cycle of poems that makes up Requiem is made up of ten poems as its centerpiece,
and those ten poems are prefaced by four pieces, three of them in poetry and one in prose,
and one of those, the one in prose, is the one in which she's asked by the other woman
in line if she can describe this.
And then after those four prefatory pieces, the ten main poems, then there are two epilogues
in poetry that finish this series up.
In the second of those two epilogues, she says that if a monument ever is put up for
her, she wants it to be here.
She wants this monument to be here outside this prison, as she says, I consent to that
honor under these conditions, that it stand neither by the sea where I was born, my last
tie with the sea is broken, nor in the czar's garden near the cherished pine stump, where
an inconsolable shade looks for me, but here, where I stood for 300 hours and where they
never unbolted the doors for me.
This, lest in blissful death I forget the rumbling of the black Mariahs, forget how
that detested door slammed shut and an old woman howled like a wounded animal.
The cherished pine stump that she mentions in that piece is in a park near where she
grew up, and it's cherished because Pushkin had often walked in that park.
And the inconsolable shade is probably that of her first husband, whom she had met there
and who is now dead, who had been executed before her son was arrested.
It's telling, I think, and even this little tiny piece of the poem, that part of why she
wants the monument here, why she wants it outside the prison, is to keep her from being
too happy in death, from making death too much of a release, to remind her of what the
pain was of living.
And not just her pain, but the pain of all those women who waited with her.
She speaks with their voices in the poem as well as her own, and she dedicates this large
poem not just as a memory of herself, but dedicates it to all those women with whom
she waited in line.
As she says in that same second epilogue, she says, I'd like to name them all by name,
but the list has been confiscated and is nowhere to be found.
I have woven a wide mantle for them from their meager, overheard words.
I will remember them always and everywhere.
I will never forget them no matter what comes.
And if they gag my exhausted mouth through which a hundred million scream, then may the
people remember me on the eve of my remembrance day.
The mantle that she talks about here is no doubt her own poem.
Her own poem is weaving a mantle for these women with whom she waited in line.
But the Russian word is pokrov, which is a word which is used for the shroud of the
Virgin Mary.
By the ending, the poem has required a good bit of religious imagery in this kind of way,
which we'll come back and take a look at toward the end of this lecture.
Remembrance day that she mentions here was a day that was observed by the Russian Orthodox
Church on the anniversary of one's death.
So she asked to be remembered on the anniversary of her death by the women with whom she waited
in line as she remembers them and as she says their one hundred million screams.
So the poem, four preface pieces and two epilogues.
And those six pieces speak in a larger voice than the interior pieces.
They speak for the millions of women down through history in Russia who waited in lines
outside of prison.
The dedication, which is the third of the four preface pieces, starts out in fact very
big.
She tells us that while mountains bow down to this grief and rivers stop their flowing,
the prison gates hold firm.
The only thing that doesn't move, suggesting that what's happening here is unnatural.
It's vicious.
It's a gratuitous expression of cruelty that even nature acknowledges, but rulers don't.
For the women in line, the world has narrowed down to the gates of this prison.
For them, that's all that matters.
It's all that they see.
And she says in a really, really telling and wonderful image, she says, that was when
the ones who smiled were the dead, glad to be at rest.
And like a useless appendage, Leningrad swung from its prisons.
For the women in line, the world has narrowed down to this city, this prison.
The image reminds us of Akhmadova's Acmeus training, because the image does the work
here.
For the women, the center of life has become this prison, those prison gates, while all
of the rest of the city, the entire city of Leningrad, hangs like a useless appendage,
like a third arm from that prison, doing no one any good.
So that the outside six pieces are bigger and speaking with the voices of all of the
women she waited in line with.
The interior poems, the numbered ones, are slightly more personal about her situation
more specifically.
The very first one describes the moment when her husband was arrested, at the moment that
he's let out the door and the children are crying, the candle on an icon on the wall
sputters out.
The candle is already, a candle sputtering out at that moment is already a powerful image,
but Sam Driver in his book on Akhmadova suggests that in a way, what the words suggest, that
the wax of the candle spills over, suggesting some kind of emotional breaking point.
Something snaps in the poet at this moment, and the consequences of that snap, of that
spilling over of that emotional break, will get to see throughout the rest of the poem.
That first poem ends with these two lines, I will be like the wives of the Streltsy howling
under the Kremlin towers.
The reference there is to the mass executions of members of an elite troop of the military
of Peter the Great, who were executed in 1698.
They had rebelled against Peter and were defeated and captured and sentenced to death.
Their wives and mothers came to plead for the lives of their husbands and sons, and
so they were actually there and got to watch as the men were killed under the towers of
the Kremlin.
The howls of those women are repeated in the present by the woman who howls like a wounded
animal in the second epilogue, and that ties the sufferings of the women in Leningrad to
that of all women in all of Russia through all of history.
That emotional breaking point that's noted by Driver leads to a really eerie calm in
the second numbered poem in which the moon comes to peer in at this woman.
That's what she says, the moon comes to peer in at this woman.
The woman is, of course, the poet herself, but she's talking about herself in the third
person, which suggested in some ways she's splitting in two.
She's splitting into one person who suffers and one person who watches.
The mind to protect itself from too much pain is losing its touch with reality.
Split into two, the split into two personalities is completed in the third numbered poem, which
says this, among other things, no, it is not I, it is somebody else who is suffering.
I would not have been able to bear what happened.
She asks that that suffering be shrouded, and she uses the same word for the virgin's
mantle that appears in the epilogue, asking for the virgin shroud to protect her from
pain, and it already makes sense in some kind of religious way.
It will make even more sense a bit later.
That poem, that particular poem ends with a single word line, night, and comes to a
dead stop.
The fourth poem, the fourth numbered poem, is one in which her own past visits her as
a youthful young noble woman growing up in pampered luxury, having no warning of what
her later life would be like.
Now years later, she's the 300th woman in line under the red brick walls of a prison,
and as she said, the skull of her tears can melt even the ice of a Russian winter.
Poems five and six in the sequence bring her perilously close to madness again.
In number five, she's confused and bewildered, and disconnected images float in her mind.
She can't concentrate because death is always staring at her as an enormous star, and staring
not just at her, but also staring at her son.
And in number six, at summer again, another whole cycle of seasons has rolled around,
and the star of death has now become the eye of a hawk, which stares both at her and at
her son inside his cell, inside the prison.
The seventh poem is called The Sentence, and this one is central to the entire sequence.
It commemorates the day on which her son was actually sentenced to death.
And biographically, her son was actually sentenced to a labor camp, which was almost
a death sentence anyway.
And anyway, she's speaking in part for all Russian women, many of whose sons were sentenced
to death and were executed.
This poem's tone is amazingly flat and amazingly restrained and amazingly understated.
She says in this poem, she says, And the stone word fell on my still living breast.
Never mind.
I was ready.
I will manage somehow.
Today, I have so much to do.
I must kill memory once and for all.
I must turn my soul to stone.
I must learn to live again, unless summer's ardent wrestling is like a festival outside
my window.
For a long time, I've foreseen this brilliant day, deserted house.
I think it's really stunning that in this poem, where we expect histrionics or a complete
breakdown or wild grief, we get this.
We get a tremendous effort of the will not to go mad, to hold herself in check, even
though her grief is pulling her toward madness.
She says, I have so much to do.
Sounds like a mind that can't quite take in all of the details of the tragedies.
And we've actually seen people who respond to tragedy with a kind of numbness, getting
really busy with things to keep them from having to think too deeply about what's just
happened.
The question is in here, she says she needs to turn, among other things, she needs to
turn her soul to stone.
But the question is, how can you turn your soul to stone without inviting madness in?
Poem eight, the eighth one in the sequence is called to death, and it's an amazingly
powerful poem.
And I won't attempt to read any of this to you, I want to save this so you can read
it for yourself.
But this is a poem in which the poet invites death into her house.
She says she's turned out the lights and she's left the door open to make it easy for him.
And she doesn't care what form he takes, he can come as a bomb, he can come as a assassin,
he can come as a disease, he can even come as an arrest by the secret police.
She says she's going to die anyway, so why not now?
Or she's at a place where she simply can't stand any more pain.
As I said, I'm not going to read any of this to you, because it's too moving, but it's
best read for yourselves, but it is a very powerful poem.
Poem nine marks her last flirtation with madness, which is so tantalizing and so attractive
to her now.
If you just let yourself go into madness, you could forget all this, the pain would lift.
But she pushes madness away, rejects it, since she realizes that if she travels into the
country of the insane, she can't take anything with her.
No memories of pain, but also no memories of her son.
No memory of the terror in his eyes, the cool touch of his hand.
And these she decides she cannot part with, even at the cost of living insane agony for
the rest of her life.
The last numbered poem is called The Crucifixion, and it generalizes the emotion of the first
nine poems by remembering the mother of the most famous, condemned and executed and dying
son in history, Jesus.
Like the last one, this one is best discovered in your own reading, but the focus of the
entire poem, and that is entire sequence, comes clearly into vision in the last two
lines of this poem, where she says, but where the silent mother stood, there no one glanced,
and no one would have dared.
In the dedication, Akhmadova has already described what happens in line when one woman is told
that her husband or son has been sentenced to death.
She immediately becomes cut off from the other women, and she goes staggering off alone.
Here we're reminded of that woman, and all of those who watch their husbands and fathers
and sons being killed beneath the towers of the Kremlin.
We're reminded by focusing on the grief of Mary beneath the cross, whose grief is so
awful that no one even dares to look at her.
No one dares to meet her eyes as she stands there, enduring what she endures.
Mary's mantle has already been invoked for the comfort it can give women in line, and
now we see why.
Mary would understand because she watched her own son die on the cross.
Akhmadova's poem, Mary has provided one mantle.
Akhmadova's poem is another mantle, which can at least bring the comfort of remembering,
if not of forgetting.
The poems throughout have made sort of generous use of religious imagery.
There have been church services and icons and prayers and crosses.
The last one, slightly ironic, because the prison outside of which the women waited is
called the Kresti, which means cross.
So we're prepared for the religious language at the poems, and it sort of holds the poem
together, although whether it's intended as explicitly religious comfort or simply as
metaphor we all have to decide for ourselves when we read it.
Then we're at the epilogues, which we've already talked about.
At the end of the second epilogue, the rivers which had stopped flowing at the beginning
are beginning to start to flow again.
Spring comes to Russia.
The doves coo and ship sail once again on the river.
But the melting snow on the statue that she imagines erected to herself will, she says,
run down the face of that statue like tears.
And that, of course, inevitably reminds us of Nairobi, who watched her sons and daughters
killed by Apollo and Artemis, and who was herself turned into stone, but a stone that
always weeps, a reference which connects back once again to the one in which the poet asks
that her own soul be turned into stone.
When had that happened, we guess the stone would have been like Naiobi's, or like that
of the statue with the poem's end, it would be a stone that would weep forever.
So the poem is about Russia in the 1930s.
But the references to the execution of the Strultzy beneath the Kremlin Towers makes
it about all Russian women through all of history, and the allusions to Mary and Jesus
and Naiobi and her children make the circle of weeping women ever larger until they can
take in all mothers and all wives and all sisters and all daughters of history, all
of whom have suffered in this way and all of whom are remembered in the Requiem.
Ellie Wiesel survived the Nazi death camps, but since the rest of his family didn't he
promised he would never speak or write of his experience.
But in an interview with a French novelist, he was told that he owed it to the millions
who had lost their voices in the Holocaust to speak for them to tell their story.
And so Wiesel has done for a lifetime, remembering those who otherwise would be forgotten, speaking
for those who can't speak.
Anna Akhmatova does that here for the women of Russia and for the world, for those standing
outside prisons or carrying pictures of their lost loved ones wherever this happens in whatever
newspaper story we happen to read or see the picture today.
She writes in this poem what W. E. B. Dubois writing about black music calls sorrow songs.
Songs that can't heal or can't undo what's been done, but can at least console with the
discomfort that the suffering hasn't been forgotten, it's at least remembered.
As the woman in line says, can you describe this?
And she says, yes, I can.
This is our last look at lyric poetry in this course.
Next time we will move on to Japan to look at one novel by Japan's first-ever Nobel
Prize winner, Kawabata Yasunari, and the novel at least in the West is his best-known one,
Snow Country.
We'll be back in that lecture to consideration of storytelling as we examine some of the most
modern techniques in prose fiction that are used by Kawabata to produce a really interesting
and enigmatic novel, a novel which will give us a chance to ask whether the questions we
have about it, the ambiguities about that novel are the result of modernist technique
or of something that harks back maybe to that Japanese aesthetic that we talked about way
back in lecture 14, which still may elude us Westerners even after all these years.
Next time, Kawabata in our next lecture.
