Lecture 47, Borges Labyrinths.
In the last lecture we looked at what we might call the metaphysical aspect of postmodernism
in literature, the idea that the universe is observed, and we looked at how that aspect
is represented in the stunningly original plays of Samuel Beckett.
In this lecture we want to review that idea in the work of someone who's usually considered
to be one of the avatars of postmodernism, Jorge Luis Borges, and some of the implications
of that assumption for literature.
That is, if reality is really observed, what can one write literature about except for
pointing out that reality is in fact observed?
And so that's the question that we'll try to answer in some measure by looking at some
of the works of Borges.
What I want to do is do together a couple of his stories from one of his really amazing
anthologies called Labyrinths, and then send you off to explore the other stories yourselves.
First of all, the idea that the universe is observed, or at least incomprehensible to
us, is beautifully illustrated in a very famous Borges story called The Library of Babel,
which opens this way.
The universe, which others call the library, is composed of an indefinite and perhaps infinite
number of hexagonal galleries, with vast air shafts between, surrounded by very low railings.
From any of the hexagons one can see, interminably, the upper and lower floors.
The distribution of the galleries is invariable.
Twenty shelves, five long shelves per side, cover all the sides except two.
Their height, which is the distance from floor to ceiling, scarcely exceeds that of a normal
bookcase.
One of the free sides leads to a narrow hallway, which opens onto another gallery, identical
to the first, and to all the rest.
The narrator tells us that the library is probably infinite.
He tells us that a classic dictum about it is a sphere whose exact center is any one
of its hexagons, and whose circumference is inaccessible, not coincidentally exactly
what Rene Pascal had said about the universe.
On each shelf in each one of these hexagons, there are 35 identical books.
Each one is 410 pages long, and each page contains 40 lines of 80 letters.
There are also letters on the spines of the books, but they have no apparent relation
to the contents.
There are 22 letters, a comma, a period, and a space, which make up the 25 symbols used
in these books.
And they are used in apparently random ways, but ways which are unrepeated in other books.
The narrator said that his father once saw a book that was made up entirely of the letters
MCV, endlessly repeated from the very first to the very last line of the book.
Another famous book he says is a labyrinth of letters, except that on the second last
page it suddenly says, O time thy pyramids.
But he also says that for every line of sense that has ever been found, there are, as he
says, leagues of senseless cacophonies, verbal jumbles, and incoherences.
Some people have speculated that the books may be written in a forgotten language, which
is plausible, except that 410 pages of repeated MCVs cannot correspond to any language of
any sort.
Enough is known about the library now to assume that no two books are identical, even though
they're made up of the same 25 symbols.
So presumably, those shelves would register all possible combinations of the symbols,
a number which would be extremely vast, but not infinite.
But it is also assumed that those books would express everything that could ever possibly
be expressed in every possible language.
When this idea first struck some of the people who work in the library, they were very happy,
since they reasoned that all of the solutions to all world problems, and all solutions to
personal problems, and the story of the origin of the library itself, would be explained
and are in fact in the library somewhere.
This started calling those books, those special books, the vindications, and a lot of people
were lured away from their own hexagons to travel to other ones, looking for those vindications.
But as the narrator tells us, these pilgrims disputed in the narrow corridors, proffered
dark curses, strangled each other on the divine stairways, flung the deceptive books into
the air shafts, met their death cast down in a similar fashion by the inhabitants of
remote regions, others went mad.
The searchers did not remember that the possibility of a man's finding his vindication, or some
treacherous variation thereof, can be computed as zero.
The narrator also assumes that the library is not just infinite, but since the number
of books possible combinations of those 25 letters is large but not infinite, that the
library must be both infinite and cyclical, so that as he says, if an eternal traveler
were to cross it in any direction, after centuries he would see that the same volumes were repeated
in the same disorder, which thus repeated, would be an order, the order.
Assuming that he's right about this, that would mean that if there is that kind of order
in the library, that order would seem to imply a god, or at least some architect or some
librarian since a library like this simply doesn't happen by chance.
That is, there is an order here, it's just that it's so vast as to be entirely incomprehensible
to us and large enough to be frightening.
There's much more to the story than this, but I wanted to use it just to show you Borges'
idea of an observed universe.
In his case, he doesn't see it as inherently observed since there is an order here, at
least the possibility of an order.
It's just that it's on a scale so vast that we can't grasp it and that makes it experientially
the same as if there weren't an order at all.
The most important implication of this for Borges and for all post-modernist writers
is that if reality is incomprehensible to us, then all of the structures that we live
by are fictions, are made up, are constructed by us.
Because if we can't know the nature of reality, then none of our structures, political or
economic or social or religious or literary, can be grounded in reality.
None of them is necessary.
All of them are contingent, that is, they could be other than what they are.
That gap between reality and fiction, and fiction is being used in a fairly large sense here,
the gap between reality and fiction is treated in various ways by various post-modernist
writers.
Here's one of the ways that it's illustrated by Borges in an essay called The Analytical
Language of John Wilkins.
In that essay, the narrator quotes from a Chinese encyclopedia.
It turns out that it's one that Borges made up.
He does this a lot.
He gives you these formal looking footnotes that make everything look very official and
you find out later that he made the whole thing up.
He made up this Chinese encyclopedia, and he quotes to us from the passage in that
Chinese encyclopedia, which deals with the classification of animals.
And here is the classification that he gives.
He said, all animals in the world can be divided up into these following categories.
A, those that belong to the emperor.
B, embalmed ones.
C, those that are trained.
D, suckling pigs.
E, mermaids.
F, fabulous ones.
G, stray dogs.
H, those that are included in this classification.
I, those that tremble as if they were mad.
J, innumerable ones.
K, those drawn with a fine camel's hairbrush.
L, others.
M, those that have just broken a flower vase.
And N, those that resemble flies from a distance.
This is, of course, an absurd, totally arbitrary, crazy way to classify animals.
But that's his point.
It is impossible to give linguistic form to reality, and that's the point.
All classification systems are arbitrary because there is always an insurmountable gap between
language, which is a made-up human construct, and reality, which is incomprehensible to us.
One of, one of Borges' really, very brilliant critics, a woman named Beatrice Sarlo in a
book she wrote on Borges says this about this particular passage in the Chinese Encyclopedia.
She says, no language mirrors reality, although many attempts have been made to explain why
the use of language is posited on its capacity to transfer into words an arrangement of objects
in space and time that is in itself remote from the very nature of discourse because
the order of reality and the order of discourse respond to different logics.
In its hyperbolic form, the fake Chinese Encyclopedia mimics other, more rational efforts that philosophers
and linguists have made to explore the mechanism through which we apprehend reality and the
ways in which we divide up the experiential continuum of time and space.
All these modes, says Borges, under the cover of the Encyclopedia, are conventions because
there is no classification of the universe that is not arbitrary and conjectural.
The reason is very simple, we do not know what the universe is.
That is, reality works by its own rules and logic and language which we've invented work
by their own rules and there is no necessary connection between them.
One of Borges' favorite illustrations of this is Zeno's Paradox, which dates way back
to the time of the pre-Socratic Greek philosophers.
Zeno's Paradox goes like this, Achilles can run 10 times faster than a turtle, but if
the turtle were given a head start, Achilles will never catch up with it.
According to the logic of this, he cannot catch up with it because in order to catch
up, he would first of all have to cover half the distance between himself and the turtle.
Before he can do that, he can cast a cover half the distance between that and then half
the distance of that and then half the distance of that.
And the question is, how long can we keep doing this?
And the answer is forever, since this is an infinite series.
We don't need infinite space to do this in, we only need a space which is infinitely divisible,
which in our logical system it is.
Now of course, if you were to put Achilles and the turtle into such a race, what would
happen?
Achilles would pass the turtle and win.
So what does that prove?
It proves, does it prove that we can't trust our senses, which show Achilles clearly passing
the turtle, showing that our logical systems are more reliable than sense perception?
Or does it show that our logical system is flawed and our sense perception is a more
reliable guide?
Both answers are as it turns out possible, and we have to remember that the Greeks actually
took up that idea that the logical system is more reliable than sense perception and
pushed that until it eventually became the philosophy of Plato.
Borges uses the paradox to show the independence of the two systems, logic and sense perception,
and the untranslatable gap between them.
He is apprehensible to us either via our senses or via our logical and linguistic systems,
but the gap between them cannot be bridged.
To quote Sarlo one more time, she says,
Both these answers are present at the same time in Borges' philosophical stories, whose
power resides in the way he moves between two different requirements.
The splendor of logical constructions and the despair aroused by a formal perfection
that by definition cannot translate the unknown structure of the real world.
He uses other paradoxes in the same way.
He says he learned infinite regress from a biscuit tin, which had on it a picture of
a biscuit tin on which, you know, a young girl holding a biscuit tin, on which there's
a picture of a young girl holding a biscuit tin, and so on.
We know the same, we're familiar with the same idea from a box of Quaker oats, which
has on it a Quaker holding a box of Quaker oats, which has on it.
Again, this is a paradox because it can fit an infinite series into a finite space, which
is logically possible, but cannot be done in reality.
As he points out, he didn't invent this paradox.
He quotes from Josiah Royce from Volume One of the World and the Individual, and Josiah
Royce had this to say about this paradox.
Let us imagine that a portion of the soil of England has been leveled off perfectly,
and that on it a cartographer traces a map of England.
The job is perfect.
There is no detail of the soil of England, no matter how minute, that is not registered
on the map.
Everything has there its correspondence.
This map, in such a case, should contain a map of the map, which should contain a map
of the map of the map, and so on, to infinity.
He cites other examples of this paradox, some of which he's very delighted with, and he
loves very much.
Back in Lecture 22, we mentioned, Bohr has noticing that in Don Quixote, Don Quixote actually
at some point reads a copy of Don Quixote.
In that copy of Don Quixote, there should really be a place where Don Quixote reads a copy
of Don Quixote, in which, in which, in which, and so you can keep going to infinity again.
Bohr has also made up a version.
He made this one up for sure, of the 1000 to 1 nights, in which he said, thanks to a
printer's error, on the 602nd night, Scheherazade starts to tell the frame story of the entire
1000 to 1 nights, which means that when she gets to the 602nd night, she'll start to
tell the frame story, which when she gets to the 602nd night, she'll tell the frame
story, odd and finitum.
The point is, for Bohr has, we have these two independent systems, the order of reality
and the order of human logic.
If you were going to write a story, he says, which of those two systems would you prefer
to use to structure it?
For Bohr has, there's never any question.
If he says, we try to use the order of reality to structure our stories, that is to write
realistic fictions, we simply reproduce the incomprehensibility of reality, which he demonstrates
in another story called Funes the Memorias.
This story is about a man who has perfect memory, which retains every perfectly, every
single experience he's ever had, or every thought he's ever thought.
At first, this seems really wonderful to the narrator, but it turns out that a man with
a perfect memory can't think, he can't cut and paste, he can't abstract, he can't generalize,
he can't skip over things, he can't ever break with the immediacy of memory.
He's what the narrator calls a victim of the disordered chance of realistic representation.
It always takes him exactly the same time to narrate a event as it took to experience
it in the first place.
And for Bohr has, that's all that realistic fiction can ever do.
On the other hand, using the order of human logic and language, one can construct beautiful,
artful, astonishing stories whose symmetry and tidiness and neatness remind us all the
time that they are fictions, they are made up, they are not like life at all.
That's why Bohr has says he never had any desire to write a novel.
He said, the novel's history is so tied up with naturalistic representation that it never
escapes the sense that it's about the world, it's about external reality, and hence it
always tempts the writer into unnecessary details which are also designed to give an
illusion of real life.
Bohr has his own favorite writers, include people like Robert Louis Stevenson and Rudyard
Kipling, who in usual literary histories are considered minor figures because their stories
are too artful, too implausible, too unrealistic.
But that's precisely what Bohr has loved about them.
He also admired Kafka and the 1001 Knights for the same reason, sentiments which are
shared by most postmodernists, because they are so little like life.
So what Bohr has writes is he writes elegant, tidy, artful stories which announce themselves
as fictions because they are so perfect and artful, giving us a formal perfection that
incomprehensible reality never can.
I think that we can illustrate all of this in one more Bohr has story.
This one called Tlan Uckbar Orbis tertius.
The story begins when the narrator finds, in some but not all copies of the Encyclopedia
Britannica, references to a place which he initially thinks might be somewhere in Asia,
a place called Uckbar.
Exhaustive research reveals that no one has ever heard of the place, and not all of the
copies of the Encyclopedia have the information in it.
Several years later, by accident, the 11th volume of the Encyclopedia of Tlan comes into
the narrator's hands.
Tlan turns out to be a planet that no one has ever heard of, and on that planet is the
land of Uckbar.
It takes the narrator about five more years of research and accident before the story
of these places becomes clear.
And it turns out that in the 17th century there was a secret society which included
among its members, Bishop Barkley, the idealist philosopher, who decided to create an imaginary
country.
After a while they realized they couldn't possibly complete the task in one lifetime,
so each member chose a successor to carry the work on, which has now been going on for
several centuries when the story starts, which is about 1939.
The whole effort was given a huge boost in the early 19th century when an American millionaire
from Memphis was recruited and he talked the society into expanding the project, creating
not just a country, but an entire planet, and that's where Tlan comes from.
As the narrator learns more and more about this planet and country, he discovers what
amazing places they are.
Because they were and remain so deeply influenced by idealist philosophy, their language doesn't
have any nouns in it, because nouns suggest the existence of things independent of the
mind, which idealists deny, since for them existence is ideas in the mind.
Ideas on Tlan are created as pure fantasy, and they're evaluated purely in terms of
their beauty and their internal consistency, not their connection to any external reality,
which on Tlan doesn't exist anyway.
Archaeology decides, this one I always find really amusing, archaeology involves deciding
in advance what you want to find, and then you go out and find it, since to think of
something is to give it existence.
So the past can always be rewritten, assuming that there really is a past and a lot of people
on Tlan don't think there is a past, idealist philosophers don't think there is one either.
Things that are lost are just rethought and then they reappear.
It's just that somehow for some reason when they are, so if I forget a pencil, I can just
think of the pencil and there it is.
It's just that for some reason, which nobody quite understands, when it reappears it always
reappears just slightly longer and slightly heavier than it was before, and no one has
quite figured out why these things happen, those things that are lost or have forgotten
and then rethought are called Ronir in one native language.
Tlan and Uqbar are thus perfectly consistent and logical places in which all of the details
fit together to make elegant and beautiful realities.
Eventually, the entire 40 volume encyclopedia of Tlan shows up in Nashville, Tennessee,
and when the press gets hold of it and publishes news of this imaginary world all over our
own world, it causes a terrific sensation.
Even more remarkable, once Tlan is discovered, objects that we know come from Tlan start
showing up in this world, in our own world.
The narrator himself comes upon one in a remote country in.
As the narrator tells us toward the end of this story, the contact and the habit of Tlan
have disintegrated this world.
Enchanted by its rigor, humanity forgets over and again that it is a rigor of chess masters,
not of angels.
Already the schools have been invaded by the conjectural primitive language of Tlan.
Already the teaching of its harmonious history, filled with moving episodes, has wiped out
the one which governed in my childhood.
Already a fictitious past occupies in our memories the place of another, a past of which
we know nothing with certainty, not even that it is false.
New mismetology, pharmacology, and archaeology have been reformed.
I understand that biology and mathematics also await their avatars.
A scattered dynasty of solitary men has changed the face of the world.
Their task continues.
If our forecasts are not in error, a hundred years from now someone will discover the hundred
volumes of the second encyclopedia of Tlan.
Then English and French and mere Spanish will disappear from the globe.
The world will be Tlan.
As he goes on to explain why this happens is easy enough to understand.
Tlan is an entirely made up world so it is internally consistent, it is coherent, and
it is graspable by the human mind in a way that our own reality never is.
We remember that on Tlan philosophical ideas are evaluated purely in terms of internal
consistency and beauty just as Bohr has wanted fiction to be.
As the narrator puts it, the truth is that reality longed to yield to Tlan.
Ten years ago any symmetry with the semblance of order, dialectical materialism, anti-Semitism,
Nazism, was sufficient to entrant the minds of men.
How could one do other than submit to Tlan to the minute and vast evidence of an orderly
planet?
It is useless to answer that reality is also orderly, perhaps it is, but in accordance with
divine laws, I translate, in human laws which we never quite grasp.
Tlan is surely a labyrinth, but it is a labyrinth devised by men, a labyrinth destined to be
deciphered by men.
As a made up world, Tlan is infinitely attractive.
As Oscar Wilde had put it a half century earlier in his Proust and Pirandello would have agreed,
reality is just process looking for form.
Whenever art comes up with something really beautiful, reality limps along behind it trying
to emulate it, and so the world is trying its best to become Tlan.
That, although it's arrived at in different ways by different authors, is what postmodernism
asserts.
It asserts that art and literature can construct for us fictions by which we can live as long
as we remember that they're fictions, that we made them up, and that they have no necessary
connection with reality, any more than does the chess game that provides part of the metaphor
for Beckett's Endgame.
That doesn't mean that postmodernist authors can't work for things they believe in.
John Barth, who's a great admirer of Borges, has spent considerable energy in his works
arguing for gender equality.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez uses part of his postmodernist 100 years of solitude to recall portions of
Colombian history that have been suppressed by rulers.
It's just that, even as these stories are being written, postmodernists keep reminding
us that they're fictions, made up, not intended as explications or imitations of reality,
which as Vonnegut reminded us in our last lecture, we don't know very much about anyway.
Gore has himself pretty much avoids political and social agendas in his stories.
Usually they're just elegant little conundrums, exercises in logic and language that tease
us and make us think.
In the rest of Labyrinths, when you get to the book, it's a delightful, smashingly good
book.
You'll encounter brilliant mystery stories like Death in the Compass and the Garden of
the Forking Paths.
There's a story called The Lottery in Babylon about an all-encompassing lottery which turns
out determining every event in our lives.
The circular ruins is about dreams and dreams within dreams.
In a stunningly brilliant little story called Pierre Menard, author of the Quixote, Gore
has a modern writer writing Don Quixote, reinventing it word for word, not copying it, but actually
writing it as though for the first time, duplicating the text of Cervantes.
He winds up the essay by comparing one passage with the same passage from the new version,
which of course look identical, but he tells us the Menard version is much more ambiguous
and much richer than Cervantes is.
The point is that if Don Quixote were written today, it couldn't possibly mean the same
things it did in 1605.
Any more than Beethoven's pastoral symphony could mean the same things if it were written
today, since so much has happened and changed since then.
And so on through the rest of the book.
There's a whole world of riches in this little book, Labyrinths.
There is, however, one important implication for us in Borges, whether he goes out of his
way to reach for it or not.
In that passage before from Uqbar Tlan Orbis Tertius, the narrator tells us that when news
of an imaginary planet was released to the world, the world was ready to believe anything
that made some sense, including, he puts it, anti-Semitism and Nazism.
Nazism makes a really good example for him to use here, because if we look back on Nazi
ideology from the perspective of more than half a century, we can see what a rag bag
of ideas it really was.
It was hobbled together out of pieces from Martin Luther and Nietzsche and Thomas Carlile
and Richard Wagner and even a few Tibetan items that were thrown in courtesy of Madame
Blovatsky of all people.
It was a pure fiction, and from our vantage point, not a very plausible one at that.
But, and here's what postmodernists have to teach us, the danger of all fictions, social,
political, economic, religious, is that once we've created them, we may come to think
that they're true, as the Nazis did.
And once we think they're true, we are willing to die for them and even worse, to kill for
them.
And that for a postmodernist is the ultimate form of madness.
It's to make something up and then to forget that we made it up and begin to believe that
it has some connection with reality.
Terry Eagleton in one of his books says that he reminds us of the story, Dr. Zeus's story
of Yertle the Turtle.
You get the stack of turtles, and the turtle at the very top has got a hope that that bottom,
it was based on something, on a rock, on something solid.
We know that it isn't.
We know that the bottom is just another turtle.
There's Yertle down there at the bottom.
And Eagleton says that's the way it is with all of the fictions that we make up, too.
No matter how complex they get, no matter how big they get, they are based finally on
just another idea, another construct.
Down at the bottom, there is only one more turtle.
And that's, I think, another part of the postmodernist agenda.
It's to remind us that all of the structures we live by are fictions, which can help us
get by, maybe even make life a little more comfortable or a little happier, but which
are still fictions, made up by us and hence not worth dying or killing for.
Borges turns out to be everywhere in postmodernism.
There probably isn't a single postmodernist writer whom he hasn't influenced in some way.
Humberto Echo is one of his disciples, and if you know Echo's the name of the rose,
you'll remember that in it, it has a blind librarian whose library is a labyrinth and
whose name is Jorge of Borgos.
Borges himself was toward the end of his life when he was virtually blind, named the director
of the Argentine National Library, and his love of labyrinths is indicated in the title
of the book we've just been talking about.
Echo, he said, said that he had meant his character in the name of the rose to be a
tribute to the writer whose achievement stands behind so much of postmodernism all over the
world.
In our next lecture, we conclude our course by looking at one more postmodernist, one
whose story, The Prophet's Hair, we mentioned in our last lecture, Salman Rushdie.
We'll take a look at a book that he wrote for his son, Haroun in the Sea of Stories,
in our next lecture.
That book will give us a chance to define a little more what postmodernism is all about,
and perhaps give us a chance to summarize a little about something about what our entire
course has been about.
So next time, Salman Rushdie and Haroun in the Sea of Stories.
