In our last two lectures, we've been leaning toward realism.
We've been anticipating this movement called realism for quite a while.
In this lecture, we actually arrive at the movement called realism, and we discover that
there is still another way to tell stories.
We'll be talking in this lecture about Flo Baer's prototypal, realist novel, Madame
Bovary.
First, just a word or two about realism itself, about the movement called realism.
As romanticism was a rejection of all of the values of the Enlightenment, so realism
is really a rejection of the values of romanticism.
It's associated socially with the rise to power of the middle class, and the industrial
revolution, and a new faith in science as a vehicle that could solve many, many human
problems.
Aesthetically, realism really means pretty much in literature what it does in common
parlance.
That is, what the realist meant to do was to give us a faithful and truthful representation
of the real world.
And by the real world, they meant the contemporary world, so they were rejecting the romantic
interest in exotic settings in faraway places and interest in the past.
When they said the real world, they meant the real world here and now.
If you think about an analogy in painting, Manet was an early realist who avoided those
big canvases full of historical scenes and mythological subjects, and instead painted
ordinary people in ordinary settings without dramatic poses or any central events or any
big meanings.
The realist novelists tried to do the same, believing that such subjects would be more
truthful than the exotic and ideal imaginative visions of the romantics.
The standards of truth for the realists turned out to be pretty much what they were for science.
They avoided romantic idealizing and the use of spiritual or emotional standards, and relied
rather on empirical evidence.
The method of the realist, in fact, was modeled on that of the scientist, of a scientist in
a laboratory very carefully recording an experiment that he's observing.
As they argued, the results of a scientific experiment, as it's reported, shouldn't depend
on the personality or the temperament or the involvement of the scientist.
A scientist is simply there to observe, to report as accurately as he can what he's watching
in the laboratory, and so the realist writers tried to do the same, tried to simply record
as accurately as they could what they were observing.
What that meant in terms of narrative strategies is that realist writers actually tried it
to evaporate themselves out of their narratives, so that there seems to be no writer in a
realist novel.
It makes the novel seem like a kind of unmediated picture of the real world, so in realist novels
there will be no more dear reader passages, there will be no more authorial intrusions
with an author telling us what to think or how to evaluate what we're reading.
Flaubert, in fact, in one of his letters said that a novelist in his novel should be
like God in the universe, he should be present everywhere, but visible nowhere.
By writing about contemporary subjects and the contemporary world, realists inevitably
wrote about the middle class, which was ubiquitous in the middle of the 19th century, and had
become the dominant political class economically and politically and socially, if not quite
yet culturally.
But writing about the middle class didn't necessarily mean approving of the middle class,
but many realists, including Flaubert, were very critical of the manners and the values
and the smugness of the bourgeoisie, whose interest they thought in acquisition and respectability
and a lack of refinement all suggested a kind of dreary and diminished existence.
Flaubert said once that living in 19th century France was dominated by the middle class,
was like living his life in a train station, by which he didn't mean to suggest that would
be a very satisfactory existence.
The realists also wanted their work to be more inclusive than that of the romantics.
They wanted to include the trivial and the low and the sordid.
Chekhov said, would say later, that to a scientist nothing on earth is unclean, and a writer has
to be as objective about that as a scientist is.
As Chekhov went on to say, dung heaps play a very important part in landscapes, and evil
passions are as important as good ones, so that a realist has to include the dung heaps
in his work.
I have the feeling sometimes that in order to make sure that we notice that there were
dung heaps, I think occasionally a realist writer may put in an extra one or two just
to make sure that we don't miss them.
The sordid and the low, in any case, seems to play an inordinately large part in some
realist writing.
Now Madame Bovary, the novel we're going to look at here illustrates all of this about
realism.
The story is about ordinary people.
It occurs in two little tiny provincial French villages in the 1840s, and the highest ranking
members of society in these little towns are people like a priest, a doctor, and a pharmacist.
The story is also a fairly simple one.
It was based, in fact, on real events.
There's a young woman who is the daughter of a wealthy farmer who's sent to a convent
school.
At the convent school, not as part of the regular curriculum, but outside of class, she reads
a lot of sentimental novels, the same kind of novels that Tatyana read in Alexander Pushkin's
Eugene Onyagin.
And all of this reading of sentimental novels convinces her eventually that life is or should
be a series of ecstatic experiences full of longing and fulfillment and excitement and
high drama.
When she finishes school, she eventually marries a young doctor.
He's not quite a real doctor.
In France, they still had classes of doctors, and the man she marries is a second-class
doctor, which means that he can set bones and he can prescribe medicine, but he can't
do surgery.
That will be important later on, the fact that he's not supposed to be allowed to do
surgery.
He turns out to be a decent, hardworking, ordinary, and to Emma, heartbreakingly dull man.
Very, very soon, she finds she's bored with the marriage and with her husband.
She has a child, a daughter, whom she more or less ignores, and then she drifts into
three affairs.
The first one is a purely platonic one with a young man named Leone in her hometown.
And Leone and she share a lot of taste in poetry and in drama and in music, and it's
a wonderfully spiritual kind of relationship that goes on for a very long time.
Leone eventually is just sort of overwhelmed with the frustration of having this relationship
remain at a purely platonic level when he leaves town.
When he leaves town, then she is seduced by a very experienced seducer, a very different
kind of man than Leone, a man named Rodolphe, who has purchased a chateau just outside of
town.
This one is a deliberate, cynical seduction on his part, but from Emma's point of view,
she now has a real affair.
She has really evolved and involved in adultery, the kind of things that she's been reading
about in her stories all these years.
And then finally, after the affair with Rodolphe is over, she reunites with Leone, this time
in the nearby city of Roan, and this time it turns out to be a real affair.
Both of them are older, both of them have had more experience, both of them know how
to proceed now, so the third one is a real affair with Leone.
Meanwhile, in order to support the kind of life that she figures you have to have if
you're going to lead this romantic life, she thinks somehow you need all the accoutrements
of romance, too, so that she keeps borrowing money from a money lender and very slowly step-by-step
drifts deeper and deeper into his clutches until he finally has to call in his debts.
When he calls in his debts, Emma and her husband are forced to sell everything they own in
an effort to repay the debt.
In a kind of desperation, an effort to pay off these loans, she turns to everybody that
she knows to try to borrow money, including her two former lovers, both of whom turn
her down.
So friendless and hopeless, she steals arsenic from the local pharmacist and then dies.
It's not a pretty death, either.
It takes her about three long, agonizing days to die.
Charles, her husband, dies a few years later, and their daughter, Burt, is then sent away
to live with an aunt.
And in a really totally horribly sad, anti-climactic ending, the last thing we find out about Berta,
she's working in one of the cotton mills, which is one of the new products of the Industrial
Revolution.
The story, as Flo Berta tells it, is told with detachment and objectivity.
It's almost impersonally told.
The setting is full of the kind of detail that helps us to picture what life would really
be like in a French provincial town in the 1840s.
The settings and the characters and the events and the dialogue are all reproduced without
the author really guiding us or telling us how to evaluate these.
He simply reports them, doing his job as he would imagine it, the kind of job that a scientist
would do when reporting an experiment.
In his really masterful book, My Mesus, Eric Auerbach, picks out one passage to illustrate
what he calls, what he says is Flo Berta's technique, a technique which Auerbach calls
impartial, impersonal, and objective.
The passage comes from the ninth chapter of the first book, and this is at a point where
Emma is just slowly, gradually becoming increasingly bored and impatient with the failure of her
marriage to live up to her expectations.
And this is the passage that Auerbach selects.
But it was above all at mealtime that she could bear it no longer in that small ground
floor room with its smoking stove, its squeaking door, its sweating walls and its damp floor
tiles.
All the bitterness of life seemed to be served up to her on her plate, and the steam rising
from the boiled meat brought gusts of revulsion from the depths of her soul.
Charles was a slow eater.
She would nibble a few hazelnuts or lean on her elbow and draw lines on the oil cloth
with the point of her table knife.
As Auerbach points out, the details in that little tiny passage are very carefully chosen,
down even to the idea that they have an oil cloth, which means they can't afford a table
cloth, a real cloth for their table.
The chapter up until this point has been about Emma, so we get to see Charles more or less
from her point of view.
We watch Charles eating, slowly unaware of what Emma is thinking about him.
As he's slowly munching his meal, we can see him as the cause of all of her restlessness,
all of her sadness.
But as Auerbach also points out, we aren't really precisely inside Emma's head here either,
as we might have been in earlier novels.
Instead, we get Emma's thoughts from a narrator who formulates them in a way that Emma herself
couldn't.
In fact, as Auerbach says, if Emma could express her aversion in this way, she could have perhaps
outgrown her old self and saved herself.
If Emma could think about herself in this way, she'd be capable of self-analysis, which
she isn't.
For Emma, her depression is much more vague and much more undefined.
It's the author who has given us this insight into Emma by watching Emma as she watches
her husband.
Again, it's this spectator watching this experiment and then reporting very carefully
what he sees.
Notice also that this is, in good realistic terms, this is an ordinary couple in an ordinary
kitchen doing a really ordinary thing.
They're having dinner at night.
But it's treated with the kind of seriousness that Auerbach had told us way back in our
lecture on the New Testament in the story of Peter's denial of Jesus.
He said that that New Testament story opened up the chance for ordinary people to be treated
seriously in literature.
We are certainly here when we get to Madame Bovary.
It isn't, however, despite all this objectivity and all of this impartiality and all of this
neutrality of presentation.
It isn't as though we can't tell at least what some of Flaubert's own attitudes are.
Some of them clearly come through.
He treats some of his characters satirically.
There's the village priest to whom Emma goes one night looking for religious answers to
her depression.
He has grease on his gown from dinner, and he's trying so hard to keep track of the
boys in his catechism class who are running amuck, and he's so dense that he doesn't
even begin to understand what she's saying to him, so there's no way he can help her.
Ome, the village pharmacist, is so full of himself in his ideas about progress and enlightened
thinking and so sure that he's on the cutting edge of the new age that he couldn't begin
in a million years to understand what's bothering Emma.
It's interesting, by the way, speaking of Ome.
It's interesting that in some ways he's partly responsible for what happens to Charles and
Emma in this story.
He's read an article in a medical journal suggesting a new experimental kind of surgery
that could be performed to cure club feet.
There is a clubfoot boy living in town, and he talks Charles into trying this experimental
operation on the local clubfooted boy.
Charles isn't supposed to do surgery, but Ome talks him into it anyway, and the operation
goes very, very badly.
The boy gets gangrene, and then a real doctor has to be called in to amputate.
It turns out to be a very humiliating experience for Charles.
He gets chewed out thoroughly by the real doctor who warns him never, ever to try something
like this again, and it alienates Emma even further from Charles because now she can think
of him as woefully incompetent as well.
So it's maybe no accident that the end of the novel, the poison that she takes comes
from Ome's shop, suggesting that at least in some metaphoric way, Ome and all that he
represents is part of what kills her.
As noted, most of the realists were sharply critical of the middle class and what they
were making of the world.
This comes through in Flo Baer's portraits of the little provincial towns in which the
Boverys live and the people who live in there.
The priest and Ome and other characters carry this kind of satirical burden.
The most stunning piece of satire in the piece, one of the most famous little episodes in
the entire novel, is the seduction of Emma by Rudolf, which occurs in an upstairs room
overlooking the town square in which an agricultural fair is going on.
Upstairs while Rudolf is feeding Emma well-rehearsed lines about longing and unhappiness and the
destinies of isolated souls, prizes are being given down below for the best use of manure
and speeches are being made about progress and agriculture and virtue.
Flo Baer said in a letter that he had actually written the agricultural fair first and then
the seduction scene and then he intercut them so that we flip back and forth between them.
And the fact that the love scene occurs in the context of a rural fair and animal noises
makes all comments superfluous.
We know exactly what to make of that.
Still despite these indications of the author's own attitudes, the novel is still presented
in an extremely detached and objective way in terms of the standards of the novel up
until this point.
When the novel was first published in serial fashion in 1856, the French government prosecuted
it as an immoral book.
At the trial, Flo Baer's lawyer argued that Flo Baer was opposed to immorality since Emma
comes to such a bad end.
The Flo Baer's lawyer won the case and the book was published the next year and in fact
Flo Baer dedicated the book to his lawyer.
But the fact is that if you can argue, these two extremely opposed viewpoints about the
same novel, the novelist himself must have been neutral in his presentation.
He gives us the characters and their settings, but he does so without telling us what we
should think about them or what they do.
Both the prosecution and defense attorneys in the trial seem to have slightly missed
the point of the novel.
It's neither a defense of adultery nor a judgment on immorality, but it's a realist
novel about a woman who dreams, who acts, and then who dies.
At the book's end, Charles, who has by now, after Emma's death, has discovered in all
the letters that she left behind, all the evidence he needs of her infidelities meets
Rodolphe one day in town and tells Rodolphe that he doesn't blame anyone, that fate is
to blame.
Now, Charles doesn't usually speak in generalities like this and the narrator tells us this
is the only such utterance he ever made in his life, but he may be right in a way.
He may be right at least as far as fate is understood by the realists.
For them, fate isn't something that comes to us from the outside.
It's not the stars or God, but it's what happens to us because of who we are and the
circumstances in which we find ourselves.
In a way, the realists did see themselves as scientists studying human behavior in lab
situations.
Both Flaubert's father and one of his brothers were surgeons, and critics have said there's
a kind of surgical analysis that goes on in Flaubert's novels that allies him to his
family.
We could almost reconstruct the experimental parameters of this experiment, the experiment
of this novel.
If we had a beautiful woman whose head is full of romantic dreams from sentimental novels
and we place her in a really dull provincial French town and we marry her to a good but
dull and utterly predictable husband, what would happen?
The novel is that experiment, and this is what would happen.
The consequences are as inevitable as if they had been fated.
They are in fact fated by character and circumstance, which is what fate becomes for the realists
and becomes mostly for us in the modern world.
But if it's an experiment, it is also a very elegant experiment.
The novel is built around a series of really beautifully articulated scenes, each one of
which captures some part of Emma's environment, which is partly responsible for what happens
to her.
There is her country wedding to Charles, which is a beautiful scene by itself.
There is the ball to which a neighboring squire invites them earlier in their marriage,
which gives Emma a brief glimpse of a different kind of life, what it would be like to be
living somewhere else, doing some other kind of life.
There's the agricultural fair, which we've already mentioned.
There is Emma's first ride in the woods with Rudolf, her first adultery, and then coming
home to look at herself in the mirror, so excited that she's now one of the women she's
read about.
She's one of those women who've been the heroines of the novels that she's read.
There's the moment that she gets her letter from Rudolf telling her that he isn't going
to elope with her.
We know that he never intended to, but he led her to believe that he would.
She takes the letter, climbs the steps to the attic to read the letter, and nearly commits
suicide right then and there.
There's the scene at the opera at Roan where she meets Leon again, and a beautiful account
of the opera itself, again interleaving the account of the opera and the reaction of Leon
and Emma and Charles in the box where they're watching.
There's a scene in which she meets Leon in the real Roan Cathedral the next day, and
then the mad cab ride that follows that.
There are scenes of intense love-making at the hotel in Roan where she goes every week
under the pretense of taking piano lessons.
And there's the scene of her death.
All are done in this very precise, detailed, objective manner of the realist, but each
one is really telling in terms of the story itself as well.
Let me just give you one example, this is one of my favorite ones in the entire novel.
Emma and Leon have re-met at the opera in Roan.
Charles has to go home the next day to see patients, but Emma stays overnight.
She thought her heart was broken after Rodolphe, but it's revived at the sight of Leon and
the memories that he evokes.
But she has decided not to embark on another affair.
And so that night she writes very carefully, writes a long letter on the hotel stationery,
explaining why after one more meeting she will never see him again.
They have decided to meet at Roan Cathedral the next morning, where she will give him
the letter.
Then they run into a verger who keeps insisting on showing them all the details of the cathedral.
Leon is very anxious to get Emma away and he's impatient with the verger.
And Emma can put up with the verger for a while because it can delay for her a little while,
yet that moment when she's going to have to tell Leon and give him the letter.
Finally, Leon gets her into a carriage and tells the driver just to drive anywhere, just
keep the carriage moving.
The blinds go down and in Roan that day.
People see a carriage going randomly up and down the streets with its blinds drawn.
About noon, a woman's bare arm reaches out through the blinds with a hand and a fist
and when the hand opens there's a flurry of bits of torn paper falling like snowflakes
across the street.
Again, the narrator doesn't have to tell us what happened.
Those little scraps of paper tell us all we need to know about what has just happened
inside that carriage and where Emma's going to be going from here.
So it is a perfect realist novel, but Flaubert was also an artist right down to his fingertips
and his solution to the problem of combining art and realism was one that many later realists
were going to use, and that is to use the details of the setting both as environment
and as symbols.
This happens so often in the book that we come to take it for granted and forget that
Flaubert had to invent every single one of these things.
A couple of examples.
Emma, early in her marriage, already bored with her marriage, sits one day by the fireplace
holding her now dried up wedding bouquet in her hand and she's plucking out petals one
by one out of these flowers, tossing them into the fire and watching as black butterflies
float up the chimney, beautiful, beautiful symbol.
The day that Charles gets reprimanded by the real doctor about the clubfoot he comes
home to Emma wanting to be comforted.
She is so appalled at his incompetence and subservience that she walks out and slams
the door so hard that the barometer hanging on the wall crashes and breaks.
There's the boiled beef and the oil cloth we looked at earlier.
There's the blind beggar who shows up outside Emma's window just as she is dying.
She's now prepared to meet her final lover, Jesus, and she's preparing for this magnificent,
beautiful, romantic ending to her life.
It doesn't go well because either she took the wrong kind of poison or didn't take it
the right quantity, she's dying, it's a very hard death.
And then just at the moment when she thinks she's just about there ready, as Jesus, her
final lover is going to come down to meet her, the blind beggar shows up outside the
window and sings a really bawdy song.
The book is just full of details like this, which function both at the realistic level
in terms of description, but they are also symbols of what's happening in the narrative.
Charles after he's lost the clubfoot boy's leg, the stable boy, he feels so bad about
it that he buys the stable boy a wooden leg.
And for the rest of the novel, every time the stable boy walks by and we hear that wooden
leg hitting the sidewalk, we remember it's a symbol.
That becomes a symbol of Charles' incompetence and his subservience.
There's a man in town with a lathe and he makes table legs and napkin rings and things
on his lathe, and the sound of his lathe accompanies some really intense emotional moments in this
novel until it too, the sound of the lathe by itself, acquires a kind of symbolic significance.
And so on throughout the novel, almost every single detail functions not just as part of
the environment, but also as a really beautiful symbol of what's happening in the novel.
So we have here our first real, realist novel.
Emily Bronte had described settings in her novel in enough detail to qualify at least
the second half as being something of a realist.
And as we noticed, she also managed to evaporate the author out of the novel altogether.
But her story, at least the first half of it, is still a romantic one, about a love so
passionate that it can live beyond the grave, and that's not the kind of story that a writer
who thinks of himself as a scientist would choose to tell.
Pushkin recreates St. Petersburg in the 1820s with enough care that part of his verse novel
could qualify as realist as well.
But his is a novel in verse, and as we pointed out, that verse is so ingenious, it's so complicated,
it's so wonderfully masterful, that that verse keeps calling attention to the ingenuity
of the poet, and the main character in that poem turns out to be the narrator himself,
whose presence is always felt.
And for some of those same reasons, none of the novels that we've done in this course
so far really qualifies as quite a realist novel in the way that the 19th century meant
the term.
All of them have too many fantastic elements in them, or they have too much of the author
in them, guiding us or reminding us that this is, after all, the manuscript of Sid Hamid
Benengali, an untrustworthy Arab historian.
This is the first work that we have looked at that brings all of these elements together
into a perfect work of art.
Once established, realism never really goes away. Realism is still, I suspect, the basic
mode of most novels that are written today, and when we pick up a novel at an airport
that we're going to read on the way to Antwerp or London or wherever we're going, there's
a good chance, a very good chance, that that will be a realist novel that we pick up and
buy. It is still probably the dominant mode for novels to this very day.
What makes Flaubert's novel so special is that he writes a perfect realist novel while
making every single sentence count, every word, every detail of his environment turns
into a symbol which helps us to understand the character or the event. This is the perfect
combination of realism and art. It took Flaubert five years to write his first draft of this,
and when he finished his first draft, he had something like 3,000 pages of manuscript,
and then he took several more years to cut that down piece by piece until what he had
left was about a tenth of what his original novel had been, but it is so pure, it is so
perfect that every word by the time he finishes is exactly in the right place. Henry James
read Madame Bovary when he was a young man, and he tells us that it changed his life.
For the rest of Henry James' life, despite his own contributions to the development of
the novel, which are going to be considerable, he treated Flaubert as the patron saint of
the modern novel. The first writer to see the novel not just as a long short story, but
as a real work of art in which every word should be as carefully chosen as it is in
a poem or in a play, and making thereby the novel into an art form which then Henry James
would pick up and carry on to the next stage. Despite all of the objectivity and the impersonal
narrative strategies, all of us when we read the novel still have to decide what to think
about Emma, what to make of her. We mentioned in lecture 22 that Flaubert admitted his debt
to Don Quixote. He said that the Quixote was in his blood before he could even read.
And this is in some ways a 19th century female version of the Don Quixote story. It's about
a woman who dreams dreams, who tries to carry them into the world and then gets destroyed
by them. Emma's dreams are probably silly. They're made up of scraps of sentimental novels
and that sturdy bourgeois context in which she has to try to live out her dreams makes
clear just how silly they are. She's a little like, I always think, like Mephistopheles
Grasshopper in Gertes Faust. She sees the stars and she leaps for the stars, but invariably
always lands in a pile of dung, which Emma Bovary certainly does. It may be that Emma
Bovary's stars aren't very high and they may be made out of tinfoil, but she's still
the only one in the novel who sees them and who tries for them. She's tried and found
wanting by her petty bourgeois context, but for myself, and you'll have to decide for
yourself when you read this what you think of Emma, in a world full of complacent and
smug and limited people whose only goals are respectability and acquisition. She's the
only one who thinks she's missing something, that there must be more to life than this,
that somewhere there must be a place for feeling and excitement and ecstasy in the sense of
being really alive. She turns out to be wrong, of course, in this novel. In her too little
provincial town she is dead wrong, but in the end my heart always still goes out to
her despite her narrator's fame neutrality, and I sorrow for her when she kills herself
at novels, and even while acknowledging that she is truly a flawed human being, she's corrupted
by sentimental and romantic literature and trapped by circumstance, and we can understand
that. But the overwhelming response to this novel in Flaubert's own day, especially among
women writers, readers, and the number of works it has generated over time, which includes
some really, really great masterpieces like Kate Chopin's The Awakening, like Sinclair
Lewis' Main Street, like Willa Cather's A Lost Lady, like John O'Hara's A Rage to
Live. All of these suggest that it touches some deep chord in our shared history, especially
for women readers. Some years ago there was a cartoon in The New Yorker which showed a
mother reading a bedtime story to her little girl, and the little girl was very little.
She was actually sitting in bed with a teddy bear, and you could see the book that the
mother was reading because she was holding at just the right angle, and she's reading
her Madame Bovary. It's only in The New Yorker, I guess, that a mother would actually read
Madame Bovary to her daughter as a bedtime story. But at the moment of the cartoon, the
woman was looking up from the book, looking at her daughter and saying, the amazing thing
is that Flaubert, being a man, got it right, and he certainly must have. He got something
right in this novel, anyway. Next time we'll be back to our Russia to look at a Russian
realist, Fyodor Dostoevsky, but a realist who, to paraphrase Ophelia and Hamlet, wears
his realism with a difference. Russia, in fact, was going to produce a great stream
of realist novelists in this period, the greatest of which perhaps is Tolstoy's War
and Peace. But one of the greatest of these novelists was Dostoevsky, and in our next
lecture we will take up a novel that for him was a kind of preparation for the four great
masterpieces he was going to write in the next two decades. We will be looking at notes
from underground in our next lecture.
