Lecture 20, The Heptamaran
In this lecture, we're back to narrative strategies and narrative techniques, particularly
the technique of framing in Marguerite of Navarre's Heptamaran.
She was a sister of the 16th century French king Francis I, and with her brother she brought
the Italian Renaissance to France, including getting such notables as Leonardo da Vinci
and Benvenuto Cellini to come to France.
She was a writer herself, and she was interested in Italian literature, and she in fact commissioned
a translation of Boccaccio's Decameron, which she had no doubt already read in Italian.
The Heptamaran is her version of the Decameron, it's just that she died before she could
get to the number 100.
The Hept in the title tells us she got to about 70, 72 in the most complete edition
that we have.
Like the Canterbury Tales, it's a very, very interesting fragment.
There is, as with Thousand and One Nights, there is really no definitive edition of this
book either.
Since she had already died by the time it was published, the editors were felt free
to mess with the contents, and there have been over the years 17 different versions
have been published with a lot of variations.
We're going to be referring to Paul Chilton's in the Penguin edition, and he has a really
good introduction, which discusses this whole history of the text.
Like Chaucer, like the Canterbury Tales, and like Thousand and One Nights, this book has
a frame.
The frame for this book is that in the fall, a group of aristocrats visit a spa in the
Pyrenees.
When they've spent enough time there, the group breaks up and travels in little parties
to try to get home, but they leave at a bad time.
There are heavy autumn rains, there are bears, there are bandits on the mountain trails, and
the little groups fare very badly.
Some of them are actually killed in the process of trying to make their way back home.
One little tiny group of people manages to find its way to a monastery, and there they
decide they're going to have to stay for at least 10 days, because a bridge that they
need to get back out to the outside world has been washed away in the heavy rains.
So there are 10 of them there, and they decide to spend their days telling each other stories,
and so 10 storytellers, times 10 days, would have gotten them to the 100.
The debt to Bocaccio can be seen already in the use of a disaster as a frame story.
You remember that in Bocaccio, his 10 storytellers make their way out of Florence as a way of
trying to escape the contagion, making their way to a country estate during the time of
the plague.
Here we have the floods and the bandits and the bears to set up a kind of disaster as
a context for the hero of her book.
During the debt to Bocaccio is acknowledged.
Parliament, who is one of the characters, a female character in this book, who is something
of the group's leader, says at one point that at court, Marguerite of Navarre's and
her courtiers had decided to write a French version of the Decameron, but they all got
busy and they all got taken off in other directions, and they never got it finished.
She says now, if they get these stories written down, then they can take them back to the
court and help the courtiers and Marguerite finish the job.
It's a kind of nice irony in that one, Marguerite is in fact writing this book, and the second
irony is that Parliament, the woman who makes this proposal, is usually seen as Marguerite's
own representative among the storytellers.
That is, if Marguerite appears at all in the story, Parliament is the character that we
guess that she embodies.
As in the Decameron, a theme is provided each day for the storytellers so that every group
of ten stories has a kind of thematic focus.
All of these ways suggest the real serious use of Boccaccio's Decameron as a source,
but there are some differences too.
This one is a little bit more like the Canterbury Tales in the way the storytellers get characterized.
When they all arrive at the monastery, we learn something about them, and each one of
them is given a kind of characterization.
This is sort of the equivalent of Chaucer's general prologue, and then, and this is really
the interesting part about this book, every time a story gets told, that story is followed
by a general discussion among all ten of the storytellers.
The ten, of course, respond differently to the stories based on their personalities,
on their experiences, on their values.
And after a while, as we get to know these characters, we can tell why that character
would tell that story, and we can also begin to anticipate some of the ways in which characters
are going to respond to other people's stories.
And as in Chaucer, some people in this book are going to tell stories in response to other
people's stories.
We talked about the way the Reeve tells his story in reaction to the Miller's Tale in
Chaucer.
Even in the example we'll talk about in a minute, we'll see how one character hearing
somebody's story is going to tell another story, it's either going to reinforce or refute
that other story, and so there's a lot of interaction among these ten characters.
In fact, it's been suggested that in a way, this entire book is an extended dialogue among
the ten characters on the subjects of the stories.
The other differences from Boccaccio and Chaucer both is that Marguerite insists from
the very beginning, the tail-tellers all agree with this in the book, they agree that the
stories they tell have to be true.
Names can be changed and circumstances can be changed to protect identities, but the
stories have to be true stories.
And every time someone tells a story, he or she has to validate that story in some way.
He or she has to say, I witnessed it, or I heard it from one of the participants, or
I heard it from a most reliable witness, so that in some ways all of these stories are
grounded in some kind of real event as far as the agreement that these storytellers make
with one another.
In fact, historians have tracked down about twenty of those stories of the 72 so far which
can be validated.
The focus has changed sometimes, the emphasis has changed sometimes, but at least in twenty
cases we know that if these stories are not quite literally true, they're at least based
on some kind of historical event, some kind of real event, so that the stories are in
a sense that's not the case with Boccaccio and Chaucer, these stories are supposedly
true.
The other agreement that all of them make with each other before they start telling stories
is that the stories have to be rhetorically unadorned.
There can be no elegant language, no complex metaphors, no similes, no other verbal ornaments.
What they want is they want to tell these stories simply and plainly and cleanly, so
as not to distract from the point of the story.
This is very different from Chaucer and Boccaccio.
Chaucer sometimes lets his unlettered characters tell a story in a relatively simple manner,
but it's always written in Chaucerian poetry, so there's always a lot of artfulness about
the way the story is told.
And Boccaccio's, of course, are highly ornamented.
It's one of the things that makes Boccaccio fun to read, since so many of his stories,
for example, are about sex, his stories are full of elegant euphemisms and metaphors
for sex, and it's almost like a little contest among his tellers as to who can come up with
the next really brilliant metaphor for the sex act.
And so there's a lot of ornamentation and rhetoric in Boccaccio, and that's part of
the charm of both Boccaccio and Chaucer.
Not so here.
Here the stories are supposed to be simple, plain, and unadorned.
Marguerite also strikes a balance among genders, or between genders, among her storytellers.
Boccaccio had seven women and three men, and there are very few women in Chaucer's, among
Chaucer's, telltellers, because women would be less likely to be going on a pilgrimage
in this kind of way than would men, the wife of Bath being, of course, an extraordinary
exception.
Here we get five men and five women, so that when the debates happen after each story,
we can get a fair hearing from both genders, because gender is going to turn out to be
one of the really important issues in this book.
Socially and economically, the ten storytellers in Marguerite of Navarre are all from the
same class, that is, from the aristocracy.
Many of them, in fact, know each other at court.
In this way, they're a little more like Boccaccio's homogeneous group of young people than Chaucer's
pilgrims, who represent a fairly accurate cross-section of medieval society.
I don't know whether we mentioned it when we were doing Chaucer, but the highest-ranking
member of Chaucer's group is a knight, and the lowest-ranking member is a plowman, because
the very, very rich in Chaucer's time would not have gone on pilgrimages, this way they
were gone in much greater state, and very poor people, of course, couldn't go at all.
So it's not quite a complete cross-section, but insofar as the classes are represented,
it is a really good cross-section.
But Marguerites are like Chaucer's again, in that they bring very, very different perspectives
and values and worldviews to the stories that are being told, making for some really lively
discussions.
Chaucer really matters in which men and women see things differently.
It's one of the reasons why it's important for her to have an equal number of men and
women.
The themes that occupy the storytellers are love, sexuality, and the abuses of the clergy.
That third one sounds like the odd category out, but it isn't random, and it isn't put
in there just for humor or for satire, as it is in Boccaccio, and as it is to a lesser
extent in Chaucer.
Because as far as Marguerite is concerned, the abuses of the clergy is part of the gender
question in her age, part of the theme of relations between men and women.
Marguerite was a correspondent with such Renaissance humanists as Erasmus and Rabelais.
Rabelais, in fact, dedicated the third book of his gargantuan pentagoral to her, and
Erasmus and Rabelais had both argued that the Catholic insistence on celibacy for the
clergy was in itself an argument for the inferiority of marriage and, by implication, the inferiority
of women.
Marguerite and her correspondents agreed with him, and this, of course, is a subject that
we've already broached in our course.
The wife of Bath has a lot to say on that same subject.
The real subject of the stories, with a few exceptions, however, are relations between
genders and the status of women.
It's what Patricia Francis Cholachie, and in a book called Rape and Writing in the Heptameron
of Marguerite of Navarre, calls the quarrel about women, about their status, about their
identity, about the nature of their subjectivity, and the nature of their desire in a patriarchal
culture.
Chilton, in his introduction to his translation, says that it's too euphemistic to say that
the theme of the book is love.
It's easy to say that.
In fact, sometimes in surveys you see that her stories are all about love, but he says
it would be more accurate to say that the stories are about rape, seductions bordering
on rape, incest, and numerous infringements of the sex and marriage codes of aristocratic
Europe.
The reason why these become the subjects for the stories is that in many of the stories
there are class distinctions that make marriage impossible, so that two people may fall in
love, but it turns out that they cannot marry.
This is a stock situation in the literature of courtly love, for example.
An inferior man, say, from the night class, falls in love with a woman who outranks him.
She might fall in love with him, too, if he's worthy of her love, but concerns for blood
lines make marriage impossible, and that can lead, under certain circumstances, to frustration,
to repression, and sometimes to an explosion of sexual violence.
In two, courtly love provided a kind of cover which sometimes deceived even the lovers themselves.
Courtly love professed to be platonic, and spiritual, and refined, and not physical,
and as a consequence, people who believed that they were courtly lovers in this platonic
kind of way might be tempted into thinking that they were safer than they really were.
We remember in Dante's Inferno, we remember the story at Francesca's story about how she
and Paolo fell into adultery.
She said they thought they were just good friends, they were reading this book together,
and then their eyes met when Lancelot Kiss Guinevere the first time, and she said that
day we read no further.
She says that they were tempted into this, they were sort of tricked into this because
they didn't know the strength of their own passion, or thought that their relationship
was of a different order.
These two themes of class differences, combined with courtly love and or courtly romance,
come together in a very famous story on the first day in the Heptamaran.
This one is told by Parliament herself, in which a brilliant and a beautiful young knight
named Amador, I'm going to anglicize the names here, a beautiful young knight named
Amador falls in love with a beautiful lady, Florida.
She's too far above him for marriage to be possible, so that he offers to become her
courtly lover, to serve her in secret ways that will allow them to have priority in each
other's hearts, and to be faithful to one another, and to be faithful to the chivalric
ideal in every way except sexually.
The story is a long one and it has a lot of twists and turns in it, but at the end, Amador
makes two attempts to transform the relationship into a sexual one, the second of which is
pretty much straightforwardly an attempted rape.
The lady managed to elude him both times, but she's bitterly, bitterly disappointed
in the clay feet that her lover has shown.
The story is well told and it is ambiguous so that we have a difficult time trying to
decide, was Amador all a long planning seduction and simply using courtly love as a screen,
or did he start out with good intentions, but the force of repression, of sexuality
between them, caused that restricted relationship of platonic lovers to collapse into a rather
nasty story of attempted rape.
So here the themes of social inequality and the dangers of courtly love occur in the same
story, but they aren't the only ones.
Chalakian argues in her book that the story begins as a medieval romance about a young
knight and then as it progresses, we gradually shift until it becomes a story told from a
woman's point of view about a woman's struggles and choices, which aren't simple because
Florida loves Amador and has learned over the years to trust him completely.
That puts her into a really difficult position at the moments of crisis because she has to
choose between love and duty.
The same kind of choice that so many heroines of so much literature of the future are going
to have to make, and to make it work, she has to do it all alone without even any help
from her mother, who seems to have abandoned her responsibilities.
She feels that if Amador and Florida become lovers, she has no real objections.
So Chalakian says that among other things, this story is and the book itself is an effort
to carve out a space for female narrative in a world dominated by male writers and perspectives
in which women have been defined not by themselves, but by male writers, and through history have
had a very little chance to speak for themselves.
The wife of Bath has an interesting little illustration of this.
She says that one time a lion was shown a picture of a man killing a lion, and the lion says,
who painted that?
And he was told a man did, and the lion said, I thought so, the suggesting that if the lion
had painted it, you'd have a picture of a lion killing a man.
And the wife of Bath's point here is the fact that because men have done virtually all of
the literature, women had very little chance to speak for themselves.
This aspect of the story comes clearly into focus in the discussion that follows this
story.
Parliament's story itself is prompted by a story told by one of the men about a man
who does manage to keep his love for a noble lady at a platonic level all his life, but
who dies as a result of the accompanying suppression and frustration.
As he is dying, the woman falls into his arms, and as he says in his story, spends the rest
of her life lamenting what the storyteller calls the wrong she had done him.
After that story, there are various opinions expressed by others on this story, ranging
from the idea that love too carefully and too long concealed can lead to death, and
conversely that the lover showed a kind of divinity in their careful preservation of
their chastity.
And one man says that both lovers were exceptionally foolish, especially the man who showed that
he was afraid of women by not being more bold and taking what he had every right to expect,
that when his point, when a woman loves a man, the outcome will be physical to both of their
satisfactions.
And then tells this story in response to that story about Amador and Florida to show that
a woman can be truly in love and remain chaste.
So her story becomes a kind of refutation of the earlier story.
After her story is done, she reminds women to use Florida as their example and not to
put too much faith in what men say.
But then her husband, a man named Irkan, says that if Amador had been more of a lover and
less than a coward, he wouldn't have been put off so easily, that he would have used
whatever force was necessary and all would have been well, with Florida as well, who
just needed, as he puts it, a bit more persuasion to overcome her scruples.
One other lady finds this remark offensive and says that no real gentleman ever uses
force and that anyway, he had deceived the lady by offering her reverence and obeisance
when all along he had something else on his mind.
Another man says that men are always a little afraid of or at least awed by women in the
courting stage, but that once a man has won a woman, he turns out always to be her master.
All of these things bear on the quarrel about women question, and it illustrates both the
kind of space Marguerite is trying to clear out for women to tell her own stories and
to be allowed to have a subjectivity of their own in literature.
Clearly, the men and the women, as they discuss, have different conceptions of what constitutes
honor, a point which becomes very clear in this discussion following Parliament's story.
For a man, honor means conquest and dominance and physical courage, as the remarks of that
second man about masters and mastery indicate.
For a woman, honor in the narrow sense means her chastity, that is her need to keep blood
lines and genealogies clean and unpolluted, but in a broader sense, what honor is for
a woman, it means to be able to keep her own integrity, to keep her own self intact.
Women, as it's mentioned often enough in the discussions that follow, women were taught
not to feel desire, or at least not to express it, since female desire was problematic for
men since if a woman was sexually awake and sexually desiring, it opened up the possibility
that a man might wind up raising another man's child, so that a woman who expressed desire
in this culture was always considered a loose woman, or a bad woman, or at least problematic
woman.
A woman who really feels desire, as the woman seems to do in this story, in which she dies
in her lover's arms and then regrets her cruelty for the rest of her life is thus in an extremely
conflicted position, being tugged in two different directions at once.
In terms of narrative, the conflict can suggest that there are two different endings to either
of the two stories we've referred to.
All of this, plus being able to retell male stories as female stories, is what Chalockian
means when she says that this book is an important step in the process of helping women learn
how to write their own stories.
So the book is very rich.
The stories are interesting and they're surrounded by transitions and debate and dialogue, the
kind that Chaucer seemed to have wanted and might have supplied in rich and abundant detail
if he had gotten to finish his work.
Stories are told in response to other stories, and then all the other nine stories have a
go at interpreting the stories and reacting to them.
Maybe it's okay in a way that the work was never finished.
I like to think in a kind of post-modernist way that those tenoristocrats are still out
there in the monastery somewhere, endlessly debating these important and necessary questions,
waiting for that bridge to be built, which it never is because we don't ever get to that
tenth day.
And this, of course, what we've talked about so far really only scratches the surface of
this work.
A critic named Betty J. Davis in a book called The Storytellers writes a book about the interaction
among the ten characters during the prologues before each day and the discussions that
follow each story.
She more or less ignores the stories themselves to focus on the interaction among the ten
characters between stories, and her book is over 200 pages suggesting some of the richness
of those interactions.
We've already referred to the relationship between parliament and earcon, so let's see
what Davis has to say about them in her book.
They're married, and their relationship seems on the whole a good one.
One morning they show up late to meet the others, and earcon obliquely suggests that
they were making love in the morning, and that somewhat delayed them.
They speak sharply to one another on occasion, and there seem to be occasionally some veiled
references to earcon's affairs with other women, although we have a hard time pinning
them down or being too sure, because they're always said in public and therefore are always
veiled to some extent.
They disagree most notably on the question of sexual morality.
Parliament sees women as morally superior to men, whose conception of honor consists
in killing other men and sexual conquests.
She said, that's what men do, that's what men mean by honor, is killing other men in
war and sexual conquest.
And she strongly condemns adultery.
Earcon, on the other hand, advocates pleasure, whether inside or outside of the marriage
contract.
He sometimes denies his interest in other women, but sometimes he suggests, usually indirectly,
that he's had his share of adventures.
Parliament usually pretends not to hear those remarks, or deliberately to misunderstand
them, practicing what Davis calls a mechanism of denial, because, Davis says, she knows
that unfaithfulness on the part of one spouse usually leads to diminution of love or even
contempt on the part of the other.
So, as long as she doesn't know what's going on, or pretend she doesn't know what's going
on, her love for her husband can remain strong.
Davis sums up the relations between them in this way.
The relationship of parliament and earcon is one of mutual esteem and desire between
two vital and strong individuals.
There is, however, a fundamental disagreement between them on the nature of men and women,
and on the rights and responsibilities of husbands and wives, and their relationship
is marred by earcons in fidelities.
Though earcon denies these on many occasions, it is always in such a manner as to make us
doubt his sincerity.
Parliament, though undoubtedly aware of the situation, goes to great lengths not to see
earcon's faithlessness, which would hurt her and destroy her sense of peace and contentment,
founded, though it may be, on self-deception.
In this way, the frame of Marguerite's stories not only enriches the stories, as it did for
Boccaccio, or Chaucer, or the writers of the One Thousand One Nights, but it also replicates
the situations which are the subjects of the stories themselves, making the frame a functional
frame about the stories themselves, a really nice blending or combination of the two.
The book is full of the kind of complexities that we encounter in good literature all the
time.
Every story is capable of multiple interpretations, depending on the listeners or the reader's
perspective, as we know from our own experience.
When we try to tell a story sometime to make a point to someone, we are sometimes occasionally
shocked to discover that that person has understood something entirely different by what we've
said.
That complexity or ambiguity is built into the book.
In a way, this book also anticipates a lot of modern fiction in that it demands that
we must be aware of who's saying what to be able to make our own judgment about what
goes on and what it means.
Clearly, once we come to understand the perspectives and the values of the ten storytellers in
this book, we have to take those perspectives and values into account when we evaluate their
stories and the judgments they make on the stories of others.
If we think about Marguerite's narrative strategies, I suspect that we'll probably conclude that
they're closer to Chaucer's than they are to those of the One Thousand One Nights.
She sets up ten characters with very different points of view and then lets them debate a
series of core issues and questions without interfering directly in the discussion.
Even if, as most critics think, Parliament is her own representative and her own voice
in this debate, she's still only one voice among ten, and her views don't go uncontested
any more than any of the other nine do.
As we read the book, we're going to find ourselves liking some characters more than
we like others.
We're going to approve of some visions more than we approve of other visions.
And this, after all, is okay because that's the point of the book itself.
But Marguerite herself, like Chaucer, can always stand apart from this debate, can stand apart
from this fray and allow her characters to speak for themselves.
We're pretty sure that she had her own agenda.
She has her own values and beliefs that she was promoting.
Among them, notably, as we've talked about in this lecture, giving a woman a chance to
tell her own story.
But her narrative technique allows this theme to emerge from the discussion rather than
being forced upon it from outside.
And in fact, it's possible to read her book and to come to some very different conclusions
about what the stories really mean or what the book is really about.
The readings that we've been considering in this lecture are really fairly new, in fact,
in the history of Marguerite and Navarre criticism.
Primarily these have been done by feminists over the last three decades, say.
That we can come to different conclusions about the book is part of its richness.
And that richness, as with Chaucer, is made possible in part by Marguerite's use of a
frame and all of these wonderful narrative strategies, which is one of the things that
makes these strategies not just important, but interesting in the history of literature.
Marguerite was traditionally, in fact, considered, until the feminist discovered her within the
last three decades or so, was generally considered a minor figure in Renaissance literature.
She has since come into her own, and she has emerged as one of those early pioneer voices
in forging a female narrative, talking about narrative space for women.
And we are indebted to the feminists for calling her to our attention, and she has moved up
into the literary canon quite considerably over the last 30 years or so.
In our next lecture, we will be dealing with a figure whom, at least since the 19th century,
nobody has neglected or underrated.
We'll be dealing with a figure whose place as a master of English drama and poetry,
no one seriously questions anymore.
We'll be talking about William Shakespeare, the poet from Avon.
That's in our next lecture.
