This lecture is about Virgil's Aeneid, and it will continue our unit-long exploration
of the question of heroism, and it will also send it off in a slightly new direction.
Because what we'll be adding to this time, we'll be adding to our old definition of heroism,
is what the Romans did with the idea of the hero when they took it over.
In so many ways, we've been through this pattern before, that sometimes when a country is conquered
militarily, it conquers its conquerors culturally.
We've seen that happen before as the Sumerians culturally conquered all the people who took
over from them in the Middle East, and in China it happened the same way the Zhou dynasty
really became the cultural basis for all of the dynasties that followed.
It happened when Rome conquered Greece as well.
Greece was so much more civilized nation and country than Rome was that Rome simply borrowed
wholesale, wherever it could get.
It borrowed from Greek philosophy, and Greek literature, and Greek historiography, and
even parts of its religion.
Many of the gods whom we know from the Roman pantheon are simply Greek gods renamed, given
Roman names, so that Zeus becomes Jupiter, and Hera becomes Juno, and Aphrodite becomes
Venus.
So it was inevitable that when toward the end of the first century Caesar Augustus more
or less commissioned Virgil to set out to write a national Roman epic that would rival
that of Homer's, the Iliad and the Odyssey, that he would use Homer's poems as a very
close model for his own, and in fact that's what he did.
The first six books of Virgil's Aeneid are modeled very carefully on Homer's Odyssey,
and the second six books are modeled very closely on Homer's Iliad.
And then to make the connection even closer, Virgil told the story of how Rome was founded
by a Greek type hero, Aeneas, who was a Trojan who fought in the Trojan War, who after the
Trojan War came and founded Rome, so that that connects even the history of the two
people.
But in typical fashion, it has always been said that the Romans never just adopted, they
also adapted, and Virgil did that when he borrowed from Homer as well.
We've seen in our past lectures that Greek heroes are very much individuals whose concern
is personal honor, and what will happen here is we will see that the prototypal Roman hero
Aeneas is someone who will subordinate his individuality to a body of laws, to a family,
to a state, to something bigger than he is.
Where the Greek heroes have epithets like swift-footed or many-faceted or strong-armed,
Aeneas will wind up with a heroic epithet, Pius, P-I-U-S, which means something like
responsible or dutiful.
William Anderson in a book called The Art of the Aeneid says that Piatas, which is the
noun version of the adjective Pius, says that Piatas really implies four levels of responsibility.
The first is to the gods, the second is to the state, the third is to the family, and
the fourth is to one's fellow human beings.
And we notice that there's not any duty listed to oneself in there, those are duties that
are outside oneself to other people.
This begins this poem as a Greek hero who was fought at Troy, but over the course of
the poem he is transformed from a Greek type hero into a Roman type hero.
And he is transformed by learning how to subordinate his public to his private self in the course
of the poem, managing in the process also to lose some bits of individuality and humanity
along the way.
We'll see how this works in just a moment.
The poem begins as Homer's poems both begin in medius race, in the ninth year since the
fall of Troy, during which Aeneas has been at sea, traveling from place to place, looking
for the place where he is supposed to found his new Troy.
Virgil doesn't mention it, but if we try to match up this poem with the Odyssey, we'll
remember that about the time that this poem starts, Odysseus is still trapped on Calypso's
island, and so to put those two poems kind of in relationship to one another.
Juno, that is the Greek Hera, Juno still hates the Trojans.
We remember from the Iliad that Hera and Athia were the two goddesses who were most
adamant in their hatred of the Trojans and their support of the Achaeans.
And it turns out that Juno, the Roman name for Hera, still bears that grudge even nine
years after Troy has fallen.
Aeneas thinks he's on his way from Sicily on the last leg of his trip up to Italy, and
so he thinks he's nearly there, he's just about there, but what happens is that Juno
brings up a huge storm and then sends Aeneas' ships heading in entirely the wrong direction,
so they land dispersedly on the coast of North Africa near Carthage.
The reason why Juno does this is because her favorite city is Carthage, that is her city,
she wants Aeneas and Daito to fall in love and she wants Aeneas to stay in Carthage because
she's heard that Aeneas has this great destiny that he will one day found the greatest city
in the world, and she would like that city to be Carthage, and she figures if she can
make Aeneas stay there, then his destiny will be fulfilled in Carthage rather than Rome,
which is where he thinks he's going.
So she enlists the aid of Venus.
Aeneas is Aeneas' mother, like Gilgamesh and like Achilles, Aeneas has a divine mother
and a human father, and so she gets the aid of Venus, Aeneas' mother, to make this happen,
to have Daito fall in love with Aeneas, and so Aeneas immediately when she finds that
Aeneas is here, she immediately invites Aeneas and all of his shipmates on to shore, giving
them refuge, giving them aid, and the first night that they're there, she throws a huge
banquet in their honor, and at the banquet she gets Aeneas to tell the story of his
wanderings over the last nine years in precisely the same way that Odysseus told the story
of his nine years of wandering to the Fyachians in the Odyssey.
Aeneas begins the poem in very low states.
The very first thing we hear him say in the poem is he wished he had died at Troy, and
so he starts in a very low point and we'll have to watch to see what happens to Aeneas
across the poem.
Daito, in fact, thanks to the intervention of those two goddesses, is smitten with the
kind of love that the ancients just absolutely dreaded.
It's the kind of love in which you absolutely lose your head, you lose control, and Virgil
keeps, there's a recurring image that Virgil uses of a doe pierced with an arrow wandering
in agony through the forest, and that's what the picture we get of Daito.
Daito does invite Aeneas to the banquet and we get to hear in book two of the Aeneid what
the Troy of Fall looked like from inside, that is what it looked like to the losers.
We've already heard this story once before from Odysseus in the Odyssey, but there we
saw it from the side of the victors.
Now we get to see it from the side of the losers and it's one of the great books of
the entire epic.
In the story that Aeneas tells, he tells not only how Troy fell, but he also describes
the first stages in the transformation of a Greek hero into a Roman hero.
Because he's a Greek hero, he wants to die with the city, that's what a Greek hero would
do, and when he sees that the city is on fire and it's hopeless, nothing can be done to
save it, he simply rushes out to die.
But his mother intervenes and lifts the veil off his eyes, which ordinarily prevents him
from seeing things the way they really are, and he sees all the gods and goddesses tearing
the city apart.
He understands either this is the will of the gods or else the gods are at least cooperating
with destiny.
He still needs a couple of extra signs from Jupiter before he's convinced that his destiny
is to leave town, leave this burning city, and there lead a group of people to found
a new Troy.
The picture of Aeneas leaving Troy is one that has been done in sculpture and has been
done in paintings and has been done over and over through history.
It is a magnificent picture.
His father is paralyzed, so he takes his aged father on his shoulders.
He takes his little boy by the hand.
His father is holding the household gods, the penates.
His wife is walking just a few paces behind them, and then when they get to the gates
of the city, waiting out there are thousands of Trojans saying, take us where you're going.
And as Anderson pointed out, all four of the levels of Piotas are right there, duties
to the gods, duties to the family, duties to the state, duties to other people.
He discovers when he gets outside the city walls that he has lost his wife, that she
is somehow in making their way through the burning streets.
She's gotten lost, and he rushes back in to try to save her, but discovers only her
spirit.
She has died in the process of escaping from Troy, and she tells him it's all right.
Your destiny is when you get to Italy, you're going to have to marry a Latin princess, and
the union of a Latin princess and a Trojan is going to create the great race of the Romans.
I would just be in the way I had to be eliminated.
So everything Aeneas wanted to do that night, he's forbidden from doing, but he's on his
way now at any rate.
In book three, Aeneas describes his years of wandering, nine years of wandering, in
which he visited many of the same spots that Odysseus visited.
In fact, there are some kind of interesting parallels.
It's interesting to see what happens when Aeneas gets to the island of the Cyclops.
He's not tempted to go ashore because he's responsible for all these people.
He sees those giants, he said those are dangerous creatures.
He gets back on board ship, and they tiptoe quietly back out to sea, so that he's behaving
in a very different kind of way than Odysseus when it comes to the Cyclops.
Book four of the epic is Dido's story, and this is perhaps the most famous book in the
entire poem.
She's in love with Aeneas, but they still have to consummate this love, and so the two
goddesses maneuver them into a cave during a storm, and the love affair is consummated.
It's not a real marriage, but it feels like one to Dido, and Aeneas and Dido spend that
winter in Carthage, and for one of the very few times in the poem, Aeneas seems really
happy.
But in the spring, Jupiter sends a message to Aeneas that he has his destiny, he's got
this job to do, he's got things that he has to accomplish, and says you've got to go.
He does so with great reluctance, but he does leave.
In the last confrontation that happens between Aeneas and Dido, it's a very touching and
gripping scene in which he has to tell her, I'm leaving now.
And what he tells Dido in that interview was that what I want doesn't seem to matter much
anymore.
The gods tell me what to do, and I do it, I've learned to obey, and I go now, not from
my own free will.
Still, despite the fact that we know that Aeneas has to do this, he loses some of our
sympathy in this book.
There's no way that he can't.
Virgil seems to have intended it that way.
In this confrontation, this last dialogue between Aeneas and Dido, Dido gets eight great
speeches and Aeneas gets one, so that he only can say, I'm doing this because I have to,
she has many, many things to say which are true, which are touching, which are gripping,
which win our hearts as we listen to her talk.
And then the last part of the book after Aeneas and his ships have sailed off, the last part
of the book is given to us from Dido's point of view.
And I think we do come to sympathize with Dido and in a way to distance ourselves a little
bit from Aeneas, who is in the process of sacrificing everything, personal and human
to the demands of history, to the state, to Romanitas.
What Dido does after Aeneas leaves is she builds a funeral pyre and then kills herself
on it, asking as she dies for eternal enmity between Carthage and Rome.
Historically, of course, this sets up the Punic Wars, the series of Punic Wars that
was going to be fought for about a century between the Romans and the Carthaginians.
But it also raises a question that Virgil is going to keep asking throughout the rest
of the poem.
That is, as Aeneas can't move forward without destroying Dido, so the Romans don't seem
to be able to move forward without crushing the Carthaginians and the Punic Wars.
And Virgil just says, why?
Why does it have to be like this?
Why?
What had Dido ever done to deserve this kind of fate?
What had the Carthaginians ever done to deserve what they got in the Punic Wars?
As a tiny, tiny, digressive footnote on this, one of the most beautiful arias in the history
of all of opera is written by Henry Purcell from his opera, Dido Aeneas.
It's the song that Dido sings just before she steps on the funeral pyre.
It's called Remember Me.
If you haven't heard it, it's an absolutely great aria.
You have to find a copy of it and listen to it.
In book six, Aeneas is given a vision of, or in book six, he actually gets a chance
to see Dido one more time.
He visits Hades, and when he visits Hades, he runs across her ghost.
He didn't even know that she was dead, but there she is in Hades.
And so, in this scene, Virgil borrows a great deal from the scene that we talked about in
The Odyssey, where Odysseus goes to visit Aeas in Hades.
In many ways, Virgil has set Dido up as a Greek-type heroine.
When Aeneas leaves, she reviews all her options, all the things that she could possibly do.
The only one which allows her to save face is suicide.
Victor Peschel in an article called, or a book called, The Art of Virgil, says that
like Aeas, she can recover her full self only in death, fulfilling her nature, which is what
Greek heroes do as opposed to fulfilling their duty, which is what Roman-type heroes do.
There are a lot of parallels in that last scene between Aeneas and Dido on the one hand,
and Odysseus and Aeas on the other, including the fact that after Aeneas makes his impassioned
speech to Dido, saying, I'm so sorry, please tell me it's okay, she doesn't say a word
to him.
She simply stands and looks at him for a while, and she turns and slowly disappears into
the world of the shades.
Book Four also raises some of those really good questions about Roman destiny.
Virgil was asked to write a poem celebrating Roman greatness, and he did that, but he wasn't
a propagandist.
He was a poet, and a poet always works best with ambiguity, and so he asks questions over
and over again throughout this poem about the cost of Roman destiny, the cost of Roman
achievement.
He keeps asking, why do so many innocent and admirable people have to die?
What had Dido done to deserve her fate?
What had the Carthaginians done?
These questions will haunt the poem from here on until the very end.
In Book Six and Eight, Aeneas has given a couple of visions of Rome's future to kind
of cheer him up.
He's not been very cheerful lately, and what he needs is he needs some help in understanding
why he has to do all this stuff, what he's doing it for.
In Book Six, he visits Hades, where his father, who had died on the trip, shows him Rome's
future up to the Battle of Actium, and including the Battle of Actium.
The Battle of Actium was fought in 31 B.C.
It was the battle in which Octavian, defeated Mark Antony and Cleopatra, became Caesar Augustus,
and then ushered in the Pax Romana, the great Roman peace, and the great Roman Empire.
In Book Eight, he gets a new set of armor, and he has a new shield, and on that shield,
the centerpiece of the shield is also the Battle of Actium.
And so what he's being taught, what he's being told, is that he has to pacify Italy
now, Rome now, so that later the Romans will be able to pacify Italy, so that later Caesar
Augustus will be able to pacify the entire world.
These are steps in a process.
His father, and Caesis, says a very interesting thing to him while he's in Hades, and because
Aeneas can't help but notice that almost all these Romans who are waiting to be born
into the future are soldiers.
And what his father, and Caesis, says to him as he says that's appropriate, that Romans
should be soldiers, and he says this, For other people's will, I do not doubt, still
cast their bronze to breathe with softer features, or draw out of the marble living lines, plead
causes better, trace the ways of heaven with wands, and tell the rising constellations.
But yours will be the rulership of nations.
Remember, Roman, these will be your arts, to teach the ways of peace to those you conquer,
to spare defeated peoples, tame the proud.
What Ancaesis is saying here, and this is amazing coming in the middle of an epic poem
by a Roman poet.
He said, Other people, and I'm sure he's thinking of Greeks, will always be better at the arts
than we are.
And he said, That's just a simple given.
These gifts are military, military might and rulership, and providing security and peace
and prosperity for all the peoples of the world.
Under our umbrella, they can do their thing.
The visions are designed, of course, to justify to Aeneas all the personal sacrifices he has
already made, and will have to make in Rome's establishment.
The last six books of the Aenean are modeled on the Iliad, as the first six were modeled
on the Odyssey.
When Aeneas gets to Italy, he discovers he has to fight another Trojan war, again fought
for a woman, Lavinia in this case, whom he has to win away from Ternus.
He knows he has to marry Lavinia, but Lavinia, when he arrives, is already engaged to Ternus,
a Latin prince, and Ternus isn't about to turn her over just because Aeneas said the
gods want it this way.
So that he has to fight a battle for her in order that he can marry her, and so the two
of them can create a race which is blended of Trojan and Latin blood.
In the battle, Ternus becomes yet another Greek-style hero who fights for personal reasons, while
Aeneas is by now Pius Aeneas, Pius Aeneas, fighting for duty, for destiny, and for Rome.
Ternus' epithet, his heroic epithet in this poem, is furens, f-u-r-e-n-s, which means
either raging or furious, and that epithet allies him with Achilles.
As in the Iliad where Hector's killing of Patroclus precipitates the climactic battle
between Hector and Achilles, so here the killing of a young protege of Aeneas by Ternus, a young
man named Pallas, precipitates what will have to be the climactic fight in this poem between
Ternus and Aeneas.
When Ternus kills Pallas, he does the same thing to him that Hector did to Patroclus
in the Iliad.
That is, he strips off his belt and his bald rick, and he puts it on and wears it.
He will be very noticeable the next day.
The next day after a day's long fighting, Ternus and Aeneas finally meet, and now the
stage clears, and the armies step back, and these two heroes face off one against the
other.
They both throw their spears, and the spear of Aeneas hits Ternus in the thigh, disabling
him.
He goes to his knees, he drops his armor, he throws out his arms, and he says to Aeneas,
you have it all now, you have Lavinia, you have defeated my army, everything is yours,
and then he says, please, on behalf of my aged father, please spare me.
Aeneas hesitates just for a moment, and then we are told, in a furious rage he plunges,
he sees his eyes light on the bald rick and the belt, and in a furious rage he plunges
his sword deep into the chest of Ternus, and the poem ends with these two really gripping
lines.
His, and we're talking when we say his here, we're talking about Ternus, his limbs
fell slack with chill, and with a moan, his life resentful fled to shades below.
Readers and critics have been arguing for about 2,000 years about what that ending means,
about how to read that.
In the last half of the poem, Aeneas has become something of an automaton, his personality
slowly being ground away, beginning with that night the Troy fell, and so the question
at the end here, is this yet another illustration of Piotas?
He hesitates.
He really doesn't want to kill Ternus, but then he realizes his duty, he has to do it,
and his eyes light on that belt and on that bald rick, and he uses that as an excuse to
make him do what he knows he has to do, or is this the last impulsive thing that Aeneas
ever does in his life?
Is this the last little tiny squeak of his humanity, which has been slowly squeezed out
and crushed and destroyed over the entire course of the poem?
The last little tiny bit of Aeneas that's left before he disappears into history.
Well, it's a good question, and critics have argued and debated over this for a long time,
and you will have to decide this for yourself how you want to read the ending of that when
you get to it.
Other things in the second half of the poem are a little less ambiguous, and keep the
question of the cost of Roman achievement in front of us.
One of the things that Virgil does very beautifully in this poem is he will have people meeting
in one-to-one combat, the way it happened in the Iliad, and what he will do is just
before a couple of men come together, he will personalize these people, so individualize
them so we know something about them just before they meet.
And some of them are really sad and beautiful.
He will say, for example, one of the young men approaching this battle, this is his first
battle, his first day of battle, he is the only son among eight children.
He has seven sisters, and his seven sisters love him so much, and they are so proud of
him for going away to war that they actually made with their own hands the tunic he's wearing
that day.
We find all this out just before he steps out and is instantly killed.
And so he does this over and over and over again.
There's a huge sadness about these young people who go out and on their first day of battle
or the second or the fifth or whatever it is they die, and what Virgil keeps asking
over and over again, is all of this really necessary?
If Rome is to become the ruler of the world, and if the gods have already decided that,
why do so many young men have to die to make it happen?
There's a kind of pervading sadness that runs through this entire poem, almost every
line in the Latin especially, has a kind of dying fall at the end of each line.
And then Aeneas himself, as the central character of this poem, expresses very little joy or
satisfaction during the course of the poem.
He begins the poem by saying he wished he had died at Troy.
That's the first thing we hear him say.
In the middle of the poem, when he's visiting in Hades, and his father shows him all these
spirits who have lived once and now they're in Hades, and they're waiting to be reborn
again into other bodies, they're going to be born as Romans.
And Aeneas says, he can't believe, he's incredulous.
He said, you mean people who have actually achieved the peace of Hades would choose to
go back to live life again?
He doesn't understand it because life for him has gotten so difficult, so bitter that
he can't imagine ever wanting to return.
And then he ends the poem by killing a helpless and sympathetic opponent in a rage.
So Aeneas himself has not ever been very, very happy in this poem.
And then Virgil complicates this even more by making two of the characters who are presumably
the wrong kind of heroes die to Aeneas, two of the most attractive characters in the entire
poem, far more attractive than Aeneas, who by the end of the poem has become something
of a juggernaut representing inevitability, but losing so much of his humanity in the
process.
So when people have tried to sum this up and tried to decide what this poem really means,
what it's about, all we can say is yes on the one hand, but on the other hand, it does
glorify Rome.
But it reminds us that everything Rome achieved, it achieved by force.
Everyone whom Aeneas sees waiting to be reborn in Hades is a soldier.
Rome will bring the peace of the world peace and will bring a rule of law, and that's all
very good, but the cost is very high.
That he gets both sides into this poem and does both sides so brilliantly is what makes
Virgil a great poet and makes this a really great poem.
Aeneas has to renounce art and beauty and love and happiness to become an agent of providence
that doesn't seem to care very much about him, that cares about him only insofar as
he has a job to do.
He has to leave Daito and we understand that, we understand why he has to do it, but we
don't feel good about it, and nor are we able unequivocally to endorse the decisions
that he makes along the way.
We know why he has to make them, we know why he does, they're admirable.
And so, as we look at this poem, we can think of it maybe as two poems wrapped into one.
Caesar Augustus really wanted one poem when he got two.
It's a story of history on the one hand, and that's the positive side.
It's also a story of a man who sacrificed a history, who becomes a kind of man in a
gray flannel suit, who ceases to be fully human by the time it's done, who becomes simply
an agent of destiny, of history, of inevitability.
T.S.
Eliot, in an essay called What is a Classic, says that this is the only work in the western
world that truly deserves that title, both because of Rome's immense influence on subsequent
western history, and he says, because of the poem's very civilized attitude toward power
and humanity.
That's the most subtle analysis of Roman history that we have.
Adam Perry, in an essay called The Two Voices of the Aeneid, sums up these two voices very,
very brilliantly when he says, the Aeneid, the supposed panagyric of Augustus and great
propaganda piece of the new regime, has turned into something quite different.
The processes of history are presented as inevitable, as indeed they are, but the value
of what they achieve is cast into doubt.
Virgil continually insists on the public glory of the Roman achievement, the establishment
of peace and order and civilization, that dominion without end which Jupiter tells Venus
he has given the Romans, imperium sine finae dei di.
But he insists equally on the terrible price one must pay for this glory.
More than blood, sweat, and tears, something more precious is continually being lost by
the necessary process.
Human freedom, love, personal loyalty, all the qualities which the heroes of Homer represent
are lost in the service of what is grand, monumental, and impersonal the Roman state.
What that leaves us here at the end of our consideration of the Aeneid then is a brand
new definition of what a hero is.
We now have two different kinds of heroes, two different ways we can think of heroism.
The one, the Greek type fights for personal reasons and fulfills his or her own nature.
We can think of Achilles or Odysseus or Medea as examples of this.
The other one fights for a cause and fulfills his duty instead of his nature and of course
we have Aeneid as our first example of that.
The really interesting question for us is that from here on out these two ideas of heroism
are going to be running parallel and side by side.
So that every story of every hero for the rest of our course is going to have a choice
so you can go one way or the other.
And one of the things that's really interesting for us as we consider the heroes that are
still coming up is to ask what is the hero fighting for?
What's the real motive?
What makes this hero tick?
Is this hero fighting for a cause that's outside him or herself, is willing to sacrifice
him or herself to this cause or is this hero fighting for personal reasons?
We can ask that question, our next hero that we will have in this course will be Beowulf
and we can ask that question of Beowulf.
We can ask that question of Don Quixote although Don Quixote is certainly an unusual kind of
hero.
We can ask that question of Gertis Faust, what kind of hero is Faust?
We can ask that of the heroic moments that Huck Finn is going to have and they're going
to be too greatly heroic moments that Huck Finn has in his novel.
We can even ask that of some of William Faustner's protagonists like Wash Jones and Emily Greerson.
We can say, what is it that really makes them tick?
Why do they do what they do?
And of course, one of the really interesting and fun things to do is the next time you
go to a movie, you know, it's a movie about a hero is to ask yourself, what does a Rambo
type hero fight for?
What is he really doing?
In popular culture, we tend to try to mash these two together so we don't have to choose.
But since the two are incompatible, they are mutually exclusive, there will almost always
come a point in every hero's story where you have to decide.
We have to pick one or the other.
That is the moment of truth at which we decide if we're dealing with a Greek hero or if we're
dealing with a Roman hero.
Clearly, the Roman type of hero is going to appeal more to the Christian tradition when
it emerges than the Greek type because the Roman type hero fights for a cause outside
himself.
He fights for something bigger than himself.
But both types have survived and both types we still have available to us in the modern
world and so every hero, every story about every hero that we ever hear for the rest
of our lives, you know, we can ask that really good question.
The question is, what is that hero fighting for?
What is the motivation for this hero?
Is this hero fulfilling his nature or is he fulfilling his duty?
Next time we'll travel to India and we'll get yet one more look at one more kind of
hero, the kind of hero that the Indians created when we look at the Bhagavad Gita in the context
of one of their great epic poems, the Mahabharata.
And that one will also give us a chance to study a little bit further one of the sub-themes
of this first unit and that is the relationship between the gods and human beings.
That will be in our next lecture.
