Lecture 36
Pruse, Remembrance of Things Past
For the last seven lectures of this course, we've been in deeply involved in the realist movement.
In this lecture, we're going to take a look at a novel which helped to abandon realism,
to reject the rubrics of realism, and in the process set a brand new course for the novel for the 20th century.
We're talking about Marcel Pruse, The Remembrance of Things Past.
What I'd like to do in the time we have on this is to take a fairly close look at the first 50 pages,
which functions as a kind of overture, which introduces themes which will be developed in the rest of the novel.
In fact, in the English translation, the first 50 pages is designated as an overture.
It's not indicated as any special section in the French.
The novel begins with the phrase, for a long time.
And 3,000 pages later, when we come to the end of the novel, the last word in the novel is time,
so that in a way, time quite literally begins and ends this book.
It is a novel about time in many ways.
It's about the time in which Pruse lived.
It's the time during which he wrote the novel.
It's the effects of the passage of time.
And it turns out finally to be the enemy that the narrator hopes to defeat by finishing this book.
The passage of time and its effects on us and on nature and on everything is not a new theme in literature.
It's been around as long as literature has been.
But it becomes in this novel a kind of virtual obsession.
And what Pruse does in this novel is charts with a kind of ruthless accuracy
the changes that time makes in nature, in individuals, and in society.
As is almost always the case in literature, the record of what time does is a kind of lament.
It sees time as a sort of relentless force that attacks the beauty of the human body,
the stability of the human personality, and even the freshness of a work of art
is subject to the ravages of time.
And so the novel becomes in some ways a kind of heroic battle fought against time.
It has a slightly elegiac tone because the battle against time is always a hopeless one.
We always lose, time always wins.
But at the same time, the novel is also a kind of search for some absolute within time
something stable enough that you can oppose to the ravages of time.
During the course of this book, the protagonist will try many, many things.
He will try friendship. He will try romantic love.
He will try political and theological and philosophical ideas.
None of which work because it turns out that all of those are subject to time themselves.
Even the self, the I, which we think of as enduring across time,
so that I think in some ways I must be the same person that I was 10 years ago or 20 years ago,
even that I, which we think of as enduring across time,
is really never the same two days in a row as the protagonist finds out.
Some elements of the personality get strengthened over time.
Some get weakened.
The self that loves passionately today will be disillusioned and fall out of love tomorrow.
And this, all of these ideas were really part of the mental furniture of this whole age.
They were stimulated in part by the philosophy of Henri Bergson.
And we'll come back to him and talk a little bit more about his ideas.
Three lectures from now when we talk about Luigi Pirandello.
But it becomes the theme of this novel as the narrator traces changes in everything
and everybody, including himself, over a period of about 50 years.
The father in Pirandello's six characters in search of an author
will argue that what we think of as the I, the self, the ego,
that endures through time is really not a fixed entity,
but it's a succession of selves that succeed each other in serial fashion.
He doesn't ask the question, but Proust does.
What happens to the old selves, the ones that we've outgrown, that we've transcended?
Do they disappear? Do they fall into oblivion?
Do we think of old selves that we are no longer inhabiting as train stations,
that we have left behind and we can't see anymore?
Or do we think of them as rings on a tree so that when a new ring is added,
the old ring is still inside in some way, still present in that tree?
The answer for Proust is they never disappear.
They never go away. The old selves are never lost.
They live on in us beneath the level of our consciousness
and we can make contact with them in our dreams and sometimes very rarely
if we are very lucky in our waking life.
The opening of the novel describes a literal awakening for the narrator.
The kind of awakening that each of us experiences every morning
when we leave the state of sleep for the state of consciousness.
For Proust, every morning, every waking up is a recovery of our current identity.
We have to find out when we wake up, where we are,
and so that we can know for sure who we are,
that is which particular self we are inhabiting at this moment.
Here is a passage from the very beginning of the novel
and as you will see, Proust writes in very long sentences and very long paragraphs.
I will try to read this coherently so it's easy to follow,
but it's very beautiful, but it does make big movements rather than small individual ones.
When a man is asleep, he has in a circle around him
the chain of the hours, the sequence of the years, the order of the heavenly host.
Instinctively, when he awakes, he looks to these
and in an instant reads off his own position on the earth's surface
and the amount of time that has elapsed during his slumbers.
But this ordered procession is apt to grow confused and to break its rank.
Suppose that, towards morning, after a night of insomnia,
sleep descends upon him while he is reading
in quite a different position from that in which he normally goes to sleep.
He has only to lift his arm to arrest the sun and turn it back in its course
and, at the moment of waking, he will have no idea of the time
but will conclude that he has just gone to bed.
Or suppose that he gets drowsy in some even more abnormal position,
sitting in an armchair, say, after dinner.
Then the world will fall topsy-turvy from its orbit,
the magic chair will carry him at full speed through time and space
and when he opens his eyes again, he will imagine
that he went to sleep months earlier and in some far distant country.
But for me it was enough if in my own bed my sleep was so heavy
as completely to relax my consciousness,
for then I lost all sense of the place in which I had gone to sleep
and when I awoke at midnight not knowing where I was,
I could not be sure at first who I was.
I had only the most rudimentary sense of existence,
such as may lurk and flicker in the depths of an animal's consciousness.
I think we know the kind of thing that Proust is talking about here.
If you've ever had the experience of sleeping in a really dark room,
a room that's so dark that you really can't see anything at all,
most of the time we sleep in rooms that have streetlights coming through the windows
or something so we can see the orientation of the room.
But if you've ever had the experience of falling asleep
or waking up in the middle of the night in a room that is really, really dark,
so at the first moment of awaking you can't remember
what the orientation of the bed is to the wall or where the other furniture is.
At that moment, for a brief moment when you first wake up,
you could be in any bedroom that you have ever slept in in your entire life
and knowing which bedroom you're in is important
because that will tell you which self you're inhabiting in the moment,
that is which was the self that slept in that bedroom.
That's I think the kind of experience that he's talking about very early in this novel.
He goes on from the point at which we just left off to say this,
I was more destitute of human qualities than the cave dweller,
but then the memory, not yet of the place in which I was,
but of various other places where I had lived and might now very possibly be,
would come like a rope let down from heaven to draw me up out of the abyss of not being
from which I could never have escaped by myself.
In a flash, I would traverse and surmount centuries' civilization
and out of a half-visualized succession of oil lamps
followed by shirts with turned-down collars
would put together by degrees the component parts of my ego.
For Proust, every single morning, every single waking up
is a recovery in this way of our current identity.
We have to find out when we wake up where we are
so that we know which particular self we're inhabiting at this moment
because a sleeping person has control over his entire past,
over all the old selves that live beneath the consciousness
and we can roam around through the worlds of those past selves at random.
So when you awake, you have to determine which room you're in
because which room you're in will tell you where, who you are.
It's the self that lives in this room.
When the narrator awakes in the middle of the night, he tells us,
his efforts to locate himself carry himself through the most important bedrooms
of his life across the years.
One bedroom after another remembering which one he might possibly be in now
and which self he was in that bed,
and the places of all those important bedrooms are, in fact,
the places in which this novel will be set for the rest of the time.
This always happens in a halfway state between sleeping and waking
because in sleep, the boundaries of consciousness sort of melt away
and we have access to memories and experience
which are usually blocked off by the conscious mind.
When we wake up, we have to return from this sort of phantasmal world
back into the normal one in which we live now,
which is what the narrator does in passing through all the important bedrooms
he's lived in until he arrives at the one he's in when he wakes.
So the question is, what happens to those old selves?
They're all inside us.
We visit them in dreams and they're ready under the right circumstances
and we're really lucky and very rarely does this happen to rise up into the level of consciousness.
The importance of this for Proust is that that means that inside each of us
there is something permanent and unchangeable,
something that time cannot get at and destroy.
Time is always destroying the present, but the past cannot be destroyed.
It is a kind of absolute.
And the title of the book tells us that this is part of what the whole search is.
Time, the past, is an absolute which cannot be destroyed.
The translation in English is usually given as the remembrance of things past.
The French title more literally is in search of lost time
and it is in search of lost time that this whole book is about.
Now for Proust, there are two ways of recalling the past, two kinds of memory.
The first is voluntary memory and that's the kind that we use most of the time.
It's the memory of the intellect, it's rational, it's deductive,
it's based on evidence and calculation.
It's what we'd use right now if we were to try to remember some incident from our childhood
or try to remember some house that we used to live in.
It's what the narrator uses when he lies awake at night
remembering his life as a boy in a town called Combray.
Voluntary memory is really good at some things.
It's good at routine things, things that happened over and over so often
that they get imprinted on the mind.
So when the narrator wakes up, he can remember that his grandmother
took a walk in the garden every night after dinner, whether it was raining or not,
she ruined a lot of dresses that way.
He remembers that almost every evening the neighbor's family, a man named Swan,
would come to visit the family and he would always announce his arrival
by ringing on the garden bell.
And he also remembers the nightly ritual of going to bed
because he always needed, he tells us he was a high, strong, nervous child,
he always needed a kiss, a good night kiss from his mother to be able to get to sleep.
So those kinds of things, those routine things Voluntary memory is pretty good at.
Voluntary memory is also good at recalling traumatic events.
In this narrator's case, he remembers in particular one night
when Swan dined with the family and the boy got whisked off to bed
without his good night kiss.
He became almost ill with anxiety.
He sends a message to his mother through the maid
and when his mother doesn't come, he decides to wait up until Swan leaves
and his parents come to bed expecting severe punishment when they find him still awake.
He says he expects fully to be sent to a military academy the next day.
But the father, who's a little bit more whimsical,
unexpectedly takes pity on the boy when he finds him still awake
and he says, look, I'm tired, I'm going to bed.
He says to his wife, why don't you just spend the night with him?
He's so wrought up now that he's not going to get to sleep unless you help him.
And so that night, unexpectedly, he gets to spend the whole evening with his mother
who reads to him as he's falling asleep from a novel by George Sand.
All of this is courtesy of voluntary memory,
which is very selective, which omits a lot of what really matters about the past.
This is all that he can recover of Combre via voluntary memory
when he lies awake at night and thinks back on those days.
As he says, it is as though all Combre had consisted of but two floors
joined by a slender staircase and as though there had been no time there
at seven o'clock at night.
I must own that I could have assured any questioner that Combre did include
other scenes and did exist at other hours than these,
but since the facts which I should then have recalled would have been prompted
only by an exercise of the will, by my intellectual memory,
and since the pictures which that kind of memory shows us of the past
preserve nothing of the past itself,
I should never have had any wish to ponder over this residue of Combre.
To me, it was in reality all dead, permanently dead, very possibly.
So where is the rest of Combre and all of the memories that go with it
and the self that used to live in Combre?
Is that lost?
And again, the answer for Proust is no.
There is a second kind of memory, one which never forgets
and which preserves all of the past.
This he calls involuntary memory, which is responsible
for the most famous moment in the book, the Madeline episode.
It's out of that Madeline episode that so much of modern fiction is going to derive.
He tells us that years later, when he's grown up and living in Paris,
he comes home one day very, very discouraged and tired
and his mother gives him a cup of lime tea and a Madeleine,
which is a little cake shaped like a shell.
He's distracted and he's not thinking what he's doing.
He puts a little bit of the cake on a spoon, dips it in the tea
and puts it in his mouth and suddenly he says he's overwhelmed
with a feeling of great happiness.
He thinks there's something in the cake and tea, so he tries again.
He tries the second bite, but it's a weaker sensation this time
and so he realizes that whatever is happening, it's inside him
and not in the cake and tea.
And so he does the kind of things we all do when we're trying to reach
for a memory that's just out of focus.
He focuses first his whole attention on that cake and lime tea
and then tries to clear his head of everything else
and then just take a bite and focus on just that taste
and that doesn't work.
Then he tries the opposite.
He tries to clear his head of the lime tea and the Madeleine
and think about anything else in the world
and kind of let the Madeleine and the lime tea sneak up on him.
That doesn't work either.
The problem, as he admits, is the mind is both the source of the memory
and the tool of recovery, so the mind has to work with itself,
which is always very difficult.
He says it's like getting a glimpse of an anchor that's buried deep in the mud.
We attach a line to it.
We start ever so slowly to try to bring it up,
but we know that if the line breaks,
it will probably sink back into the mud forever
and we will never, ever be able to see it again.
And then suddenly, unexpectedly, it happens.
This is that most famous episode in all of modern fiction.
And suddenly, the memory returns.
The taste was that of the little crumb of Madeleine,
which on Sunday mornings at Combray,
because on those mornings I did not go out before church time,
when I went to say good day to her in her bedroom,
my aunt Leonie used to give me,
dipping it first in her own cup of real or of lime flower tea.
The sight of the little Madeleine had recalled nothing to my mind
before I tasted it.
Perhaps because I had so often seen such things in the interval
without tasting them on the trays in pastry cook's windows
that their image had dissociated itself from those Combray days
to take its place among others more recent.
Perhaps because of those memories,
so long abandoned and put out of mind,
nothing now survived, everything was scattered.
The forms of things, including that of the little scallop shell of pastry,
so richly sensual under its severe religious folds,
were either obliterated or had been so long dormant
as to have lost the power of expansion,
which would have allowed them to resume their place in my consciousness.
But when, from a long distant past, nothing subsists,
after the people are dead,
after the things are broken and scattered,
still, alone, more fragile but with more vitality,
more unsubstantial, more persistent, more faithful,
the smell and taste of things remain poised a long time,
like souls ready to remind us,
waiting and hoping for their moment amid the ruins of all the rest
and bear unfaltering in the tiny and almost impalpable drop of their essence,
the vast structure of recollection.
He says in another place that, in a way,
what smell and taste, which brain specialists have told us,
smell and taste live in the very oldest part of our brain,
and so it's very possible that they may be the longest,
most persistent memories that we have,
that smell and taste are sort of like,
the way the Celtics believe about the spirits of their deceased relatives,
who may live in trees or in furniture,
they're living in there, they're just waiting for somebody
to come across the right combination of signals to awaken them
so that they can let us know that they're there.
And he says smell and taste are like that,
living, always waiting, waiting for the right moment
when they can bring back to us a memory of something that happened long ago
and that we have forgotten.
He finishes this very famous passage thus,
and once I had recognized the taste of the crumb of metal
and soaked in her decoction of lime flowers,
which my aunt used to give me,
although I did not yet know and must long postpone the discovery
of why this memory made me so happy,
immediately the old gray house upon the street where her room was
rose up like the scenery of a theater
to attach itself to the little pavilion,
opening on to the garden which had been built out behind it for my parents,
the isolated panel which, until that moment, had been all that I could see,
and with the house, the town, from morning to night,
and in all weathers, the square where I was sent before luncheon,
the streets along which I used to run errands,
the country roads we took when it was fine.
And just as the Japanese amused themselves by filling a porcelain bowl with water
and steeping in it little crumbs of paper,
which until then are without character or form,
but the moment they become wet, stretch themselves and bend,
take on color and distinctive shape,
become flowers or houses or people, permanent and recognizable.
So in that moment, all the flowers in our garden and in Monsieur Swan's park
and the water lilies on the vivone and the good folk of the village
and their little dwellings and the parish church
and the whole of Combre and of its surroundings,
taking their proper shapes and growing solid,
spraying into being town and gardens alike from my cup of tea.
Well, this all happens because a sensation in the present
linked to a particular one in the past
gives the narrator back the entire past of Combre,
not vitiated by voluntary memory of intellect, but the entire memory.
It's complete because it carries with it the emotions that go with the experience,
the feelings, all the parts that lie beneath the consciousness.
The importance of this is because part of the past that he thought was dead to him
has been restored in all of its fullness.
That in itself is something of a conquest of time.
And if a memory like this can be recovered and then made into art,
the past can be preserved against the erosion of time.
This episode thus in some ways illustrates the method and the point of the entire novel.
Time kills everything, but experiences like that of the Madeleine,
captured and recreated in a novel,
can defeat time by making all of one's past and all of one's prior selves timeless.
So, why is this so important for the history of modern,
for the future of modern fiction?
This has been one of the most influential novels,
and that's one of the most influential moments in all subsequent fiction.
The novel can be read and has been read as a picture of the Belle Époque,
that culture of France in the last decades before World War I.
In this way, it would be something like Tolstoy's War and Peace,
or like Balzac's series which depicts France in the 1830s and 1840s.
But that's not what Proust was interested in.
For him, realism misses the whole point of literature.
The realist beginning with Flaubert had tried to give an objective account of the world,
more or less the way a scientist would without authorial intrusion.
Now, Henry James refined that by working on point of view.
Henry James had said that all perception of reality is somebody's perception,
so that a novel to be realistic has to be told from some one point of view,
and that point of view has to be included in the novel.
So that, for example, in Conrad's Lord Jim, Jim's story gets told by Marlowe,
or in Fitzgerald's The Great Gadsby, Nick Caraway tells Jay Gadsby's story,
Huck Finn tells his own story.
But the Jamesian novel still uses an essential Aristotelian structure.
Its plot moves in an essentially linear way, with a nice tidy beginning, middle, and end,
making it more, as Chekhov would say, more a story than the way we actually experience the world.
So that modernist writers, at the beginning of the 20th century,
writers like Proust and Virginia Woolf and James Joyce,
were declaring that this simply isn't the way our experience works.
A truly realistic novel would have to capture the way reality impinges on our consciousness from moment to moment.
In an essay called Modern Fiction, which we've mentioned before,
Virginia Woolf says that every day, in every moment of our lives,
an incessant shower of innumerable atoms is bombarding our consciousness,
both from outside and from within.
Only in retrospect does our intellectual consciousness shape all those atoms
into some kind of coherent or logical pattern,
which we can call what happened on Tuesday or what I did today.
These are simply intellectual pigeonholes we use to organize what would otherwise be random sensory overload,
the kind of way that life must be for an infant who doesn't have the pigeonholes yet to work with.
But by the time we get to the pigeonholes, the experience itself has been abstracted,
has been intellectualized, has been made into something different from the experience itself.
When we think about just one element of fiction, characterization, we can see what Woolf means.
Usually in a novel, a new character is introduced with a portrait,
we get several pages of description, and then once we know that character, then that character is set into motion.
The question is, is this the way we get to know people?
And the answer is, of course, no.
A portrait of someone that we know has been built up gradually, bit by bit,
over years of experience, until it becomes something like a portrait,
and furthermore, it's always a process.
Someday our friend might do something that is totally surprising and will have to slightly revise the portrait,
because we don't know how to incorporate that bit of new behavior into the old portrait we carried with us.
So the portrait is at very least as an end product, not a beginning, it is also a process.
And the same is true for all of our experiences, they aren't given to us in neat packages,
but they're built up slowly, piece by piece, over time.
So Proust never gives us a character portrait, he gives us his protagonist's discoveries of characters
as he comes upon them, and only later can they be fitted into something like a portrait.
One of his other famous techniques is to do what critics have sometimes called time sandwiches.
So he says, this is what I knew about this character then, later on I found out this,
and then we put those two pieces together, there's a really nice instance of that in this first 50 pages
in which he says that that night when he was waiting for his mother to come up and give him a kiss,
he said, he thought if Swan had been aware of what he was doing, Swan would have laughed at him.
But then he says it wasn't until years later when he learned more about Swan and what kind of experiences Swan had had
that he understood that Swan would have been the most sympathetic of Priersons on that night.
And of course the story of Swan is part of what gets told between the first part of the sandwich and the last part of the sandwich.
The same thing is true about plot. Our lives usually don't make tidy plots,
Chekhov already has reminded us of this, and only in retrospect can we find some kind of pattern
that gives coherence to these random details of our lives.
So Proust's novel doesn't really have a plot in the old sense either.
It works by episodes which very slowly, bit by bit over the 3,000 pages,
begin to make sense to the narrator who's been living them so that he can begin to find some order and pattern in there.
In order to illustrate this, if you think, for example, just about what's been going through your mind for the last 5 minutes,
if you were to report everything that's been going on in your consciousness, it would include a lot of stuff.
It would include all the sensory data from wherever you're watching or listening to this.
It would include bits of memory that are triggered by certain words or phrases,
perhaps even the sudden recollection that you forgot to pick up the cantona at the grocery store.
This is what Wolf means by her incessant shower of innumerable atoms.
If someone were to ask you later what you've been doing for the last half hour,
you'd say you've been focused on a lecture about Proust.
So much of what has really happened, what you really experienced during that half hour,
would already have been intellectualized, abstracted, and eliminated.
And so the final report would be very unlike the actual experience.
And this is what Proust and Joyce and Wolf and all other writers at the beginning of the century were trying to get into their fiction.
They were trying to get into it the freshness of experience as it happens,
not the intellectualized, prepackaged, pigeon-holed version that realist novels deliver to us.
Wallace Fowley in a book on Proust says this about that aspect of Proust's work.
Proust believed that so-called realistic art gave only the outlines of existence, the surface of things.
True reality, which the true artist must uncover, resides in the objects and within the characters realistically described.
Objects are signs whose meaning may be discovered by the artist.
The artist's perception of the material world and human experience is far different from the perceptions of the ordinary man.
For Proust, the artist is one who constantly asks himself, what is our true life?
From time to time, life brings us by chance, a kind of happiness which is a memory of the past.
Our conscious intelligence envelops our daily life with so many cliches,
with so many mechanical responses that for the most part we are completely oblivious to our own real life.
Under these cliches and behind these usual responses, real life goes on,
and that life Proust took upon himself to explore and illuminate.
Proust's protagonist discovers this inner life in the Madeline episode.
It will take him 3,000 pages and 50 years of life to learn how to manage these brief and unexpected moments of involuntary recall
and then figure out how to incorporate them into a work of art that will be his own recovery of lost time.
And this doesn't happen until the very last chapter of the book.
But the implications of Proust's method redefine the modern novel and make him perhaps the most important and influential figure in the history of modern literature.
The novel after Proust can never be the same again.
And so with Proust we are launched into modern fiction.
In our next lecture we will look at another extraordinarily innovative writer, James Joyce,
who was working on his first stories about Dublin while Proust was beginning his great novel in Paris.
Joyce was actually in Paris at some of the same time, although neither one at the time knew what the other one was doing.
But between the two of them they were forging new paths for 20th century fiction,
paths that will be followed in one way or another by all of the writers in the next 12 lectures of our course.
