Lecture 7 – Greek Tragedy
In this lecture, we will be visiting the world of Greek tragedy, which will allow us really
to work on two themes that we've been working on in this first unit.
We'll keep going on the theme of heroism, which we've been much concerned with over
the first lectures, but this will also give us a chance to talk about the relationship
between gods and humans, which has been a kind of sub-theme of much of this first unit.
The origins of Greek theater are treated in other teaching company courses, and so I'm
not going to say very much about that, except to say that by the 5th century BCE, there
is a fully developed theater in Athens, which features the two kinds of plays which would
remain standard in western drama up until the time of Ibsen, that is comedy and tragedy.
We're going to be dealing in this lecture only with tragedy, which we can define fairly
simply as a play in verse dealing with characters of significance, dealing with serious issues,
which generally but not always leads a protagonist from happiness to unhappiness.
As we'll notice, the first plays that we'll look at in this lecture, or Escalus' Orestia,
ends happily so that it isn't absolutely necessary that the plays end unhappily, although many
of them do.
Socrates said, or is supposed to have said, that the unexamined life is not worth living,
and it has always seemed to me that one of the ways in which the Athenians went about
examining their lives, particularly in terms of religious questions, was to do it in the
theater.
There are so many plays that deal in one way or another with the relationship between
gods and humans that it seems worth our while to spend this lecture talking about that theme,
and while we're at it, we'll also get to say another word or two about heroes because
the question of heroes goes on from the Greek epics on into a Greek drama.
The first great playwright of the three who have survived and come down to us is Escalus.
When we have some dates for him, he was born about 524 and he died about 456 BC.
He was a veteran of the Battle of Marathon, and he lived through the first great flowering
of the Age of Athens.
He is the most conservative of the three playwrights.
He's the most deeply religious, and he's the most patriotic.
He's also the greatest poet of the three.
His poetry has frequently been compared to that of Shakespeare.
His most famous work, his most famous surviving work is a trilogy, which was a set of three
connected plays that were designed to be performed in sequence.
The three of them together are called the Orestia, which is based on the myth of the
House of Atreus, which dates back to about the time of the Trojan War.
In fact, the events in Escalus' plays take place right after the Trojan War.
This was standard practice for Tragedians in this time and place, was to take old stories
and then reinterpret them for contemporary audiences dealing with contemporary problems.
The trilogy of Escalus is composed around a series of very difficult, if not impossible,
choices.
Agamemnon is the title of the first play, and in that first play, Agamemnon comes home
from the Trojan War of victorious general.
He has won the Trojan War, and then the first night that he's home, he is killed by his
wife and Caudamnestra and her lover Agisthus on his first night home.
She kills him because years earlier, ten years earlier, when Agamemnon was ready to sail
for Troy, he had been forced to sacrifice their daughter, Iphigenea, to appease Artemis
so that she would allow the winds to blow so that his great armada of one thousand black
ships could sail to Troy.
So the background of the story already contains one really impossible choice.
Agamemnon is the leader of this army.
The expedition has been sanctioned by Zeus, and he is under a lot of public pressure to
do what has to be done to allow that army to get on the move.
But to kill one's daughter is equally profound violation of law and of the will of the gods.
And so what you have is you have a situation in which Agamemnon is forced to choose between
his public and his private responsibilities between his army and his family, between Zeus
and Artemis.
This is a situation that can and does occur in polytheistic religions.
We would probably, if we were to rewrite this story, we would perhaps rewrite the story
in psychological terms rather than mythological ones, but the situation is real enough and
profound enough.
As Agamemnon says at the time, there is no right choice here, and I am going to be doomed
whichever way I choose, so that what you have is you have a very difficult choice with a
god standing on as sanctioning one action, a god standing sanctioning another action,
and you have to make a choice and then be willing to take the penalty whatever that penalty
happens to be.
In the second play in this sequence, it's called the Libation Bearers, the terrible
choice of Agamemnon is passed on to that of his son, Orestes.
Apollo, whose concern is the state, is appalled that a king should have been killed and he
demands that Orestes avenge his father's death, but avenging his father's death would mean
killing his mother, and the Furies whose special concern is avenging the deaths of murder,
the murders of blood relations, the Furies say, if you kill your mother, you are committing
the worst crime imaginable.
Once again, like his father, Orestes is doomed whatever he chooses, whichever way he goes.
In the end, he chooses to kill his mother and her lover, and at the play's end, at
the end of the second play in the sequence, the Furies have moved in to take their revenge.
For Escalus in the third play, which is called the Humanities, there turns out to be a way
out.
Apollo sends Orestes to Athens and asks Athena to arbitrate, to arbitrate between him and
the Furies.
There is a court trial, an actual jury court trial that takes place in this third play in
which Apollo is the defense attorney and the Furies are the prosecuting attorneys, and
Athena presides over a jury made up of Orestes peers.
The vote is a hung jury, and the jury cannot decide one way or the other, and that means
that Athena, as judge, casts her vote in favor of acquittal, and Orestes goes free.
The play is important and profound and interesting for a lot of reasons.
It celebrates that moment in history for Escalus when the law of Vendetta changes to
a rule of law, of court law, and communal justice.
The rule of Vendetta says that if I kill one of your relatives, you have to kill one of
mine and then I have to kill one of yours, and leaving justice in private hands, operating
by the law of Vendetta, there's no way that this was ever going to stop.
It can go on forever.
The idea is that if you take punishment and have it meted out by the state, not by the
individual, you can take into account circumstances, you can take into account situations, and
then it will be the state and not individuals who will be handing out the punishment, and
then the punishment stops here.
One punishment takes care of it.
So Escalus sees this as one of the great steps forward in civilization when we move from
the law of Vendetta to the law of court justice.
And Escalus also sees in these plays, he also sees this as evidence of the way that Zeus
leads human beings through suffering into truth.
Part of the idea of this play is that Zeus is guiding all of this, and in some profound
way, Zeus is helping humankind make these steps up and forward into civilization.
And it's in this way that Escalus is usually considered to be not only the most patriotic,
but the most religious of the three dramatists.
Sophocles was 28 years younger than Escalus, and he lived during virtually all of the fifth
century.
He was born about six years before the Battle of Marathon, and he died two years after the
end of the disastrous Peloponnesian War, so that he got to live through both the best
and the worst of the Golden Age of Athens.
He also, like Escalus, played important parts in public life, and he held many offices.
And based on the number of prizes that he won, he was the most popular and successful
of the three dramatists.
In his plays, he expresses a good deal more skepticism than Escalus does regarding the
participation of the gods in human life and their concern for human beings and for human
morality.
Sophocles never doubts the existence of the gods.
They're there, he's sure of that.
Nor does he deny that they should be reverenced, but he doesn't find that they provide much
support for human morality or human conduct.
Rather, human beings are pretty much on their own for these things and have to invent their
own standards, their own rules, their own ways to behave.
The gods don't help them much in this.
In his play Antigone, the protagonist is forced to make another of those difficult choices.
Dramatists love these situations in which you have to make a choice like this.
She has to choose between loyalty to the state on the one hand and loyalty to her family
on the other.
And once again, as with Eggamemnon and Orestes, there are sanctions on both sides of the question.
The situation is that two brothers have died in the same battle.
The one has died defending Thebes and the other one attacking it.
King Creeon has decreed that the enemy brother not be given proper burial.
The one who was fought and died defending the city is supposed to be given a hero's
burial, but the one who died attacking it is supposed to be left for carrion dogs and
birds to devour.
Now Antigone knows on some level that the gods insist on a proper burial, especially
for family members.
So she has to decide whether to obey the state or to obey her loyalty to her family.
And she chooses family over state by burying her brother.
She gets caught, she's imprisoned, and she's put into prison with just not quite enough
bread and water to live on, and so the state anticipates her starving to death, which she
anticipates by committing suicide.
The gods whose wills and whose laws Antigone is presumably defending here are remarkably
silent until too late.
After everything is done, after everything is decided to racists, the augury shows up
and says his birds have suggested that Creeon is making a mistake.
This is a bad policy, but by that time it's all too late.
Creeon is also punished in this play, but he's not punished by the gods, but he's
punished by the consequences of his own action.
His son was engaged to Antigone, and when he finds out that Antigone has killed herself,
he kills himself.
His wife, when he finds out that her son has killed himself, she kills herself.
So that by the end of the play, Creeon has been severely punished, but he's not punished
by anything the gods have intervened on, he's being punished simply by the consequences
of his own actions.
And this is pretty much the way Sophocles works throughout his plays.
He doesn't believe that the gods really interfere very much or care very much or are very much
involved in day-to-day activities of human beings, and especially we can't expect them
to validate or to help us make right choices, even if we're making choices on their behalf.
Moses Hadas in a book called Introduction to Classical Drama suggests that in Greek
thought, because the Greek gods looked like us and behaved like us, we might think that
they cared about us.
But he also suggests, reminds us that the gods are ageless and immortal, and hence are
stunningly remote from human concerns.
As the Epicureans would say later, I think we quoted this one in an earlier lecture,
if the gods had to keep books on men's doings, what would be the advantage of being a god?
Humans in Sophocles plays have to do the best they can in a universe where the gods are
part of the furniture, but humans can also have no real expectation that the gods will
help us in things that are really important to us.
This is a quotation from Moses Hadas on this subject.
The spheres of the human and the divine are kept apart.
When man behaves correctly as man and is then tripped up by forces he cannot control or
understand we have tragedy.
The usual interpretations of many tragedies, that of Oedipus for example, as we shall see,
is that they show divine retribution for sin.
Oedipus' punishment like that of other tragic heroes is unfair by human standards.
He was not aware that he was committing crime, and his own conduct by human standards was
admirable.
If anyone is to blame it is Apollo who contrived the sin.
But Apollo cannot be blamed for gods and men operate by different kinds of arithmetic.
What Sophocles' play shows us is not that Oedipus was a bad man, but that he is a hero.
So what we see here is we see we've moved a step away from Escalus' vision, and Escalus'
play Athena and Apollo both show up to participate in the human drama because they care what
happens to Orestes, and both make clear that they are here because they are carrying out
the will of Zeus who has a vision of human progress.
In Sophocles the gods don't appear, and their existence if they do anything generally complicates
things for humans who have to do what they think is right without expecting any help
from the gods, who have their own concerns, and can't really be expected to pay much
attention to creatures whose lives compared to their own are so pitifully short.
The third dramatist who takes the next step in this discussion that's going on among
Greek tragedians is Euripides.
He was the youngest, he was 16 years younger than Sophocles, and his plays feel, although
they're really very close in time to the other two, they feel like they come from an entirely
different generation.
He seems to most modern readers the most modern of the three playwrights.
He also was by everything we know about him the most private of the three men, unlike
the earlier two who had held a lot of public offices, he seems to have spent most of his
time in his library, which was by all accounts a very beautiful and vast one.
He was the least popular as a dramatist in his own lifetime, but he became extremely
popular after his death, and as time has passed he's gained in stature relative to the other
two dramatists.
And he is, in terms of our question about relationships between gods and humans, he
is the most skeptical of the existence, the very existence of the gods.
Euripides was influenced by the Sophists who were a group of teachers in Athens who taught
their students how to argue on both sides of a question.
In the process of teaching them how to argue on either side of a question, they encouraged
a kind of relativistic point of view that led eventually to a denial of any kind of absolute
standards or points of reference outside the individual.
Protagoras was a Sophist, and he argued that man is the measure of all things, man is the
measure of all things, not nature, not the cosmos, not the gods, man is the measure of
all things.
What he really meant by that is, a man is the measure of all things.
So if it tastes bitter to me, or it feels good to me, or it looks good to me, then there's
really nothing outside myself that I can appeal to for verification of that.
That skepticism, once it was introduced, could be extended everywhere.
It could extend to morality, to ideas of justice, to the nature of the gods themselves.
Euripides plays turn out to be full of characters who wonder whether the gods even exist at
all.
The chorus in a play called Hippolytus, for example, says this.
To think that the gods care for man is a comforting thought, comforting to think that all is well,
everything in place, that there is something to believe in.
But when I look at man, when I study his fate, his fortune, his well-being and happiness,
when I try to understand and strive to discover a rational order of things, my mind fails,
grows dim, for all I see is chaos and injustice, and the swiftly alternating currents of reality,
the ever-changing instability of being.
And there is a character called Telphibius in a play called Hecuba, and he says this.
Do you care, Zeus?
Do you watch over men?
Or is yours a false reputation?
It's assuming the gods exist, and chance governs human concerns.
Euripides plays are full of characters who raise these questions, who ask these really
difficult questions about the very existence of the gods.
The play that we're going to take a brief look at here of Euripides is Medea, and Medea
is really a play which is made up out of this kind of skepticism.
The Medea story is a tale piece to the story of Jason and the Argonauts, like the stories
of Arestes and the story of Antigone.
This one is drawn from ancient Greek myth.
Its time period would have been set about a generation before the Trojan War.
Jason, as you remember, went to Colchis in Asia Minor in quest of the Golden Fleece.
Medea was the daughter of the king, and she not only betrayed her father, but arranged
to have her brother killed as a way of helping Jason win the fleece and escaping then from
her father.
And so what she does in the process of helping Jason is she winds up cutting herself off
from her past.
She can never go home again.
There is no place for her to go back to.
When the play opens, when Euripides plays opens, she and Jason are living as kind of aristocratic
refugees in Corinth.
They have two sons.
They've had two sons over the years.
And everything seems all right until Jason comes home one day and tells her that he is
planning to marry the king of Corinth's daughter, which he can do, since by Athenian law at
the time that Euripides wrote this play, a marriage between Jason and Medea would not
have been legal because she is a foreigner, because she isn't Athenian, so that in a way
he's doing exactly what's within his rights, he's doing what's legally right, despite the
fact that they have lived together for many years, they have had two sons together.
He owes her a considerable debt and she has no place to run to.
She has no place to go.
And she's in a really, really difficult spot.
She has no rights as a non-citizen.
She has no rights as a woman.
And she's being set aside by a man for whom she's given up everything.
And so that's the situation at the beginning of the play.
She tries every method she can to talk Jason out of this marriage, which he keeps insisting
he's doing not just for himself, but for her and the children, because he will be
well set up to take care of her and the children once this marriage takes place.
She tries to talk him out of it, and when all of that fails, then she sends a poison
tiara and a poison gown to the princess, whom Jason is supposed to marry, and when
she tries it on, it kills both her and her father when he tries to help her.
Then she comes home, she waits just before Jason gets to the house to tell her that the
princess is dead and to find out what's going on.
She kills their two children, and then she escapes in a chariot, which was provided
her by the sun god Helius, who happens to be her grandfather.
Jason, as he watches her sailing off in the chariot up into the sky, can only sit on the
ground, curse her, and shake his fist at her.
His life totally enshambles, an absolute ruin at this point.
The play is, of course, subversive in a lot of ways.
It's a small wonder that Euripides won less prizes than anybody else during his own lifetime.
It is, first of all, it is an attack on Athenian smugness about foreigners.
It is also an attack on the smugness of Athenian men about women.
In the middle of the play, Medea makes an impassioned speech about how hard it is to
be a woman in the best of circumstances, and for her it's even worse because she's
a foreigner and because she has no place to run.
That speech, by the way, in Gilbert Murray's translation, which begins, a read most bruised
is woman, became an anthem in the last century for the suffragette movement, so that one
has an interesting history all by itself.
Jason thinks that even if he dumps her, that she's gotten more than she deserved out of
this bargain, because he says after all, we took you out of this barbarous Asia minor
where you lived and you got to live among Greeks for a while.
How lucky for you.
In a way, he thinks that he's paid her off, that somehow he's really not under any obligation
to her anymore.
It would be interesting to have been in that first audience to hear how the men in that
audience understood and heard these speeches, because it's clear that they would have shared
a lot of the assumptions he makes in the speeches.
Eilhart Schlesinger says in an essay about this play that the same conflict that we have
here showed up in book 6 of the Iliad in that conversation between Hector and Andromache
that we talked about when we talked about the Iliad.
As he said, Jason's set of values include he wants to live well, he wants to have status,
he wants to have honor, and he wants to have children to perpetuate his name.
For him, relationships are simply means to an end.
It makes sense for him to dump Medea, to marry the princess, and take care of everybody
and live happily ever after, and he can't understand why Medea can't see it that way.
For Medea, on the other hand, Jason and their relationship is everything, for which she
has sacrificed everything else.
When Jason asks her at the end, and really sarcastically, he said, was it love that
made you kill your own children?
She says, is love so small a pain, do you think, for a woman?
So it's subversive in that way.
The play is also subversive in making Medea into a really powerful, masculine-type tragic
hero who's given the same kind of treatment that Achilles or Hector received in earlier
Greek literature.
She's given the similes of storms and lionesses and bears and the raging sea, and like Achilles,
she is absolutely driven by fear of being shamed, of losing face.
She tells the chorus at one point why she's doing what she's doing, and she says, friends,
the laughter of my enemies is unendurable.
Let there be no mistake, I am not a weak woman, not submissive, a cipher, a contemptible nothing.
Quite the contrary, an enemy to my enemies and a friend to friends.
Those who live such lives, live lives of glory.
Like Hector, she turns out to be willing to sacrifice her family who turns, he's willing
to fast sacrifice his family and his city.
She is willing to sacrifice her children.
Achilles was willing to sacrifice the Achaean army not to lose face.
She is willing to sacrifice her children.
Odysseus was willing to lose boatloads of men on his way home in order to gain honor.
She is willing to sacrifice her children to do the same.
Her anger is as vast as that of Achilles.
It is as powerful as that of Achilles.
It is so big and so vast that it feels to her like a force coming to her from outside.
And there's one point in the play when she even actually has a debate with her own anger.
And like the anger of Achilles, it carries her away, making her something both more and
less than human at the same time.
Finally, the play is absolutely subversive in suggesting that the gods themselves are
simply personifications of the most powerful forces in nature and the most powerful of
human passions.
In this play, Medea becomes a deity.
The Greeks had machinery in their theater which allowed a chariot or a machinery to
come down and bring a god down onto the stage to fix problems.
And sometimes you needed to have a god come down and solve whatever was happening in the
play.
Euripides used that device called Deus ex machina, god out of the machine, used that
device more often than any other playwright did.
This is really the opposite of that because what happens instead of bringing a god down
onto the stage, this one carries Medea up into the sky.
She becomes a deity.
And so what happens is that passion for revenge has become so big, so vast that it becomes
a god in this play.
Euripides says, where do gods come from?
Where do we get our gods from in the first place?
And he says, the answer is we take the most powerful forces in nature and the most powerful
human passions and then we anthropomorphize them and then we honor them as gods.
The sea becomes Poseidon, the lust for war becomes Ares, sexual passion becomes Aphrodite.
The advantage of doing this, of course, is that once we have taken those things from inside
ourselves and externalized them, made them into something else, we can blame somebody
else for what we're doing because it is somebody else that made me do it, is my anger, is my
wrath, it is Aphrodite who made me do it.
There's a really interesting exchange that happens between Helen and Hecuba in the play
Hecuba, where Hecuba is attacking Helen for running away with Paris and starting the whole
Trojan War in the first place.
Helen says, it wasn't my fault, Aphrodite made me do it.
I was carried away by this outside passion for love that didn't give me any choice in
the matter.
Hecuba says an answer is very Euripidaean and this comes very close to what happens
in Medea.
She says, no, Paris was an extremely handsome man.
One look and your appetite became your Aphrodite.
Why?
Men's lawless lusts are all called love.
It's a confusion easily made.
And so that's the Euripidaean take on the gods.
Euripidaean's passion is so big and so vast that it kills her humanity, obviously.
Her humanity has to be killed in order for her to kill her own children.
But in the process of that vast passion, that vast rage, that vast anger, it also becomes
big enough to become a Euripidaean goddess.
One of the passions, one of the blind instincts, one of the great lunacies that permeate our
world and Euripidae says that's who our gods are, that's where they come from.
If there are gods that all Euripidaeans suggest, they behave pretty much the way Sophocles
showed them.
The sun god lends his chariot to Medea not because he endorses what she's done, killing
a princess, killing a king, killing her own children.
He isn't endorsing that.
He's lending her a chariot because she's his granddaughter.
And so as Hadas reminds us, the gods do what they want and we can't expect them to help
us do the right thing because they've got concerns of their own.
So where Escalus shows the gods participating in human life and working towards some greater
good, where Sophocles sees them as simply part of the furniture of the universe, which
one has to try to reverence and try not to irritate if one can help it, Euripidae sees
them as the anthropomorphic projections of our own most uncontrollable lusts.
And in this way, tragedy in Athenian golden age could really be part of the examined life,
raising questions and debating current issues in the intellectual life of the city.
What I think is really interesting about these positions, positions taken by, first of all,
by Escalus and then by Sophocles and then by Euripides, are positions about religion
and about the gods, which are going to recur again down through history.
The Renaissance is going to go through these same three positions all over again, rediscovering,
reinventing, going through these same steps so that in this way, as in so many other ways,
our cognitive life, our religious life, our life of thought follows in the footsteps of
the Greeks.
In our next program, we will jump ahead several hundred years to Rome and we will find there
in Rome, we will find the most careful reader that the Iliad and the Odyssey ever had.
Virgil was a great student of the Iliad and the Odyssey.
We have to believe that he had those poems virtually memorized so that when he, at the
end of the first century, was given a kind of commission from Caesar Augustus to write
a national epic for Rome that would balance, parallel, contrast, stand beside the great
epic poems of Greece, and he wrote his Aeneid, he incorporated so much of Homer, so much
of the Iliad and so much of the Odyssey into his own epic that if you get a really good
footnoted version of it, which does indicate and remind you of all the different places,
there are hundreds and hundreds of places where you can see Virgil simply lifting things
out and putting them to his own poems.
But as we'll also discover, one of the things that people have said about Romans down through
history is the fact that they never simply adopted, they also adapted what they adopted.
What Virgil is going to do is he's going to take all this Homeric material and in the
process of rewriting this for Roman use, he is going to give us yet one more new definition
of hero in our course, and we will see by the time we take our look at Virgil's Aeneid,
we will be able to see what some of the really most profound and interesting differences are
between the Greek conception of hero and the Roman conception of hero and how those two
conceptions of heroism play their way down through history.
That's our next lecture.
