In our last lecture, we did a brief digression off into the poetry of Emily Dickinson.
In this one, we're back to realism again, which we've been in the middle of for the
last several lectures.
This time, however, we're not going to be talking about realism in fiction, which we've
been talking about so far, but realism in drama.
And we're going to talk about the two dramatists, Ibsen and Chekhov, who more than any other
dramatist brought the realist rubrics into drama, in the process creating not only modern
drama, but also stimulating a lot of the reactions against realism, which we're going
to see later on in the 20th century.
Just to remind you of where we have been in terms of understanding what realism is
in fiction, we've said and we've learned in the works that we've looked at in the last
lectures that realism in fiction meant a kind of faithful representation of contemporary
life.
It included a rejection of romantic idealism and subjectivity and exoticism, and it included
an inclusiveness that incorporates the low and the mean and the disgusting into a faithful
depiction of life, and included critical attitudes toward the middle class values and matters
of attitudes.
The earlier realists had stressed the importance of the environment in shaping the individual.
This really gets to be stronger by the time we get to realist drama, because by the time
we get to realist drama, Charles Darwin had published his Origin of Species in 1859, in
which he had argued the thesis of that book, of course, is that it is adaptation to environment
that causes change over time.
What this is going to do is for the later realists, both in fiction and in drama, is
going to provide them with a reason for putting even additional emphasis on environment than
they had done in their earlier works.
If we take those same realist tenets that we've looked at in fiction and apply them
to drama, we get pretty much the same list of virtues.
We get in drama an attempt to do a faithful depiction of the contemporary world, which
means particularly a focus on the middle class, which is now the dominant class in this period.
It means a kind of ruthless objectivity about subject matter.
Again, the dramatist is going to try to mimic the stance of the scientist in a laboratory
in the same way that fiction writers had attempted to do the same things, and an additional emphasis
here on the shaping power of the environment.
Along with these values, there came in drama some new stage techniques.
The proscenium art stage became the normative stage in theater.
Proscenium art stage is one that has an opening at the front from which the curtain hangs,
and then inside of that opening there is a box set, and so that the proscenium arch really
functions as an invisible fourth wall.
The actors pretend that it is really a wall.
We are kind of overlooking.
We become voyeurs looking in on their lives which are lived inside that box set.
There are no more asides or soliloquies in realist drama.
Actors pretend that we're not out there in the dark watching them.
They pretend that they're simply living their lives, and we are overlooking.
We are overseeing what they do and what they say.
All the action in realist drama has to be plausible for its place and its characters,
and all the exposition has to be motivated in some kind of way.
Exposition is, of course, what we need to know about the drama in order to understand
what's happening, and it has to be motivated, and by now we're familiar with a lot of the
techniques that the realist dramatist invented to motivate exposition.
We're familiar with the kind of play in which a maid will be dusting and then some visitor
will come to the house and the maid will explain to the visitor all the things that have happened
in the last six months or something in the process of explaining to the character also
explaining to us what we need to know, or a friend might show up, an old school friend
may show up in the middle of the play who needs to be caught up on what's going on,
and some character will catch him or her up, and that will catch us up, too, give us the
exposition.
The stage sets themselves will be meticulous recreations of middle-class drawing rooms,
and these are meticulous down to the point of including accurate bric-a-brac on the shelves
and the wallpaper and the pictures on the walls so that these internal sets are designed
to look as much like a real Victorian drawing room as it's possible to recreate on the stage.
Henrik Ibsen was the father of this kind of drama, and hence of the father in a way of
modern drama generally.
He recreated himself as a realist writer in exile.
He self-exiled himself from Norway and spent a lot of his time in Italy and Germany, and
while he was there, he changed from the kind of plays that he had begun writing early in
his career to the things that were going to characterize his later career in which are
going to become the foundations of realist drama.
In 1877, he wrote a play called The Pillars of Society.
Then he wrote A Doll's House in 1879, and he wrote Ghosts in 1881.
When he first wrote these plays, no respectable theater would touch them because they all
attacked the great pillars of middle-class life, marriage and family, and the church
which are all portrayed in Ibsen's realist drama as oppressive and hypocritical and which
crushed the lives of the individuals who try to live inside them.
Slowly, little tiny avant-garde theaters sprang up, many of them sprang up in order
precisely to do the kind of plays that Ibsen was writing, and when they caught on and
when people started being interested in these kinds of plays, mainstream theaters eventually
adopted these and tried them out as well.
Like any new innovation in art anywhere, Ibsen had to create his own audience.
When he first started writing his plays, there was no audience for his plays.
He had to create the audience as he wrote his plays.
It took a long time, and it's telling that the first production of Ghosts occurred not
anywhere in Europe, but in a little tiny theater in Chicago and was put on by a Norwegian club,
and these were people who were very proud to have a Norwegian playwright in their midst.
The Doll's House may not be Ibsen's best play, but it's maybe his best known, and it
perfectly illustrates the kind of things we've been talking about.
It's about a woman who comes to see that her husband and her father before her husband
never took her seriously as a human being.
She's always been a doll in somebody's doll's house.
At the end of the play, to the shock of everyone in 1879, Nora Helmer leaves her husband and
her children to try to discover herself as a person, and this, of course, stunned audiences
everywhere.
This is why respectable theaters for a long time wouldn't touch this play.
As part of the final exchange it goes on between the husband and wife, they say this to each
other.
He's just been talking to her about what her sacred duty is as a wife and mother, and
she says, I have another duty just as sacred, and he says nonsense.
What duty do you mean?
And she says, my duty towards myself.
And he says, remember, before all else you are a wife and mother.
And she says, I don't believe that anymore.
I believe that before all else I am a human being, just as you are, or at least that I
should try and become one.
That was really stunning in 1879.
Years later, the Norwegian Society for Women's Rights had their annual banquet, and at that
annual banquet they honored Ibsen as the man who, in their lifetime, had done more
for women's rights than any other man, and they gave him a toast, and they said, thank
you to all the work you've done for women's rights.
And then when he had a chance to respond to the toast, here is part of what he said.
He said, I have been more of a poet and less of a social philosopher than people generally
seem inclined to believe.
I thank you for your good wishes, but I must decline the honor of being said to have worked
for the women's rights movement.
I am not even very sure what women's rights actually are.
I think that when Ibsen said this, he was being his brutally honest self, because his
concern throughout all of his plays were not women's rights, nor even men's rights, but
they were always human rights.
And his plays are all about what he called the dead hand of the past, the dead hand of
the past in the form of tradition and custom and convention and the notions of respectability
and all those things which come down from the past and which stifle and kill the present.
In this play, Torvald, Nora's husband, is as much a victim as she is.
Both of them believe that marriage and gender rules are fixed and are immutable and are
what society has taught them that they are.
For Ibsen, this is part of the pressure that environment always exerts on individuals.
It makes them what they are, just as surely as the physical environment does for Darwin
species.
The environmental pressures in Ibsen's plays are always symbolized on his stage by those
overstuffed chairs and those overheated Victorian drawing rooms that have too much furniture
in them and they smell, as Henry James said, of spiritual paraffin, just exerting an enormous
pressure on the individuals who have to live in those rooms.
A few years ago I saw a production in which the setting was 1950s America, the age of
crinolines, petticoats and blonde furniture and ranch houses and Ozzie and Harriet and
Father Knows Best.
The set worked depressingly well, suggesting how little progress had been made in gender
relations in the 80 years between a doll's house and I Love Lucy, but at the back of
that set there was a plan, a board that had honored a plan of a ranch house, probably
the ranch house in which the Torvalds live.
In the end of the play, when Nora leaves Torvald, the house that plan splits into and allows
her to walk backstage off the set.
It's suggested, and I think Ibsen would have approved of this because it's perfect in illustrating
what happens.
It suggests the ways in which both husband and wife are trapped by the house and what
it represents.
It has to be broken in half and to allow Nora to escape from her doll's house.
As Ibsen got older, like Mark Twain, he became more skeptical of human ability to transcend
environment and training.
As he saw it as he got older, the past always lays its deadly hand on the present and always
blights and destroys the people who have to live in it.
He said later in his life that if he had been God at the time of Noah's Ark, he would
have torpedoed the Ark and started all over again.
Presumably that's the only way you can escape the weight of the past and make a fresh start.
In this play, however, early, this is early, early Ibsen, in this play he still believes
in the possibility of Nora's gesture, which is what made it such a powerful play for women
and made it so shocking for the rest of Europe when it was first produced.
Now, Ibsen created modern drama by changing its content.
He used the stage to reflect modern problems, and he included things like the oppression
of women, corrupt politics and journalism, even venereal disease made its way onto his
stage.
But he kept the form of drama pretty much as he had found it.
He was using the formula of the so-called well-made play, which was being used all over Europe
at the time.
The well-made play starts with a late point of attack just before the crisis.
And then as the play moves forward, the background is filled in, stuff that we need to know,
which explains the climax so that the last piece of information is filled in just before
we get to the climactic moment, and it helps to explain that climax when it happens.
The Dolls House opens, the Dolls House works in precisely this way.
The Dolls House opens on the day before the Torval's annual Christmas party, at which
Nora always dances the tarantella in a magnificent costume.
We can tell from the very beginning of the play that she's edgy, she's nervous, she's
worried, and as the background is filled in, as we move forward in the play, we find out
why.
Years ago it turns out she had forged her father's signature on a loan document to get
money for a southern vacation for herself in Torvald, who was in the midst of a physical
and emotional breakdown.
Her father was dying, and she was unlucky enough to have forged his signature after he had
in fact died, which is known to Krogstad, who is an employee at the bank where Torvald
has just been named the manager.
Ever since then, Krogstad has been blackmailing Nora, and now Torvald is planning to fire
Krogstad, who puts pressure on Nora to make sure that she puts pressure on her husband
to allow him to keep his job.
There's lots of plot in here, but we know that we're heading for that climactic moment
after the Christmas party, when Krogstad will leave a letter in the helmer's mailbox, which
will explain everything.
After the party, Torvald, having watched Nora dance her terrantella, is full of desire
for her.
It always turns him on to watch her dance her terrantella, and he always looks forward
to making love with her after the Christmas party.
This motif, by the way, of the husband desiring a wife who has an entirely different agenda,
will be used again in one of our future lectures by one of the great absent admirers in Ireland,
James Joyce, in a story called The Dead.
So instead of making love, Krogstad's letter forces the helmers to have the first real
discussion that they've had in years, and it ends with Nora walking out on her husband
and children to find herself.
In all of these ways, it's still, in terms of format, it is still a well-made play.
So what Ibsen really did is he revolutionized the content of drama, but he left the form
pretty much intact.
It has great curtain lines, it's a tightly organized cause-effect plot, it has a tidy
and beginning, middle, and end.
And there's an ultimate revelation at the end of a long, hidden secret that finally
comes to the surface, which causes the climax and which has to be dealt with in some way
or other.
For modern audiences, sometimes Ibsen's plays look a little creaky, a little too full of
coincidence, a little too theatrical to be entirely lifelike.
And the reason why they look like that to most modern audiences is because of the other
playwright we want to talk about in this lecture, and that is Anton Chekhov.
Chekhov completed the realist revolution in drama by making the form of drama match
its content by bringing it as close to the texture of ordinary life as theater can get.
For Chekhov, Ibsen's plays would have violated a sense of life likeness by their artificiality,
by their reliance on stage formulae, which force life into their patterns rather than
adapting the form to the patterns of life.
As far as Chekhov is concerned, the entire history of western drama had done this, always
distorting life to make it match theater patterns.
From Aristotle onwards, for example, there had only been two kinds of plays available
in western drama, comedy and tragedy.
The one usually ends in marriage, the other one usually ends in death, and everything
that got put on stage had to be fitted into one or the other of these two containers.
Our own lives Chekhov suggested aren't very much like this.
There are a lot of days on which we neither get married nor die, but we just go on doing
whatever we happen to be doing.
We don't usually get a curtain after we've gotten off a good line.
It's rare in our lives that we get off a really great line, but it never happens that
once we've gotten off a great line in conversation, a curtain falls to underline that for us.
We don't usually die in meaningful ways, rather we wind up living our lives in a kind
of steady muddle in which crises sometimes overlap and sometimes we live long periods
of boredom and quiet in which nothing seems to happen at all.
The tidy pattern of Ibsen's plays, which are very tidy, is what's missing.
Chekhov wanted somehow to change the pattern of drama to make it more like life.
This is one of the things that Chekhov said about drama.
He said,
The demand is made that the hero and the heroine of a play should be dramatically effective.
But in life, people do not shoot themselves or hang themselves or fall in love or deliver
themselves of clever sayings every minute.
They spend most of their time eating, drinking, running after women or men, talking nonsense.
It is therefore necessary that this should be shown on the stage.
A play ought to be written in which the people should come and go, dine, talk of the weather,
or play cards, not because the author wants it, but because that is what happens in real
life.
Life on the stage should be as it really is, and the people too should be as they are and
not stilted.
What Chekhov was going to do, both in his plays and in his short stories, was to somehow
try to capture this sense of the texture of real life, letting life be the determiner
of form rather than the other way around.
His play, Uncle Vanya, which was first produced in 1900, is a perfect illustration of what
he's been talking about.
Uncle Vanya occurs in a Russian estate somewhere around the turn of the century.
The permanent residents on the estate are Vanya, his niece Sonia, Vanya's mother, an
old man whose nickname is Waffles, and the servants.
Vanya's sister had owned the estate.
It was given to her as a dowry so she could marry a professor.
They've never lived on the estate.
Rather, Vanya has cared for it and sent the money which the estate generated to them for
them to live on.
When Vanya's sister died, her daughter, Sonia, came to live here, and ever since she and
Vanya together have continued to run it, sending the money to the professor and his now new
wife, a beautiful young woman.
The action of the play is precipitated when the professor is forced to retire and decides
to come to the estate to live on it with his new wife, Yelena.
And their presence totally disrupts all the routines on the estate.
The professor, for one thing, stays up till two o'clock in the morning and then he sleeps
till noon, which throws every schedule into chaos.
One of the servants said that the Samovar has to be on all day to meet everyone's needs.
Even worse, Yelena is so beautiful that she awakens longings for a fuller life in both
Vanya and a middle-aged doctor, Dr. Astrov, who frequently visits the estate.
Both of them, in fact, fall in love with Yelena, who's unhappily married to the professor,
but who lacks the courage to leave him or even to have an affair.
Meanwhile, Sonia confesses to Yelena that she has loved Dr. Astrov for a long time, a love
which he not only doesn't return, but he isn't even aware of.
This is a very Chekhovian kind of situation.
You have a whole group of people, each pursuing his own dreams and all of them working at
cross-purposes with each other.
In literature, Chekhov said, there's always a central character.
There's always a Macbeth.
There's always a Faust.
There's always a Tom Jones, around whom all the action revolves.
In life, there is no central character.
There are only individuals pursuing their own goals while bumping into other characters
and their goals.
William Faulkner in Absalom Absalom has a character named Judith Sutpin, who comes
up with a metaphor that I think applies very beautifully to this Chekhov play.
Judith Sutpin says that living is like working in a room on a huge loom where other people
are working on the same rug.
We keep trying to put our own patterns into that rug, but other people keep trying to put
their patterns in too, and every time we get a thread in exactly the right place, someone
else comes along and uses that thread for his or her own purpose.
The threads get tangled up, and no design ever gets completed.
That is what Judith Sutpin is suggesting that, and I think this is what Chekhov is
suggesting too, is life is more an ensemble event than a personal one.
It has no clear-cut hero or heroine.
Each of us probably tries to imagine ourselves as the central character in a novel or play,
but we're always working in rooms full of people, each of whom considers him or herself
to be a central character too.
And that's what Chekhov is after, something more like real life than the artificial shapes
that drama had traditionally forced life into.
Here you have a group of people pursuing their dreams and goals and all working at cross
purposes with each other.
Once when I was teaching this play, I had my students each take one character and pick
out one character and follow him or her through the entire story.
What we discovered is that there isn't a single plot in this play, but there are about five
or six plots, one for each character.
They all bump into each other and bounce off in different directions, like the people in
Judith Sutpin's room with the loom.
The individual plots also cancel each other out.
Dr. Astrov and Vanya are both in love with Yelena, who's already married to the professor,
and she won't change her status, so all three of those plots are bound to wind up in impasse.
Sonya is in love with Dr. Astrov, who doesn't even notice her, in any way he's in love
with Yelena, who won't leave her husband, so their stories are going to end up in impasse
as well.
The climax of this play is precipitated when the professor decides to sell the estate to
invest the money and move with his wife to Finland.
By this time, Vanya is already convinced that the professor is a fraud and an arrogant one
at that, and that he's wasted his whole life in serving this professor.
This is the last straw, because not only does it involve selling the estate, but it would
displace Vanya and his mother and Waffles and Sonya and the servants as well.
So Vanya finds an old pistol and tries to shoot the professor.
He misses the first time, and the second time the gun misfires, and then having failed to
kill a professor, he tries to kill himself.
He steals a vial of morphine from the doctor's bag, but Astrov notices the missing morphine,
and then he and the others talk Vanya into giving it back.
The professor and his wife, who by now know that life is intolerable for them on this
estate, decide to leave.
And when they leave, everything goes back to exactly where it was before they had arrived.
Vanya and Sonya will run the estate and send the money to the professor and his wife, and
at the very end of the play, we see Vanya and Sonya sitting at a table, going over accounts,
and both of them are crying because they know this is their life from here on.
It will never have a chance to change again.
And the same is true for other characters.
The Elena and Astrov will fall back into their old routines, aware that they maybe
had one brief, tiny chance to break out.
One little window opened a little bit, and they didn't take it, or they couldn't take
it at any rate the moment has passed.
Eric Bentley, in a beautiful analysis of this play, in a book called In Search of Theater,
says this about the Chekhovian ending.
He says, in the Greeks, in much French drama and in Ibsen, recognition means the discovery
of a secret which reveals that things are not what all these years they have seemed
to be.
In Uncle Vanya, recognition means that what all these years seem to be so, though one
hesitated to believe it, really is so and will remain so.
This is Vanya's discovery, and gradually, in the course of the ensuing last act, that
of the others.
Thus, Chekhov has created a kind of recognition which is all his own.
In Ibsen, the terrible thing is that the surface of everyday life is a smooth deception.
In Chekhov, the terrible thing is that the surface of everyday life is itself a kind
of tragedy.
In Ibsen, the whole surface of life is suddenly burst by volcanic eruption.
In Chekhov, the crust is all too firm.
The volcanic energies of men have no chance of emerging.
Uncle Vanya opens with a rather rhetorical suggestion that this might be so.
It ends with the knowledge that it certainly is so, a knowledge shared by all the characters
who are capable of knowledge, Astrov, Vanya, Sonja, and Yelena.
This growth from ignorance to knowledge is perhaps our cardinal experience of the play,
the moment of recognition or experimental proof being Vanya's outburst before the shooting.
The point that Bentley is making here is that in this play, we end exactly where we start.
Nothing has changed.
Everybody is back to exactly the same position.
The only thing has changed is that all the characters in it are now aware that nothing
will ever change again.
They have grown in knowledge, they have grown in a kind of awareness, but that awareness
is a sad one.
It's a pessimistic one.
It's one that suggests that the little tiny moment, the little tiny window for change has
passed and it will not return again.
As Bentley is saying, this is uniquely Chekhovian.
This is Chekhov's kind of contribution to drama in that this discovery, this moment,
the climax of the play, entirely internal is all his own.
He finishes up, Bentley finishes up by saying, that Aristotle says that the change from
ignorance to knowledge produces love or hate between the persons destined by the poet for
good or bad fortune.
Nobody's fortune at the end of Uncle Vanya is as good or bad as it might be.
Nobody is very conclusively loving or hating.
Here again, Chekhov is avoiding the black and the white, the tragic and the comic, and
is attempting the half tone, the tragic comic.
This is also Chekhov's vision of life for which his form matches so beautifully.
In his plays, generally no one dies, no one gets paired off.
As George Bernard Shaw, who later on would be a great admirer of both Ibsen and Chekhov,
put it, he says, the curtain no longer comes down on a hero slain or married.
It comes down when the audience has seen enough of the life presented to it and must either
leave the theater or miss the last train.
And so what he's suggesting is there are no big endings in Chekhov.
We have the notion that when a Chekhov play ends, the characters simply move off stage
where their lives go on, and we can speculate about what that life must be like.
Like life itself, his plays have no big climaxes.
Just a series of events which illustrate something in the lives of the characters and then the
curtain falls.
We have to catch our last train, too.
Before we leave this one, I want to suggest that after you've read this, and if you have
no chance to see an Uncle Vanya in a live production, there's a really good film version
of Uncle Vanya called Vanya on 42nd Street.
The screenplay is done by David Mamet, who's a very, very good contemporary dramatist,
stars Wallace Sean and Andre, the same people who were in my dinner with Andre.
The play itself is a rehearsal for a production of Uncle Vanya, so in a kind of post-modernist
way, it makes Uncle Vanya itself a play within a play, since the frame is the rehearsal itself.
But a lot of the play gets done, and it's a very, very nice production of Uncle Vanya.
So if you have no chance to see it anywhere else, I recommend that film to you as a chance
to actually see what Uncle Vanya looks like on stage.
So that's how realism comes to drama.
Ibsen kept the old forms, but he renewed the drama by importing into it stories that he
said he got out of newspapers, the same kind of sensational stories that we saw Dostoevsky
borrowed most of his plots from.
Chekhov changed the form of drama, making it more like ordinary life than the constructions
of traditional drama.
Between them, they created a drama that inspired several generations of great playwrights,
including George Bernard Shaw and Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams and Eugene O'Neill,
among others.
And their achievements, great as they were, were going to stimulate reactions from such
great playwrights as Pirandello and Bertolt Brecht, whose plays we will look at in later
lectures in this course.
What Nora does also, and I think this is also one last little reminder of the realism of
these plays, what Nora does in this play is as revolutionary and as subversive as what
Faust does in his play, what Catherine Earnshaw does in her novel.
But what the realist drama does, as the realist movement does in general, is take these great
cosmic events, these great cosmic gestures, and removes them out of the cosmic and takes
them into a Victorian drawing room.
One of the things that's always touching about watching a doll's house is to notice
that in the corner of the parlor where all of this takes place, the parlor or eventually
Nora will leave her husband, there's a familiar Christmas tree standing in the corner.
It's bringing these great cosmic events and bringing them down to the level of the everyday,
the middle class, the ordinary.
And in response to that heightened psychology of Dostoevsky, which we talked about when we
talked about notes from underground, Chekhov gives us ordinary people living ordinary lives
which bump into each other in ways that Judith Sutpin would understand.
And this in one way is what realism is all about.
In our next lecture, we will be off to India where we will see that movements like realism
don't just happen in France or Russia or America or Norway, but they travel across international
borders to change literature everywhere.
We'll look specifically at the work of the Indian who was the first Asian to win a Nobel
Prize for Literature, Rabindranath Tagore.
That's our next lecture.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
