These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses covered a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spend just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled The History of World Literature, Part 1.
The lecture is Grant L. Vothe, Professor Emeritus in English and Interdisciplinary Studies at
Monterey Peninsula College.
Professor Vothe received his BA in Philosophy and Greek from Concordia Senior College, his
MA in English Education from St. Thomas College, and his PhD in English from Purdue University.
Before joining the faculty at Monterey Peninsula College, Professor Vothe taught at Northern
Illinois University and Virginia Tech.
For several years he was a consultant for the National Endowment for the Humanities
and served as director of an American Institute of Foreign Studies program for a consortium
of California colleges in London.
He has led study tours to England, Ireland, France, Greece, Turkey, and Egypt.
Professor Vothe is the author of more than 30 articles and books on subjects ranging from
Shakespeare to modern American fiction.
He wrote official study guides for many of the plays in the BBC's The Shakespeare Plays
Project.
He is currently a Discovery Series lecturer for the internationally acclaimed Carmel
Bach Festival in Carmel, California.
In addition, Professor Vothe created a series of mediated courses in Literature and Interdisciplinary
Studies for the Bay Area Television Consortium and the Northern California Learning Consortium.
One of these courses won a special Merritt Award from the Western Educational Society
for Telecommunication.
Professor Vothe was the recipient of the first Allen Griffin Award for Excellence in Teaching.
In 1996, he was the student's association teacher of the year.
Professor Vothe prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The course guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical
notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
In ancient Greece, a poet asks his muse to help him remember the story of the anchor
of Achilles and what it cost the Achaean army camped outside the walls of Troy.
In India, a great warrior coming in toward the battle lines in his chariot notices that
many of the enemy on the other side of the battle line are his kinsmen, his teachers,
and his friends, and he tells his chariot driver to stop the chariot and he lays down
his bow and tells the driver that he cannot fight this battle.
In medieval England, a group of pilgrims on the way to Canterbury to visit the shrine
of St. Thomas of Becket decide that they get along well enough that they'll travel together
on the way to and from Canterbury and they'll tell stories to one another, both coming and
going as a way of wiling away the time.
In India, a young woman has to tell a story every night to a king that's interesting enough
that will keep him from cutting off her head the next morning.
In Spain, a middle-aged Hidalgo goes mad from reading too many stories about knights in
shining armor and he decides to become a knight himself even though the age of chivalry has
been over for a very long time.
In China, a Daoist and a Buddhist come upon a stone in which is inscribed a story about
the decline and fall of a once great family and they stop to read it.
In Germany, the greatest scholar of his age sells his soul to the devil in exchange for
infinite human experience.
In pre-Civil War America, a river rat of a boy tells the story about how he and a runaway
slave on a raft floating down the Mississippi try to escape from too much civilization.
In Japan, on a train, on a way to a resort, a man, when the lights go on in the carriage
and turn the windows into mirrors, sees reflected in the window the face of a very beautiful
woman and he sees the landscape behind it going behind her face.
Then at one point, there's a distant light from a mountain which shines directly through
the eye of the reflection in the mirror and he wonders that light makes the eye look exactly
like a star and he wonders what this might possibly mean.
In Russia, in Leningrad, there were a line of 300 women standing outside a prison in
the midst of a cold winter day.
They have been standing here for days and days and the prison door is never open and
one day one woman recognizes another woman in line as a poet and she turns to her and
she says, can you describe this?
And the poet says, yes I can.
And in a little town so sad that it has no name, a professional storyteller one day sits
down in front of an expectant audience, opens his mouth and nothing comes out because his
supply of stories has just dried up.
These are just a few of the first moments in some of the stories we'll be doing together
in this course because while we will be studying the occasional play or the occasional set of
lyric poems, our course will mostly be about stories and storytellers and the ways in which
stories have functioned for people in different times and different places through history.
What we'll discover is that there's never been a time in human history when stories
weren't important even though in different times and places they have signified in very
different ways.
Oscar Wilde in the Decay of Lying says the true social intercourse, communication that
really matters, begins the first day when a caveman doesn't go out with the rest of
his men to go hunting that day and stays home rather and makes up a fantastic and beautiful
story which when they come home at night they can gather around the fire and he can tell
them how he hunted the great megatherium and hunted it into its jasper cave.
What Oscar Wilde also goes on to say in that same book is that that man who made up that
first story is the only person in human history that makes dinner parties tolerable.
He said there's nothing duller than having a dinner party in which everybody sits around
telling the truth and so for him the stories themselves are part of what makes social life
possible.
What Wilde is suggesting of course is that stories can be beautiful and elegant and can
be treasured just for their beauty, for their entertainment value even if they never kill
a woolly mammoth.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez in his 100 Years of Solitude tells a story about the people of
Meccando who were at one time visited by an insomnia plague.
Not only do they stop sleeping but as they go longer and longer without sleep their memories
begin to erode.
They begin to lose track of things and of people and eventually they get to the point
where they have to put notes on things just to remind themselves of what they are, what
they are called, what they are for.
And when it really gets bad they have to start putting names on other people, putting little
tags on other people, remember this is my wife, this is my sister, this is my brother.
They are saved from this insomnia plague and this loss of memory by a gifted gypsy who
helps them to restore their memory.
Later he comes back to write the story of Meccando and in fact that book that he writes
becomes the book that we are reading.
So an essential part of the memory of who we are and where we came from is told in stories
too.
So that if Wilde says entertainment Gabriel Garcia Marquez says memory, stories retain
our memories, help us remember who we are and where we came from.
Chinua Achebe in a book that we'll be doing later on in this course says that his people,
the Ebo people in Nigeria remembered who they were and what their lives were all about by
telling stories and singing songs to each other especially to the children.
When the English move into the village the old stories and songs are either forgotten
or suppressed and people begin to lose their identity and with their identity they lose
their self-respect.
Achebe says there's an old Ebo proverb that says a man who cannot tell where the rain
began to beat him cannot know where he dried his body and what Achebe said is the rain
began to beat on his people when they forgot their stories.
So stories have been around as long as there have been people to tell them and listen to
them but they have served different purposes in different times and places as we will notice
in this course.
The first twelve lectures, the first unit of this course will really be a kind of an epic
unit and it will deal largely with epic poems.
Epic poems are about events and characters larger than life that in some way or another
help to define a people or a culture or a nation.
The Greeks for example saw the Trojan War as a defining event in their history and
the stories about the Trojan War had actually been handed down from generation to generation
for something like four centuries before someone called Homer wrote them down.
The central characters of those great Trojan War stories Achilles and Odysseus were created
as idealized versions of what the Greeks thought of themselves.
So what the Greeks might have said during any of those four hundred years while they
were retelling these stories is that in those days when the Trojan War happened people
may have been bigger than they are now and life may have been more transparent than it
is now but if we understand their stories we know what it means to be Greek and my feeling
is that for about at least six or seven hundred years if you would have asked a Greek what
it meant to be Greek they would have probably told you the story of Achilles or the story
of Odysseus.
The same is true about the Middle Eastern epic of Gilgamesh which is the first and oldest
written piece of literature that we will do in this course which defines what life was
like for the earliest peoples who created civilization and what they thought about themselves and
who they were and what their expectations and their values were.
And it will also be true in this first unit about Virgil's Aeneid who does the same thing
for Rome that Homer had done for Greece.
Beowulf is the last epic poem that we will do in this first unit and Beowulf tells about
those Germanic peoples who overran the Roman Empire when the Roman Empire collapsed and
once again it will tell us what those Germanic peoples thought of themselves, what their
values were, what they looked forward to, what their hopes were, what their expectations
are.
In a slightly different way the religious texts in our first unit of this course which
include the Old Testament and the New Testament and the Bhagavad Gita function in somewhat
the same kind of ways as epic poems do.
All of them will share features of the epic but they will focus more squarely on the way
a people defines itself in relationship to its god or the gods.
That's an element in all epics which always feature gods and goddesses as characters,
Beowulf being the one exception to that rule.
But these religious texts, these specifically religious texts that we'll deal with in the
first unit, define their respective peoples, the Jews, the Christians, the Hindus, in terms
specifically of their relationship to Yahweh, to Jesus, to Vishnu.
And in all of these works, whether they're pure epics or these more or less religious
texts that we're talking about, all of them have in common a more or less official status.
The poets and writers who write these are expressing official views of a people and in some ways
serve as spokespersons for their culture.
The two exceptions in the first unit will occur in Lectures 6 and 12.
In Lecture 6 we're going to be looking at the early literature of China.
The Chinese did not develop an epic tradition nor one that explains life in terms of relationship
to the gods.
Confucius said that he believed in the gods and in heaven but he just didn't know enough
about them to say anything useful.
So he spent his time talking about how to live with each other, how to be good parents,
how to be good children, how to be good magistrates, how to be good subjects, how to be good rulers.
Zhuang Zhou, the other Chinese writer we'll look at in Lecture 6, has a similar focus
as does the one early Chinese poem that we'll take a look at.
It's a poem about ordinary life in the here and now.
At this point, that is, Chinese literature is very different from that of other peoples
and it helps to explain the presence in the first unit of two writers, Confucius and Zhuang
Zhou, who are usually considered more philosophical writers than they are literary writers.
The other exception comes up in the last lecture of this first unit, Lecture 12, which deals
with three amazing collections of Indian stories.
The orientation of one of them is religious, it's a Buddhist collection.
The other two are more or less secular, but all three of them use amazingly complicated
and sophisticated narrative techniques that will provide the transition to our second
and third units the next 24 lectures in this course.
Those next 24 lectures will cover the periods in the Western world that go from the Middle
Ages to the Renaissance to the Enlightenment to the French Revolution to Romanticism to
realism all the way up to about the time of the First World War and we'll talk some
about the corresponding ages in China and Japan and India and the Middle East.
The Indian stories that we'll deal with in Lecture 12 make a transition into a consideration
of narrative strategies, the way writers learn to write stories in more and more complicated
ways.
Dante is really the last writer in our course who can speak for an entire culture, his culture
in this case being medieval Christendom, and his divine comedy is still called an epic.
From here on in our course, writers will speak not for entire cultures or nations, but for
segments of increasingly complex societies.
Murasaki and her tale of Genji will reflect the views of the Japanese court.
Chinese novels will reflect popular culture as opposed to classical court culture.
Mollier will write about the middle class and Voltaire in his works will actually attack
the two most important bastions of French life, the French government and the church.
Quite a few of the works that we look at in Units 2 and 3 in fact will have been banned
or suppressed by their dominant cultures when they were written and that's a sure sign
that they're no longer official spokespeople for their cultures.
As writers learn how to speak for segments of society rather than for an entire culture,
writers also develop new ways of telling stories.
Chaucer and the authors of the 1001 Nights will follow the lead of Indian writers in using
framing devices, that is setting stories inside other stories.
For example, all of the stories in the 1001 Nights are told by Scheherazade to a king,
trying to keep him interested enough in her stories that he won't cut her head off in
the morning.
Framing devices, putting stories inside stories, put a distance between the writer and the
story so that Chaucer could say, if he were pressed and he chose to say this, he could
say that he isn't necessarily endorsing any of the stories that he's telling.
The fiction of his work is that he is simply repeating stories which were told by his
pilgrims, the pilgrims on their way to and from Canterbury.
Murasaki and Cervantes and Pushkin will go slightly different directions in their use
of frames.
Framing their works with historical figures, with historical events and details, all of
which makes the story seem a little more likely, a little more plausible, and give to their
novel something of the resonance of history.
Guerte will frame his Faust with a scene from the Book of Job in the Old Testament as a
way of giving it a kind of profundity and the seriousness of a religious text.
In all of these ways, storytelling becomes more artful, and the space created between
the author and the narrator and between the narrator and the tale gives us readers some
space in which we can work.
We can move around in that space, we can interpret, we can argue, we can discuss the meanings
of these works, because the meanings are not quite as explicit as they are when an author
is speaking for, officially, for an entire culture.
By the time we get to Lecture 29, we will get to Madame Bovary, Flo Bair's Madame Bovary,
and then we will arrive at a movement, a huge movement called Realism, and we'll be in
the middle of that movement when we get to the end of Unit 3.
That movement had profound impact on all the literatures of the world.
By the time we get to Realism, which is really the second half of the 19th century, science
had become the paradigm for human knowledge and truth, and writers were all attempting
to make their work seem more scientific.
They wanted them to be, in fact, like accounts of lab experiments.
That is just as a scientist's personality shouldn't be an issue in a report of an experiment,
so the narrator in realist works tries to take him or herself out of the work so we
get just the report itself, the way it would look to anyone who had access to the same
data.
Flo Bair and Tagore, for example, will write what seem authorless stories.
That is stories without a storyteller, stories which purport to be simply unmediated visions
of reality.
Ibsen and Chekhov will use some of the variations of some of the same techniques when they create
modern, realist drama.
Other writers, writers like Emily Bronte in Wuthering Heights and Mark Twain and Huck
Finn, will put the storytellers inside the stories.
Huck will tell his own story, and Wuthering Heights comes to us from a variety of narrators,
all of whom are inside the story rather than some omniscient narrator being outside of it.
Realism was the avant-garde movement in the West at the height of colonialism, and that
meant that at that point in history, Western influence on the rest of the world was probably
stronger than it's ever been in history.
And so that Western mode, that avant-garde movement, when it moved into the other countries
to which it came, was adapted to local uses, and we'll see that show up in the works of
Ichiyu, Higuchi of Japan, Nagib Mifuz of Egypt, and Chinua Achebe of Nigeria.
As we'll notice when we get there, realism really never goes away as a literary mode.
The avant-garde moves off in a different direction, but realism has been with us ever since the
realist movement happened, so that the novels that we pick up at airports to read on airplanes
as we're traveling somewhere are likely still to be realist novels.
By the end of Unit 3, we will come to Marcel Proust in Lecture 36, and from then on avant-garde
writers abandon realism for a century of experimentation with stories.
In the Lectures in Unit 4, we'll have a chance to talk about the ways in which the traditional
foundations of belief and behavior are eroded at the turn of the century by the great isms,
particularly Darwinism and Marxism and Freudianism.
And there are social as well as artistic changes which are stimulated by things like the world
war and the depression and the rise of fascism and another world war, and all of the things
that happened in the early 20th century.
Many writers came to feel with Nietzsche that there were no absolute standards of truth
outside the self.
Each one of us has to make up our own definition of what it is to be human,
our own rules for conduct, and the individual becomes the locus of meaning and value.
So writers experimented with new techniques that could incorporate this radical subjectivity
plus the loss of external points of reference into the works, and these techniques included
things like interior monologue and broken chronology and stream of consciousness,
making sure also that each storyteller is inside the story
because it is his or her world that we are going to get in the story.
Notable experiments along these lines in the early 20th century include James Joyce's Ulysses
and even more radically Finnegan's Wake, both of which simply
explode all the old ways of telling stories and invent some new ones.
But the techniques also show up in other writers and stories that will be in our last unit,
including Marcel Proust himself, Kafka, and after World War II, in the last three writers
we will consider in our course Samuel Beckett, Jorge Luis Borges, and Salman Rushdie.
Because those last three writers have a disjunction even from the experiments of the first half of
the century, they have their own designation. They are called the post-modernists,
and post-modernism is a movement that we'll start defining in lecture 46.
More time in post-modernism is spent on a question which is implicit throughout much
of literature, but which nevertheless becomes foregrounded and is a really important question
for the post-modernists, and that's the question which is going to be raised
in the very last story that we look at in our course, and the question is what's the use of
stories that aren't even true, so that post-modernism in a way focuses on the relationship between art
and life in a way that's perhaps slightly different from the way that's been focused on
in earlier periods. The movements from the 20th century on are all going to be international
movements. Kawabata will use a stream of consciousness technique in his Japanese novel
that he admits he learned from Western writers. Nagib Mahfouz will admit the same in his Cairo
trilogy. It's appropriate that the last unit should feature an Irishman, an Argentinian,
and an Indian, and it's also appropriate that the Irishman should have spent most of his mature
life in France, that the Argentinian should have become a world figure living all over the world,
and that the Indian should have lived much of his life in London and now spends a lot of time
as a visiting professor at American universities. What this means is that by the time we get to the
20th century, literature really is an international effort. All people now, all storytellers,
are part of an international community of storytellers. We'll also, along the way,
include a few texts that are primarily religious or philosophical, a few lyric poets,
a few dramatists. We'll try to keep track of those themes too, those subjects as we work through our
course, and try to keep track so we can see the developments in lyric poetry, so we can see the
developments in drama as we move through this course. As the summary, this little summary,
brief kind of a bird's-eye view of this, of our upcoming course, suggests there will be other
themes that will be involved here. We'll be looking at periods in literary history. We'll be looking
at the Enlightenment, at Romanticism, at Realism, at Modernism, at Postmodernism, and along the way
we'll be defining some genres and some techniques. One particularly important one will be the rise
of the novel. We'll get to see the novel as it grows and develops in a number of different cultures,
and we'll be able to compare and contrast some of the circumstances out of which the novel emerges
in various cultures to look for the similarities and differences. But still, having said all of that,
the big theme of our story is still going to be stories and storytelling, and we'll try to keep
that foregrounded in the lectures that follow. Briefly, to define the terms, the terms we're
using in our course, history and literature, literature probably doesn't need much definition.
We will be meaning by literature in this course pretty much what everybody means by literature,
that is poems and plays and novels and short stories. The two notable exceptions are the ones
we noted earlier, Confucius and Zhuang Zhou. Zhuang Zhou, anyway, is a really, really good
storyteller, so like Plato, he can be considered as much a literary figure as a philosopher.
In terms of history, we'll mean several things when we use the word history in this course.
We want to consider each individual work as a still living piece of literature,
which still speaks to our current needs and our current problems. That will be the literary
criticism part of each one of these lectures. But we're also going to try to see each work
historically. That is to ask questions about what kind of part did it play in the culture in which
it was created? What does it tell us about the people who wrote it, the people who read it?
What did they think about themselves and their place in the world and what can we tell about
those things by reading their works? And beyond that, we're also going to try to see how individual
works gathered into one great stream make up a truly international body of literature. There's
really never been a time in history when cultures didn't make some contact with each other.
Traders and travelers and refugees have always taken stories with them to be told to new people
in the new places and to influence storytellers in those new places. Storytelling may in fact be
one of the closest things we have to a true universal and human experience, and storytellers
in most cultures have encountered some of the same questions about stories and how to tell them
and arrived at similar or dissimilar solutions, which in turn then influenced storytellers in
other places. The last story that we do in this course will come to a metaphor, the sea of stories
at the bottom of which the source of all stories in the world
emerge different colored streams which maintain their own color for a while
and then merge to make up something brand new out of something very old. So history will mean
this in our course too. We'll try to remember that every storyteller in every time and place
has always been part of a larger community. All of them learn from each other, all of them rewrite
each other's stories, all of them rewrite other stories and write stories to refute or modify
old ones, and we'll try to take a look as in so far as we can at this great ocean of story
remembering that the individual streams and the different colors from which they come,
but noticing also the ways in which they flow together to make up this great sea of story.
I want to end this first lecture by giving you a warning about possible side effects of a course
like this. This is like the warning label that comes along with the prescription when you get it
that tells you, gives you a whole page of all the things that might happen to you when you take
this medication. This is my page of warning that goes along with the kind of things that might happen
to you as you take this course. When you start reading the stories that are in this course,
you might wind up being late for a meeting. You might wind up missing a lunch appointment or
even a dentist appointment. You might find yourself sometimes staying up till 3 a.m. even though you're
very tired and know you should have been in bed hours ago. Your friends might find you a little
abstracted from time to time because you're thinking about something else while they're telling you
about their most recent vacation trip. You might not hear the phone ringing sometimes
and your friends or children will stop by to see if you're really okay
because there are some wonderful stories in this course and sometimes once you've started one you'll
find it difficult to tear yourself away to take out the garbage or to pay the monthly bills or to
fix that leaky faucet. Henry James once said that the first job of a novelist is to create a world
that is so convincing that you can get lost in it and I think that we've all had that experience
where you've been reading for a long time and when you look up from the book you're stunned
to find that you're still sitting in your own living room because you were so lost in the
world of the book and then even more stunned to look at the clock and realize it's been two hours
since the last time you looked up from this book. James is right about this and this can and this
can happen and this probably will happen to you sometimes during the course of these lectures.
I used to tell my students in class that when we started a course like this, a course in world
literature that had so much magnificent literature in it, I used to tell them to imagine that they
were either the hero or the heroine of an 18th century novel, one of those heroes or heroines
who falls off a horse at the beginning of the novel and breaks a leg and as a consequence gets
taken into an uncle's house which is nearby and in the 18th century when you broke your leg you
had to stay with your uncle for six weeks while the leg healed and so while you were at your uncle's
you discovered that he had the most magnificent library and so you could spend six weeks simply
reading book after book after book of great literature. We have those wonderful six weeks
of convalescence ahead of us which is really a pretty exciting prospect. What we finally
will decide I think by the time we get to the very end of this course after having read all
of the things we're going to read, talked about them, thought about them, I think what we'll
discover is that probably down through history stories may have been as important in human life
as a discovery of fire. The discovery of fire guaranteed physical survival but it's stories
that perhaps more than anything else have guaranteed our spiritual or our intellectual or
emotional survival. What we think we know we can define. What we aren't sure that we know
we put into stories which can help explain to ourselves who we are and what we're doing here
or the stories can help us at least formulate the questions about what we're doing here,
give us ways to think about it or they can give us something to do while we're trying to figure it
out or if we've given up on the entire question it at least will give us some very pleasant ways
to pass the time like Beckett's two tramps under a tree waiting for Godot. So perhaps the best thing
that we can do at the beginning of this course is to find a few friends gather with them around a fire
settle in and let the one man who didn't go out hunting with us today tell us a story.
We will start this course with a very good one the oldest piece of written literature that we know
of and an epic poem of that which comes to us from one of the very cradles of civilization
the Middle East. One of the stunning things about this work the epic of Gilgamesh as we'll
see in the next lecture is that it raises many of the questions and concerns that have been addressed
since the time of Oscar Wilde's caveman and will be asked and treated again and again
in the rest of the works that make up this course.
