Lecture 40, Brex, the Good Woman of Sichuan
In a mythical, half-westernized Chinese city called Sichuan, three elderly and very infirm
gods visit to find out whether humans can still live by high moral principles.
Initially, they encountered only dishonesty and selfishness until they are taken in by
a prostitute named Shuntiu.
In gratitude, they give her money, with which she opens a tobacco shop, thinking that with
the profits she could do many, many charitable deeds.
But the shop gets so quickly overrun by so many needy people that the shop itself becomes
a kind of poor house because it's unable to support so much charity on such moderate
means.
So, Shuntiu disguises herself as an invented and totally ruthless cousin named Shui Ta,
who turns out the beggars and restores the shop to efficiency and profit.
When it's safely back in the black again, she lays aside her costume and returns as
Shuntiu.
At first, she invites her ruthless imaginary cousin back only at rare intervals, only when
things get desperate, but because of all the demands that are made on her, she finds
that she has to bring him back more and more frequently and for longer periods of time.
Eventually, he stays so long that he builds her tiny business into a huge sweatshop, employing
and exploiting many, many people.
Meanwhile, Shuntiu has fallen in love with a young man who has, as everyone else has,
has taken advantage of her generous nature, and when he leaves her, she's pregnant.
Eventually, the ruthless cousin has to stay for so long that people think that he has
killed Shuntiu and he's tried for her murder.
At the trial, Shuntiu reveals herself and tells the gods, who are acting as judges at
the trial, that everything that she did was to help her neighbors, to love her lover,
and to keep her unborn child from want.
Her point is that the gods have created impossible circumstances for those people who really want
and try to be good.
The gods, however, announce that they're satisfied with their experiment and they sail
off on a pink cloud, reminding Shuntiu to be good.
And Shuntiu in the play's epilogue then turns to the audience and asks them to solve this
seemingly insoluble problem.
That's the plot of Bertold Brecht's The Good Woman of Suchuan, which was written between
1938 and 1940, while Brecht was living in many places on the run from the Nazis in Germany,
who always seemed to move into wherever he had happened to try to take refuge.
Brecht is another one of the theatricalists or the anti-illusionists we defined in our
last lecture.
He uses many of the same techniques as Pirandello to explode the realist play, but he uses them
for very different reasons.
Pirandello uses his techniques to explore what we might call philosophical or existential
questions.
Brecht uses his for social purposes.
He had become a Marxist in the 1920s and then a follower of Lenin's kind of communism
a bit later, and he spent the rest of his life writing plays that were designed to point
up contradictions and flaws in the capitalist economic system.
This play is one of those that's designed to do that.
And in pursuing his social agenda, Brecht effectively created the modern theater.
He influenced everyone so thoroughly that by now, people who go to the theater a lot
and who hear some of the Brecht innovations will think of these not as innovative at all
because they have become so much a part of the modern theater that if you go to the theater
regularly, they just happen all the time.
It's one of the ways in which Brecht's influence is very, very profound on modern theater.
There were many reasons why Brecht wanted to change the nature of traditional drama and
theater.
His plays, as we said, are all didactic.
They're all designed to teach us about ourselves, about our lives, and about the systems that
we live in.
But he didn't want his lessons to be simply intellectual.
He didn't want us to simply go to his plays and then listen, and then at the end of them
say, hmm, that was very wise.
I learned a lot.
He wanted us, rather, to leave the theater wanting to do something, to put what we had
learned in the play into some kind of action.
And for this kind of play, the shape of traditional drama simply wouldn't work.
Aristotle had said that one of the things that happens when we see a play is that we
identify with the characters.
And by identifying with the characters, we are allowed to participate in the emotional
arc that they go through in the play.
It leads, as Aristotle told us, to a kind of catharsis, to a purging, to a kind of release
of these emotions.
So if we go to a production, say, of Oedipus Rex, we leave the theater having gone through
the experience with Oedipus, and we leave the theater emotionally spent.
At the end of it, we simply want one drink or one coffee and then to bed, and the experience
is over.
The experience of the play is a self-contained circle.
It's emotionally complete.
And that looked to Brecht like a lot of wasted energy.
So he worked with a kind of theater, which he called epic theater.
He didn't invent it, but he was so closely associated with it that he's been more or
less associated with it ever since.
It's been his domain more or less ever since.
Epic theater was identified and defined by Gerta and Schiller in the 18th century.
And the distinction they made was between dramatic literature on the one hand and epic
literature on the other.
And they said that dramatic literature always works by pulling an audience into emotional
identification with the characters.
So when we see a play, we pick a character emotionally identified with that character,
and then we are brought very close to that character to sympathize, to empathize with
that character.
Epic, on the other hand, tends to be done in narrative rather than dramatic dialogue.
It tends to be set in the past.
And because of those things, it tends to give us some emotional distance so we can contemplate
the actions and the characters while we take them in.
Epic theater thus tries to combine those two techniques.
It uses dramatic action on the one hand to draw us into identification, and then it uses
what Brecht called alienation techniques to push us back into a more contemplative stance.
So we can actually think about what it is that we are just seeing.
In a book that he wrote in 1938 called Street Scene, he said that he wanted his plays to
be like a man describing in a courtroom how an accident happened.
He will simply narrate parts of it.
He will enact parts, but he won't enact them completely.
He won't actually become the victims or the participants in the accident.
He will rather simply demonstrate, show that this man was standing here, and this man was
standing here, and then this happened, and then this happened.
And so he will, in fact, the word was demonstrate.
He will demonstrate the roles and events rather than fully embodying them.
And there's always some distance, and that distance between himself and the events also
allows the people he's telling some distance between the events and themselves.
So Epic theater alternately draws us into emotional involvement and then pushes us back.
It alienates us so that we can think about what we have just witnessed.
There are a lot of alienation techniques in this play.
Characters quite frequently speak directly to the audience, and sometimes they sing.
And the songs are sometimes not purely dramatic, but are rather commentary on some action that's
just taken place or in the play as a whole.
There are interludes between acts, which give the characters or the gods to comment and
talk about the development of the play so far.
Scene 8 does a really wonderful piece, it's like montage in film.
In the front of the stage you have a mother telling us what a good son her son is, how
good he has become.
On the back side of the screen we get to see that son in action, and what he's doing doesn't
look good to us.
So what we get is we get a real tension between what the mother is telling us and what we
see the son doing, and once again we have to decide for ourselves.
That pushes us back in a way, that's an alienation technique, which requires us to decide whether
to believe the mother or to believe what we see what the son is doing.
Brecht liked to put the musicians for his plays on stage, where we can see them so that
again, that's a violation of illusion, so that we can actually see when they're tuning
up, when they start blowing, when they start playing.
And that violates any kind of illusion, again it's an alienation technique to push us back
a bit.
The sets and the props in a Brecht play are supposed to look fake, they're supposed to
look theatrical, and they're usually changed in full view of the audience to remind us
that we're in a theater watching a play, and these are, after all, just props.
The setting in this play is also one of Brecht's alienation techniques.
It's a mythical Chinese town, but it's also, he's also talking about Berlin, or any large
city where we happen to live.
What his idea is is by taking familiar events and characters, and then moving them into
exotic settings, remote either in time or in space, he will allow us to see those events
and characters with fresh eyes.
The word that a lot of critics like to use is he will defamiliarize them, so that he
makes us see them as though we are seeing them for the very first time.
The ultimate alienation technique in this play is its ending.
Brecht knows that we're going to be very unhappy with the ending, and so he has shunned
you to ask us what can be done to make this kind of ending impossible.
Her very last lines in the play are, you write the happy ending to the play.
There must, there must, there has got to be a way.
Well, those are some of the ways in which some of the alienation techniques which Brecht
uses, and some of the reasons for which he uses them.
If we take a closer look at the play itself, we discover this is a play that Brecht called
a parable, and we remember what a parable is.
We've had parables in this course before.
We've had some by Chuang Zhou, we had some by Jesus, and we remember that a parable is
an illustrative story which points up a certain lesson.
For Brecht as a Marxist, this play has to be a parable.
Since for a Marxist, human nature is determined by the economic system in which that individual
lives, so that for a Marxist, anyone living in a capitalist society of the sort pictured
in the play, which is based on exploitation and competition, anybody living in that kind
of society would necessarily become a competitive and exploitative person, including of course
Shen Tiu.
A person as good as Shen Tiu is in this play should not theoretically be possible in a
Marxist way of thinking.
So this is a parable of the sort of what if variety.
What would happen if someone were to escape the general corruption of her society and
to try, really honestly try hard to be good?
And the answer which this play gives is, of course, such a person can't survive.
Shen Tiu invents shui ta to do all the nasty things one has to do in order to survive.
In the process, she has to divide herself, becoming a kind of schizophrenic, being both
of those characters alternately.
When Shen Tiu exercises her natural goodness, she runs the risk of ruining herself, so she
calls in her very fierce cousin to protect her from the consequences of her own goodness.
And what happens, of course, over the course of the play is that she winds up not being
able to keep those characters entirely separate.
Over time, her better self gets half corrupted by her worst one, so that as she wins in material
terms, she loses in human ones.
And this can be perfectly illustrated by the scenes involving her lover, Yang Sun.
She meets him in a park where he's trying to commit suicide.
He's trying to commit suicide because he's a trained pilot, but there are more pilots
than jobs, and the only way to get a job as a pilot is you have to bribe an official to
fire some other pilot and then give the job to him.
But he doesn't have enough money to bribe an official.
So to get money for him, Shen Tiu has to resort to her cousin, Shui Ta.
But then, when Yang Sun comes to Shui Ta to get his money, he tells him that he's interested
in Shen Tiu only for her money, that he has no plans to take her to Peking with him as
he's promised he's going to do.
Shen Tiu, of course, hears this as her violent, vicious cousin.
When she hears that she's hurt and angry and she resolves to have nothing more to do with
Yang Sun, instead she says she'll marry a rich and extremely unattractive barber, which
will at least bail her out of her financial difficulties, financial difficulties which
are even worse now because she's borrowed money for Yang Sun.
But once she's Shen Tiu again, her heart gets the better of her head and she gives
in to Yang Sun's insistence that she marry him.
Only this just leads to another problem, because Yang Sun refuses to go through with the ceremony
until Shui Ta shows up with the money, which of course he can't because he can't be
present simultaneously with Shen Tiu.
It can't be possible.
From Yang Sun's point of view, he can have either the good Shen Tiu or the wealth provided
him by Shui Ta, not both of them together.
Nor can we.
Nor can Shen Tiu, which is part of the point of this entire play.
When she discovers that she's pregnant, Shen Tiu more or less permanently disappears and
her aggressive cousin takes over the store and stays around so long that he builds that
tiny store into a large sweatshop and eventually he's arraigned for the murder or at least
the disappearance of Shen Tiu.
Metaphorically that he should be arraigned for her murder is kind of just because in
a way he has killed her.
It's only by suffocating the good woman of Su Chuan that he's been able to save and
expand her business, and she knows that because she is both characters simultaneously.
At the trial, both Shen Tiu and Shui Ta admit that in focusing on the unborn child, the
focus of Shen Tiu's charity has shifted.
When the ruthless cousin tells the judges that she did what she did to help the poor,
one poor person in the courtroom says, what good could it do to the poor to be sent into
a sweatshop and be exploited by her cousin?
What good does that do the poor?
When Shui Ta says that what she did, what he did was for Shen Tiu's child, a carpenter
whom Shui Ta has exploited and cheated, says, but what about my children?
And the point is, of course, that you can't help somebody without hurting somebody else,
and that's simply the way things are set up.
When Shui Ta throws off his disguise, she says this to the judges, who of course remember
are the visiting gods, and this is what she says to them.
She says, your injunction to be good and yet to live was a thunderbolt.
It has torn me in two.
I can't tell how it was, but to be good to others and myself at the same time, I could
not do it.
Your world is not an easy one, illustrious ones.
When we extend our hand to a beggar, he tears it off for us.
When we help the lost, we are lost ourselves.
And so, since not to eat is to die, who can long refuse to be bad?
As I lay prostrate beneath the weight of good intentions, ruin stared me in the face.
It was when I was unjust that I ate good meat and hobnobbed with the mighty.
Why?
Why are bad deeds rewarded, good ones punished?
I enjoyed giving, I truly wished to be the angel of the slums, but washed by a foster
mother in the water of the gutter, I developed a sharp eye.
The time came when pity was a thorn in my side, and later, when kind words turned to
ashes in my mouth and anger took over, I became a wolf.
Find me guilty then, illustrious ones, but know, all that I have done, I did to help
my neighbor, to love my lover, and to keep my little one from want.
For your great, godly deeds, I was too poor, too small.
That is, as she admits, she began by thinking up her cousin only to help keep up her acts
of charity, but she learned in the process that goodness is incompatible with survival.
So, as she says, the need to survive has triumphed over the need to be good, to eat has triumphed
over the laws of the gods.
The personal solution she came up with is really a personal one.
The solution helps her, but they're all at someone else's expense.
Bruce Thompson, in his introduction to his edition of The Play, says this about the
world of this play.
He says, the parable expresses with persuasive clarity the precept that goodness is impossible
in a corrupt world.
Like so many of the plays of this period, this one asserts that because of the prevailing
circumstances, men are conditioned to be evil and goodness is impracticable.
Indeed, goodness as a value cannot survive without fundamental social and economic changes.
So, that's the problem, and the problem is made worse in this play by our awareness
that humans are going to have to fix this problem themselves.
It becomes very clear very early in the play that the gods either can't or won't do anything
to help.
Wong, who's a water carrier, who's one of the principal characters of this play, he
runs through the entire play, he suggests to the gods early, he's a religious person,
he tries to keep a religious perspective, and he says to the gods early in the play,
he says, there was a flood that damaged the dam at Kwan, and he said, I'm sure that you
people did that, you gods did that, you sent that flood to Kwan to punish the wicked.
The gods say, rubbish, it was because they neglected the dam.
That is, the world is in the hands of engineers and economists not in the hands of the gods.
But anyway, these gods, as we find out from the very beginning, are not interested in
helping people.
What they're interested in doing is finding enough good people, just one will do, according
to their rules, who will validate their laws so that they can go back to heaven and forget
the whole thing.
It's a little bit like the beginning of Gertus Faust, in which God says to Mephistopheles,
I can vindicate all of human beings if you can find just one person who embodies the
best of what it is to be human.
Here these gods suggested, if they can just find one person who really tries to be good,
that'll satisfy them and then they can go back to heaven and earth can go on with whatever
it's doing.
And it's been suggested, of course, that the frame for this play comes at least in part
from Gertus Faust, in part from where Gerta got his frame, that is from the book of Job.
The gods here represent very precisely defined and absolute moral standards, which an individual
is expected to live up to whatever his or her circumstances are.
Even religious people in the play, like Wong himself, have had to compromise their principles
just to stay alive, and he keeps hinting to the gods all the way through the plays that
they might show just a little leniency, they might relax their rules just a little bit
because it's so hard to be good in a world like the one that they live in.
What makes Shen Tiu so remarkable is that she really tries to be good according to the
standards of the gods.
She hopes, as religious people do, that the gods will help good people in some sort of
way.
In scene four A, she sings a song called The Song of the Defenseless, and what she asks
is why don't the gods get indignant with all of the horrible exploitation going on on earth?
Why is it?
Why don't the gods help the good?
Why don't they punish the wicked?
Why is it?
So the gods fail to help.
When they arrive in Su Chuan, rich people turn them away and send them to the poor, and Wong
is one of those, and he would put them up, except he lives kind of culvert in the sewer,
so he has no place to put them up, so he sends them to Shen Tiu.
But he also asks the gods if they don't think their rules are just a tiny bit rigid, an idea
that he repeats in the play throughout at intervals.
But his faith is, of course, misplaced, since the gods' search isn't designed to help anyone.
It's only to justify the way things are and let the world go on just exactly the way it
is.
Any way the gods say they don't know anything about business or economics, they stay around
to see what happens to Shen Tiu, and if they could actually see if they were paying attention,
they'd learn what we do, that economic well-being and goodness are mutually exclusive.
At the end, one of the judges, who's also a god, decides that Shen Tiu is merely confused.
And so one of the gods says, what about this book of rules?
We can't renounce our rules, can we?
Should the world be changed?
How?
By whom?
The world should not be changed.
And then they sail back to heaven on a pink cloud, using the same kind of stage machine
we remember that Euripides Medea sailed off in her play in Medea.
As they leave, they remind Shen Tiu to be good and not to call up Shui Ta more than once
a month.
The suggestion of the play is, of course, that the gods are disappearing from human consciousness,
that religion is either irrelevant for help or for any kind of practical set of ethics
that we could actually live by or that society could work by.
Some people may still look to the gods for help, but there's no chance of that.
And by defending the status quo, the gods and religion by implication really serve
just the rich and the powerful the way, according to Brecht, religion always has.
The gods actually in this play become a bit comic as the play goes on.
They're initially well-groomed, they're slightly old-fashioned, but they're well-groomed,
their clothes identify them early on as part of the privileged class.
But as the play goes on, they get more raggedy, more disheveled, they show up with grass stains
and straw in their hair from having to sleep outside, and one of them actually shows up
once with a black eye that he got in trying to separate a coral.
Each time they appear on stage, they look a little bit more like clowns, suggesting
in a kind of visual way the retreat of religion from relevance, as far as Brecht is concerned,
anyway.
Brecht's epic theater devices, the ones that he created for this and other plays, are now
everywhere, and they still perform their original function.
They're to push us back from too close an emotional identification with the characters
and to give us room to think.
In Marxist terms, however, the plays always turned out to be less successful than Brecht
hoped.
After World War II, he was actually given a theater and a troupe in Communist East Berlin,
where he staged many of his own plays and many other plays as well.
And he was always unhappy with the audience's responses to his plays.
He did a series of productions of one of his best known plays, Mother Courage and Her
Children.
He had intended Mother Courage to be a kind of negative illustration of what happens
to little people who make or try to make profit from war.
But audiences saw her as a heroic figure, and they identified with her struggle to try
to keep herself and her family alive and together.
Brecht thought that he was either getting some very dim audiences or audiences who had
been too well trained by the old kind of drama to know how to react to this new kind.
So he kept tinkering with the play to try to make Mother Courage a little less attractive,
and in the final production that he actually oversaw, he carefully coached his wife, the
actress Helen Weigel, so that she would alienate audiences.
So it would really happen this time.
And the audiences still wound up identifying with her to Brecht's annoyance and bewilderment.
Human critics find various reasons for at least what Brecht considered the ideological
failures of his play.
Martin Esslin in a book called Brecht, A Choice of Evils, said the whole premise of
the didactic part of Brecht's plays may be based on a theatrical non-sequitur.
Brecht's assumptions seem to be that if you show people the contradictions and problems
in their own system, they would all rush out to promote the communist revolution, and it
never quite worked that way.
As Esslin points out, the three-penny opera, which Brecht wrote with Kurt Weill in 1929,
it was based on John Gaze the beggar's opera, ran for years on Broadway to thousands of
people, and as far as we know, not a single one of them ever became communist.
So effective as they are as plays, they didn't fulfill what at least according to Brecht
was their didactic function.
The other reason that's given by critics for the didactic failure of his plays is that
Brecht is such a good playwright.
He is so good at what he does that he invariably makes his characters and his situations more
complicated and more complex than the didactic purpose calls for.
This play can perfectly illustrate that point.
If every time a production of The Good Woman of Suchlon is put on, if you read the reviews
that come out in the paper, every responsible review will stress Brecht's alienation techniques
and will stress the point of the play.
But invariably, almost invariably, a critic will also tell us that it's difficult, if
not impossible, to find our hearts, not to find our hearts going out to Shuntiu and to
find in her a representation of the plight of poor people everywhere.
At the end, after the gods have sailed away on their pink cloud, Shuntiu comes forward
and sings or says her last song to the audience, and this is what she says to end the play.
She says,
You're thinking, aren't you, that this is no right conclusion to the play you've seen
tonight?
After a tale exotic, fabulous, a nasty ending was slipped up on us.
We feel deflated too.
We too are nettle to see the curtain down and nothing settled.
How could a better ending be arranged?
Could one change people?
Can the world be changed?
Would new gods do the trick?
Will atheism?
Moral rearmament?
Materialism?
It is for you to find away, my friends, to help good men arrive at happy ends.
You write the happy ending to the play.
There must, there must, there's got to be a way.
Well the song, as we understand it, is a splendid alienation technique.
But in terms of its themes, of its content, it is also beautifully open-ended.
A better world, she says, would certainly do something about poverty.
Justice would be available to poor people as well as to rich.
Some better distribution would be set up so that there wouldn't be such a huge gap between
the rich and the poor.
But the nature of the new order is not specified, nor the methods by which we could achieve
it.
The song stresses the difficulties of finding a solution, not its ease.
So that like so many other Brecht plays, this one can serve an ideological function.
But its concerns are always much broader, much wider, much more complicated, much more
ambiguous than any single solution could ever cover.
So what a lot of critics have decided, and this one I'm very happy to end this lecture
with, is that perhaps Brecht's greatness as a playwright served his ideological aims
less well than simpler and less complex plays might have done.
Had he been a less good dramatist, his plays might have served their didactic function
perhaps better.
On that however, as we said earlier, the greatness and the influence of Brecht on the modern
theatre is undeniable.
As we said about Proust, when we did his remembrance of things past, we said after Proust, the
novel can never be the same again.
So with Brecht, after Brecht, the theatre will never be the same again.
In our next lecture, we are still going to be between the wars, but this time we will
travel to Russia for our last lyric poet in the course, one whose works were for many
years suppressed.
Once they were published, they became a voice for women victims of every war and every time
and place, but especially in the history of Russia.
We'll be looking at Anna Akhmatova's Requiem, and what that poem does is it gives voice
to the countless mothers, wives, sisters, daughters, whose sons, husbands, brothers
and fathers were killed in war, or even worse, were destroyed by their own countries for
political reasons or who died in political prisons.
Anna Akhmatova in our next lecture.
