Lecture 45, Achebe's Things Fall Apart
In our last lecture, we saw how Nagib Mahfouz used the techniques of realism, supplemented
as we saw by some modernist techniques, to describe some of the profound changes and challenges
that were faced by his country in its confrontation with the Western world in the first half of the
20th century. In this lecture, we're going to consider another non-Western writer who uses
realism in a similar way to record another collision between Europe and a traditional culture,
and some of its consequences for his people. The subject of today's lecture is Chinima Achebe's
Things Fall Apart. We've had enough opportunity over the last several lectures to notice that
realism, as we've seen in Flaubert and Ibsen and Dostoevsky and Tagore and Mahfouz,
frequently has a social agenda. The realists gave up the metaphysical quests of the romantics,
but they felt compelled to criticize the social and political and economic worlds in which they
lived. Flaubert and Ibsen, and to a lesser extent, Chekhov, attacked the middle class for its complacency,
for its materialism, its adoration of respectability. Dostoevsky, we saw, attacked his contemporaries
for their acceptance or endorsement of utilitarian utopianism and those kind of romantic dreams of
grandeur, which disguised, at least as he saw it, a kind of paranoia, allowing themselves to feel
important and selfless when all they were doing was indulging in a kind of sentimental and self-affirming
warm bath. Tagore, as we saw when we did his stories, takes on the issue of an entire culture's
injustice to women, particularly in the small rural Indian villages in such stories as punishment,
and Mahfouz, as we saw in the Cairo trilogy, saw the inexorable disintegration of traditional
Egyptian and Muslim values in the Arabic world's confrontation with the West. And at the end of
that novel, the third novel, he implicitly asks his readers to make a kind of commitment to a
perpetual rebellion designed to bring social justice to a world in which political freedom
isn't enough. Shinoah Achebi is also in this tradition. Like many non-Western writers we've
looked at in this course, he was very early in his life influenced by Western literature and thought.
His father taught at a missionary school in Nigeria under British and Christian auspices,
so he was raised at least partially under the influence of Western thought. His mother, as he
remembers, however, remembered and taught him songs and stories of his people, the Ebo in Eastern
Nigeria. And when he went to the university, he changed his name from the baptismal Albert
to the native Shinoah. He recalls being appalled at the books that he was required to read
in his English-dominated education, including, and he particularly mentions these more than once,
Joyce Carey's Mr. Johnson and Joseph Conrad's The Heart of Darkness. Both of those books purported
to be authentic accounts of Africa, and in Carey's case, an authentic account of Nigeria,
which was written for consumption by the Western world. In both, Achebi said, he was
shocked to find Africans depicted as savages full of passion and instinct, but with the
undeveloped minds of children. His own first novel, the one we'll look at in this lecture,
Things Fall Apart, was written in part to refute this notion, and also to show what colonialism
feels like from the inside, from the point of view of the colonized, rather than the point of view
of the colonizers. So this book doesn't focus too much on the processes of colonialism, although
there is some of that in the novel, but it's intended as a reminder to Westerners and to his
own people that they had had a culture of their own before the coming of the English. In an article
that he published in Nigeria Magazine in 1964, in a passage cited by G. D. Killam in his book on
Chinua Achebi, he says this. This theme, put quite simply, is that African people did not hear of
culture for the first time from Europeans, that their societies were not mindless, but frequently
had a philosophy of great depth and value and beauty, that they had poetry, and above all,
they had dignity. It is this dignity that many African people all but lost during the colonial
period, and it is this that they must now regain. The worst thing that can happen to any people is
the loss of their dignity and self-respect. The writer's duty is to help them regain it by showing
them in human terms what happened to them, what they lost. There is a saying in Ebo that a man who
can't tell where the rain began to beat him cannot know where he dried his body. The writer can tell
the people where the rain began to beat them. It is, of course, part of the complexity of the whole
colonial experience that this novel is written in English, not his native tongue, and that it takes
its title from a poem by William Butler Yates, and we'll come back to both of those subjects later
in this lecture. The central character in this novel is a character named Okanko, who is powerful
and important, a very important person in his own clan in lower Nigeria, a clan that occupies
nine connected villages. His father had been a shiftless man who died in debt, and Okanko has
spent his whole life proving that he's not his father. He's the best in his clan at everything,
from growing yams to wrestling to being a warrior. He has a 12-year-old son, Nwoya,
whom he worries about since the boy seems to take after his grandfather too much for Okanko's
taste or comfort. In a skirmish with a native neighboring village, Okanko and his fellow warriors
capture a 15-year-old boy named Ikimefuna, who now lives with Okanko and his family.
He turns out to be something closer to an ideal son than Okanko's own son is,
and while he's there, Nwoya likewise seems to change under the influence of his friend,
coming to please his father more and more, even though Okanko works very hard not to show any
real signs of affection to either one of the boys. When the village oracle informs the elders that
Ikimefuna has to be killed, Okanko is told that since the boy calls him father, he shouldn't
take part in the killing himself, but not wishing to appear weak, he kills the boy himself.
After the killing, Okanko falls into a severe three-day depression, and Nwoya, his son,
is absolutely devastated. Later on at the funeral of an elder, Okanko inadvertently kills an elder's
son, and since killing a Klansman is a crime against the earth goddess, he and his family
are sent into exile for seven years in the village where his mother was born. While he's in exile
in his mother's village, he hears that missionaries have moved into the forest near his home village,
and that another village nearby was destroyed by the British for killing a missionary.
In Okanko's village, he hears there are already a handful of converts to Christianity. By the time
Okanko returns to his village, there are enough converts to make them bold enough to actually
disrupt an important village ceremony which is dedicated to the earth goddess. They disrupt it
because from the Christian point of view, they see that ritual as idolatrous. The next day the
church in the forest is burned to the ground, and a few days after that the English District
Commissioner arrives, inevitably with soldiers. He asks to see the leaders of the village which
includes Okanko, but instead of talking with them, he has them beaten and then thrown into prison.
When they're released, the clan has an entire meeting to decide a meeting of the entire clan
to decide what to do. They hold their meeting, and in the middle of that meeting, a couple of
English messengers arrive, ordering them to disband. Okanko thinks that his fellow villagers will
join him in an uprising, so he kills the lead English messenger with his machete, but no one
joins him. The other messengers are allowed to escape, and by the time the District Commissioner
arrives with an armed guard, Okanko has hanged himself. The Commissioner is writing a book
about Africa, and he decides that Okanko's death will make an interesting paragraph or two.
The very last paragraph of the book tells us the title of his book is the pacification
of the primitive tribes of the lower Niger. The book thus divides up into two unequal parts.
The first two-thirds gives us a rich and detailed picture of life among the Igbo before the coming
of the missionaries, and of course the soldiers who always accompany them. This two-thirds is
about Okanko and about his very complicated relationship with the village. He's very strong
and very famous throughout the nine villages. He's a solid achiever who is always very impatient
with unsuccessful men. He's a warrior, he's a wrestler, he's a rich man, he possesses two
barns and three wives, and at a very young age he's achieved already two of the possible four
titles awarded to notable men in the village. His people think of him as one of the greatest men
of his time. His motives are primarily a deep hatred of the failures of his father, which are
never, never very far from his mind. He kills Ikimefuna with his own hands precisely because
he was afraid of being thought weak. Later, when his own son, Nuwaya, becomes a Christian, Okanko
comforts himself for having a bad son by reflecting on at least that his own strength and courage had
never failed him. He at least had not become his father. But we discover as we go through the novel
that in hating his father's weaknesses and in spending his life avoiding them, he also rejects
his father's gentleness, his talent for showing affection, and his emotions. His father, we find
out, was a fine flute player, a gentle man, a good companion at parties, and even something of a poet
in the way he would respond to the changing of the seasons. Some of the most lyrical passages in the
novel are dedicated to showing the happiness of Okanko's father at these times. But for Okanko,
these are feminine qualities by which he means weak qualities. And he shows in feeling this way
that despite being one of the one of the greatest men of his time, and hence in some ways a perfect
representative of the values of his people, he isn't absolutely in perfect harmony with those
values because feminine values do play a very important part in Igbo life. A failed man, like
Okanko's father, is called an Agbola, which means woman. But Agbola is also the name of the village
Oracle, the voice of the earth goddess, and the priestess of Agbola is a very powerful figure in
the village. Women in this Igbo village are certainly not the equals of men. They can be sold,
they can be beaten, and their lot really isn't much more glamorous than that of a domestic servant.
But the most important deity of the people is Ani, the earth goddess, who's also the most
important judge of thought and action in the village. Early in the novel occurs the festival
of the new yam, and we are told this about Ani. The feast of the new yam was an occasion for giving
thanks to Ani, the earth goddess, and the source of all fertility. Ani played a greater part in
the life of the people than any other deity. She was the ultimate judge of morality and conduct,
and what was more, she was in close communion with the departed fathers of the clan,
whose bodies had been committed to earth. All three of Okanko's punishable crimes are committed
against her, against Ani, beating his wife during the ritual week of peace, inadvertently killing
the son of an elder when a gun misfires, and his suicide at the novel's end. And when Okanko goes
into his seven-year exile to his mother's village, his uncle explains to him that one of the commonest
names given to children is nenika, which means mother is supreme. When he asks Okanko if he
knows why this is such a common name, or why when a woman dies she is always taken to be
buried with her kin, not with those of her husband, Okanko says he doesn't know, and his uncle tells
him this. It's true that a child belongs to its father, but when a father beats his child,
it seeks sympathy in its mother's hut. A man belongs to his fatherland when things are good
and life is sweet, but when there is sorrow and bitterness, he finds refuge in his motherland.
Your mother is there to protect you, she is buried there, and that is why we say that mother is supreme.
All of this suggests a kind of balance between feminine and masculine values in the lives of
the people, a balance which is always threatened by Okanko because of his obsessive need not to be
his father. In the novel, at one point he's told about a very old couple, the man and wife
die within a half hour of each other, the wife hears that her husband has died and she hobbles
over to his hut and she calls out his name three times and then she goes back to her own hut and
dies immediately. And Elder says they were always like that, they were of one mind about everything,
that neither could do anything without telling the other one. Okanko listening to this story says
that's odd, I always thought he was a strong man in his youth. And Okanko was told he was a strong
man who had led his people into battle in the days of his youth, but that Okanko should find
such single-mindedness between a husband and wife a sign of weakness says a lot about Okanko.
Balance is important in evil life and anytime it's violated bad things happen. Okanko's son,
Noya, is a kind of throwback to his grandfather, an agbola according to his father. He's more at
home with his mother than with his father, he loves spending time in her hut listening to her
stories and songs, and he's altogether a gentle boy without any of his father's hardness. His
masculine side is brought out in the three years that Ikimefuna lives with the family and Ikimefuna
comes probably as close as anyone does to embodying the balances of the culture. He can do all of the
manly things that Okanko wants his son to do, but he also knows a lot of songs and stories
like the ones that the women tell in their huts. When he's killed, something breaks inside of Noya
in exactly the same way that something breaks inside him the first time he hears an infant's
voice crying in the forest. Twins were always considered unlucky by the evil and were put into
earthenware jars and then abandoned in the forest. The first time that Noya hears that cry from the
forest, something breaks inside him and it happens again when he hears that Ikimefuna has been killed.
He's in other words ripe for conversion to Christianity as will be the women in the village
who have had to abandon twins and every agbola, for all of whom the missionaries will offer an
entirely different set of values and alternative sets of ways to live, so that in many ways Okanko
is a perfect representative of his people. He is one of the greatest men of his time,
as we are told. He gets his values of the need for hard work, his drive to achieve titles,
and his belief in the need for courage from his culture. But if anything, he overdoses them,
he pushes them a little too far. While he was in exile, his people back in his village
were flexible enough to allow their missionaries to build the church in the forest and flexible
enough to live side by side with him, even while they were losing some of their own people to the
new faith. When Okanko returns, he can see only violence as the only possible response. And he
realizes at the end how isolated he is from his own people when he kills the lead messenger
and waits for his people to kill the others and nothing happens. The others are allowed to escape
and in the confusion that follows, he can hear his own people saying, why did he do it? Why did he
do it? And they're talking about him. They're asking why did he kill that messenger? And so Okanko
goes off to die. And he dies a defiled death at that, another sin against Ani, which means,
as one of the elders says, that he will have to be buried like a dog in the evil forest.
He dies representing what he sees as the values of his society, which he thinks others have betrayed.
What he never grasps is that his culture has built into it a certain flexibility,
a flexibility which complements its rigor, but which he can never accept because it would make
him too much like his father. That flexibility of the culture is expressed in many ways,
one of the chief ways is in the proverbs. The elders always are speaking in proverbs,
proverbs we know are the accumulated wisdom of many generations, and they can tell us a lot
about the people who speak them. One of the proverbs that is spoken often enough by the elders
in the villages, let the kite and the eagle perch together if one says no to the other,
let his wing break. And that's really pretty close to what happens to Okanko. He's very like,
and he's often been compared by critics to figures in Greek tragedy who are neither entirely right
nor entirely wrong, and whose weaknesses are the precise flip side of his strengths.
The story is even more touching because we recognize Okanko isn't inherently a cruel man.
He has to look away at the moment that he kills Ikimefuna, not because he can't stand blood,
but because he really loves the boy, and he broods obsessively over the death for three days.
And he really deeply loves his daughter, and that's made really clear
in the one terrible night that he and his wife's been following the priestess of Agbola
as she carries the daughter through the nine villages, an episode that we can't
don't have time to talk about, but you'll recognize when you read it. It's just that,
thanks to the weaknesses and failures of his father, Okanko can't express that side of his nature,
and that side of the Igbo culture generally. And, of course, the tragedy isn't just Okanko's
but that of his whole village. Had the village been able to deal just with Okanko, it could have
managed. It might have managed to had it had to deal only with the missionaries. What makes this
a tragedy of the entire culture is that the village has to deal both with Okanko and the
missionaries at once. And that, of course, brings us to the last one third of the novel,
which deals with this clash between the Igbo and the British cultures.
The title, as we have mentioned before, comes from William Butler Yates's
The Second Coming. Specifically, it comes from lines three and four of that poem,
which read, things fall apart, the center cannot hold, mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.
Yates's poem is treated in other courses from the teaching company, which we'll go into in
more detail. For our purposes, for its use as a title for this book, there are only a couple of
things that we need to know about it. One is that it does contain that poem, The Second Coming,
contains an entire vision of history. In that vision, reality is always some kind of unformed
chaos, and every civilization that comes along imposes on that chaos an ordered structure which
is built by the human mind. Every great civilization is thus a human construct, and it works
very well for those of us who live inside it. But to define is always to exclude, and much of
reality is always left outside whatever kind of structure a civilization builds. That is, for
every civilization, there are ideas that would work in some other civilization, but that don't work
or are nonsense or are terrifying in this one. Impulses that would be shameful in this culture
would be acceptable and normal in another. What's pathological in one culture could be normal in
another culture. Each civilization excludes what it can't use in its own definition, but it never
destroys what's excluded. It simply suppresses it or defines it into unacceptable. Over time,
those excluded materials gather strength and begin to beat on the walls of the civilized structure.
Eventually, little cracks show up and then widen, and then they break, allowing all of the excluded
material to rush in and overwhelm the existing structure, replacing them with their own, and
then the process begins all over again. So, for Yates, whatever replaces a collapsed structure
will always be its precise opposite made up of things that were excluded from the previous one.
For Yates, this process ran in 2000 year cycles. The Greek cycle, as he saw it, was initiated
by the Trojan War, which was overwhelmed about 2000 years later by the Christian cycle,
and when he wrote this poem, the Christian cycle, as he saw it, was just about coming to an end
and was about to be overrun by its opposite, which is what the poem, The Second Coming, is all about.
It is this vision of history which is alluded to by Achebe in his title. The first two-thirds of
the novel depicts Igbo civilization with its networks of relationships to the past and to nature
and to the supernatural, and in that culture, in the Igbo culture, the community is always
more important than the individual, and as their proverbs say, no man is ever greater than his
people, and no man ever wins judgment against his own clan. The community, in fact, in traditional
Igbo culture is the context in which an individual finds fulfillment, as Okonko does when he's
called one of the greatest men of his time. He occasionally breaks community laws, but when
he does, he accepts a penalty without pleading special circumstances or merit. His culture is
structured on the virtues of courage and toughness and self-reliance and hard work and success.
Its other qualities, tenderness, gentleness, kindness, sensitivity,
can be tolerated, but they aren't honored. It's why Okonko's father was a failure and why
Nohoya is a non-entity in the village. These are the values which this civilization excludes.
When Okonko kills Ikimefuna, the village understands, even if it doesn't quite
approve, because at the moment of killing, Okonko is putting aside his personal feelings
because he really loves the boy to obey his community's instructions. The one who can't
accept this is Nohoya, for whom the excluded values, compassion, sensitivity, personal relations,
make more sense than do those of the community. It's in fact a kind of defining moment for
Nohoya when he realizes that the community values are not his. When the Christian missionaries arrive,
they give expression to all of those values which have been excluded by Okonko's culture.
The first converts are mothers of twins, are outcasts from the communities,
the failures, and of course, Nohoya. These values come from outside the Ebo civilized structure.
We suspect that if Okonko's father had been alive, he would probably have become a Christian too.
So these excluded forces, which are now aided by the missionaries,
gather strength so that the Ebo people for the first time find themselves divided against themselves.
Still, to use Yates' image, the center might have held. The people of the village are flexible enough
and tolerant enough to give the Christians space, even to live side by side with them,
and to give them room to build their church in the forest. And Mr. Brown, the first English
missionary, works slowly trying to learn something about the Ebo culture as he goes.
But when he leaves, he's replaced by a Mr. Smith, who's an arrogant militant who despises
indigenous African culture and sees nothing in it worth preserving. And he arrives at precisely
the same time that Okonko comes home spoiling for a fight. The ending of the novel illustrates Yates'
thesis. The forces that lose mere anarchy into the village come from the evil forest,
the place of darkness, where all of the excluded, the fenced off values,
which are excluded by evil civilization, where they go. The forest is where twins are exposed,
it's where the weak failures are buried, where Ikimefuna is killed, and it is of course the
place where the Christians build their church. The values of the forest then, strengthened by
Christian missionaries, are personal values as opposed to the communal values of the traditional
cultures. Having been driven outside the pale into the forest, they gather strength until they
are powerful enough to overwhelm the values that have excluded them. They are powerful enough,
especially since they are aided by the new Christian missionaries. At the end, when the
village elders are explaining to the English that they can't cut down or even bury Okonko,
since his suicide is a terrible sin against the earth goddess, one of the elders lashes out
against the English district commissioner, and he says this, that man was one of the greatest men
in Umuafia. You drove him to kill himself, and now he will be buried like a dog. He could not
say anymore. His voice trembled and choked his words. His protest here is not just for a dead
hero who died defending the old ways, but it's a protest for an entire culture. And worse,
the story won't be told in Ebo terms, but it will be told in a paragraph or two in a book called
The Pacification of the Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger written for Western consumption.
The book ends with an implied irony of which Achebi himself is very much aware and sort of
illustrates the circumstances of a post-colonialist writer in the modern world. Okonko is the
central character of this book, but it's Nowoya who takes the first steps that will allow a writer
like Achebi to record in English the disintegration of the people from whom he came. Ironically,
Okonko's success in embodying the virtues of his culture leads to his destruction,
while Nowoya's failures at those same values ensure his survival in a changed world.
The modern African intellectual is a descendant then not of Okonko, but of Nowoya,
who's the loser in terms of the culture from which he came.
Gareth Griffiths in an essay on this book says this very brilliantly and will let him have the
last words to say about this book. He says, Okonko is destroyed because he performs more than is
expected of him and sacrifices his personal life to an exaggerated even pathological sense of communal
duty. Nowoya, on the other hand, puts personal feelings above social responsibility. He and
Okonko's father, to whom he is considered a throwback, are more comprehensible to the post-tribal
world. In this respect, Nowoya's greater capacity for personal relationships and his deeper feelings
for personal value is clearly a gain, but one which is accompanied by a loss of pride,
of social unity, and clarity of purpose. It involves the destruction of the tribe as the
unit of value. Nowoya's movement away from the tribal values that Okonko defends is the first
stage of the journey for the western educated Nigerians of Achebe's own generation. Achebe
is the inheritor of Nowoya's revolt as well as of Okonko's sacrifice. He can celebrate the depth
and value of beauty, of tribal Igbo culture, but he must do so with the tools gained in the act of
destroying it. So much for things fall apart. In our last three lectures in this course, which as
we noted in the very first one, we're going to take a brief look at the movement that succeeded
modernism in the 20th century, still somewhat awkwardly known as post-modernism, and we'll
get to that starting in the next lecture. We won't have time to go into very much detail about
post-modernism, but we'd at least like to suggest some of the ways in which the half a century of
experimentation that preceded it led to a second stage of experiment with storytelling whose primary
question is probably the one that will be asked in our final work, Rushdie's Haroon in the Sea of
Stories. What's the use of stories that aren't even true? That is, what is the relationship between
literature and life? What's the value of books and literature and stories? And so in our next
lecture, we'll start our definition of post-modernism and start to think about these questions,
which we'll feature in our next lecture, we'll feature the Irish novelist and playwright Samuel
Beckett.
