Lecture 5 Homer's Odyssey
The subject of this lecture is the Odyssey, which is the eternal traveling companion of
the Iliad.
This one tells the story of the homecoming of the heroes who survived the Trojan War,
particularly the homecoming of Odysseus, who makes his way back to the island kingdom
of Ithaca.
The Greeks and later the Romans assumed that these two poems were written by the same person
whom they called Homer.
Modern scholarship tends toward the idea that this poem was written perhaps a generation
later than the Iliad and perhaps by a different poet.
If so, it was written by someone who knew the Iliad very well and who patterned this
poem on the Iliad.
It's written in 24 books, the same as the Iliad is.
It's about larger-than-life characters and events.
It uses the grand style, including epic similes.
It features the same supernatural machinery, the same cast of gods and goddesses, in fact.
And it begins in medius race.
In fact, it begins toward the end of the ninth year after the conclusion of the Trojan War
and Odysseus finds himself still trapped on the island of Calypso, ready for the last
two legs of his journey home.
It also features a hero, as in the heroes in the Iliad, a hero who more than anything
else wants to make a name for himself, to endure an enduring name, to make a reputation,
to win honor.
As we pointed out in the lecture last time on the Iliad, that was the primary motivation
for the warriors at Troy.
Even if it sometimes, as it sometimes does, involves sacrificing the good of the family
or the good of the community in order to achieve this fulfillment of self.
In the Odyssey, that is a theme.
It isn't quite as big a theme as it is in the Iliad, because the primary motive here
is to get Odysseus home.
That's his primary motive, is to get back to where he started.
Some of the things that happen to Odysseus on his way home are inadvertent, things that
happen to him.
As critics have noted, some of the things that happen to him on the way home are things
that are of his own design, of his own making.
Some of the trouble he gets into is trouble that he stirs up.
When he does this, it always seems as though it's designed to enhance his reputation, to
make a name for himself.
One critic pointed out that his name really can be translated as something like trouble.
You can odysseus someone and you can be odysseused by somebody as a Greek verb.
If you translate his name roughly as trouble, then he can be compared to that figure, that
familiar figure in Westerns who pushes open the swinging doors of a bar and says, anybody
looking for trouble, my name is trouble.
Because Odysseus does seem to do this from time to time during the course of the poem.
We can illustrate this, I think, with one little tiny piece of story.
This one involves the Cyclops.
The translation that I'll be citing from actually is Robert Fitzgerald and he translates
Cyclops with a K, so it's Kyclops rather than Cyclops.
But since most of us know this character as the Cyclops, we'll call him that throughout
the rest of the lecture unless we're citing Fitzgerald.
As it turns out, Odysseus would not have had to confront the Cyclops.
He's already taken on fresh game and water from a nearby island and they can see the
island of the Cyclops over in the distance.
The crew says, well, let's just make a run for it because it looks like there's some
huge people aboard that island.
But Odysseus says, no, no, no, we need to explore this.
We need to go see if he has great gifts that he'll give to guests.
He takes 12 of his best men and then they take a little boat from the ship and row to
shore.
They get to the cave of this Cyclops and it's an enormous prodigious cave.
His crew again looks at these great cheeses hanging there and says, well, let's just grab
some cheese and run.
Odysseus again says, no, let's wait for him to come back and see what happens.
The Cyclops returns in the evening, brings his flocks in and puts them inside the cave
and then he rolls an enormous stone in front of the cave mouth, a rock that's so big that
these little 13 guys know they're not going to be able to move it so they're really essentially
trapped inside this cave.
When he stirs up his fire, he sees these 13 little guys against the back wall of the cave
and he says, oh, what have we here?
So Odysseus tries to appeal to his sense of being a host, the laws of Greek laws of
hospitality, but the Cyclops already shows that he's an uncouth character by asking
who are you before he offers to do anything else and in Greek laws of hospitality you're
not supposed to ask who someone is until you fed that person.
So at any rate, Odysseus knows that these rules of hospitality are not going to work
here and in fact he discovers that even more thoroughly in just a moment because the Cyclops
grabs two of his men, dashes their brains out in the floor and then eats the bones and
all right in front of Odysseus and his men.
The next morning he has two more men for breakfast and then he takes his flocks out and he rolls
that stone in front of the cave again, trapping the men inside.
They spend their day finding a great olive pole at the back of the cave which they sharpened
to a point and then they heat it in the fire to make sure that it's really, really a hard
point.
And then that evening when the Cyclops comes back they offer him the guest gift that Odysseus
brought along which is some very strong brandy.
The Cyclops it turns out has never had any alcohol and he gets immediately drunk.
He's already eaten two more of the men and as he falls asleep that night Odysseus in
a very colorful way says that as he snores he's dribbling gobbets of men and brandy as
he snores.
So what the men do is as soon as he's sound asleep he's getting a drunken sleep they
take this pointed trunk and then they heat it in the fire and then in an epic simile
they drive it into the middle of his single eye.
They said driving it in the way a carpenter does a drill in a plank.
Now the giant is blinded so he can't get at them.
They can avoid him during the night but they still have to get out of the cave so in the
morning when the Cyclops is ready to let his sheep back out of the cave Odysseus straps
his men underneath some of the great sheep that are going out of the cave and then the
last one he picks the biggest ram for himself and he holds on by his hands underneath the
ram's belly and that's the way they make it out.
They make it out and when they get out out beyond the cave mouth he unstraps his men.
They herd a few of the sheep down to the ship and then they get in the ship and they start
rowing like mad to go back out to their main ship.
Odysseus however stands up in the back of the boat and he says something like this is
what you get for being a bad host.
The Cyclops is blind but he isn't deaf so he picks up a rock and throws it in the direction
of the sound.
The rock lands in front of the boat and drives it back toward the shore.
The men have to row twice as fast now and they're rowing harder and harder and as they
get back out a little bit back out to sea Odysseus stands up and he gets ready to yell
again and his crew says for God's sakes captain don't yell again he'll get the range sooner
or later and he'll sink us but he yells anyway and this is what he says.
He says, Kyclops if ever mortal man inquire how you were put to shame and blinded tell
him Odysseus raider of cities took your eye, laity son whose homes on Ithaca.
Now despite the kind of fantastic fairytale quality of a story like this we can see that
some of the values are the same ones as we ran across in the Iliad.
What he does here is he stirs up trouble, exposes himself to danger, loses six men in
the process but leaves having enhanced his reputation, having achieved another bit of
glory by blinding the Cyclops.
And we notice that when he calls out to the Cyclops as he's leaving he rolls off his
entire resume so the Cyclops knows exactly who this is.
This is the king of Ithaca, this is a raider of cities, this is son of laity, this is Odysseus.
One of my colleagues said that she was always reminded by this episode of Tom and Jerry
cartoons where the cat is sleeping happily and comfortably and then the mouse comes up
and drops an anvil on his head or tweaks his whiskers or does something and then the cat
tries to retaliate and of course the mouse gets the better of it and at the very end
of the cartoon you always get the mouse jerking his thumb over his shoulder and saying do
you see what I did to that big dummy, do you see what I did to that big dummy?
And in a way that's an apt kind of analogy because here what he does is he stirs up trouble,
causes pain, suffers pain, loses six of his men but he leaves with an enhanced reputation.
In a more serious context that's precisely what Achilles was doing at Troy.
As he says he had no personal reason for being there, he was just there to stir up trouble
and win fame for himself.
So in a way there's a kind of nice parallel between the motives of the heroes of these
two poems.
As we also said in our last lecture honor is a zero sum game.
In order to win some you have to win it from somebody.
So that at Troy you win it from other warriors, here you win it from the Cyclops.
And the Cyclops name turns out to be polyphemus which means much talk or much fame so even
his name sort of fits in to this whole pattern.
When the risks continue the story doesn't quite end here because when Odysseus rose
back out to sea polyphemus whose father happens to be Poseidon prays to Poseidon to make sure
that Odysseus homecoming is not an easy one.
So every time from now on that Odysseus goes out to see Poseidon will try to sink his ships.
So once again we have this pattern, Odysseus could have slipped away without encountering
the Cyclops.
By doing so he blinds the Cyclops, he loses six men, earns the wrath of Poseidon and in
the process becomes somebody, becomes Odysseus, enhances his name.
The motif is this motif of personal fame and reputation is underscored I think by the kind
of temptations that Odysseus resists on his way home all of which are designed to get
him to lay down his arms to live a long happy quiet anonymous life.
The lotus eaters remember eat lotus and then they vegetate in their hammocks.
He turns men into swine who spend their entire life eating and drinking.
The sirens tempt men on the basis of their reputation to bring their ships too close
to shore and then sink the ships.
And particularly when Odysseus lands on the country of the Phyachians, Phyachians live
in a kind of never never land in which their ships never sink, the gods have a special
care for them, they don't even have a military, they have song and dance or what their activities
are.
There Odysseus is offered the hand of a princess.
If he stays he can marry the princess, he can become king of this place.
In all of these things however what Odysseus would have to do in order to take up any of
these temptations to fall for them is he would have to stop being Odysseus, he would have
to stop being the guy who goes out and wins fame for himself.
Most notably of all is the temptation of Calypso.
When Odysseus loses his last ship he washes the shore on Calypso's island and he stays
there for seven years because he has no way of getting off the island.
Calypso is a nymph, a goddess, she falls in love with him, she really wants him to stay,
she tries everything to make him stay and Odysseus keeps resisting, keeps wanting to
get back out to sea until finally Zeus sends a messenger down and says to Calypso you've
got to let him go and then she makes her last offer and she says if you stay with me, if
you stay here I will give you immortality, I will make you immortal.
And you know this is the kind of temptation you think why would Odysseus go back out to
sea when I teach this, I ask my male students what they think of Odysseus' choice here
and they all think he's mad, here's a woman who loves him, who will give him immortality,
he takes care of his every needs, what he does is he turns all of that down to go back
out to sea where Poseidon will try to kill him.
But of course to stay there with Calypso he would have had to stop being Odysseus, Calypso
lives at the end of nowhere, it takes forever even for Hermes the messenger god to get to
her place.
Her name comes from a Greek verb which means to hide or to cover and so in order for Odysseus
to stay there he could have lived forever but he wouldn't have been Odysseus anymore,
he would have been nobody, he would have been somebody who lives out the far end of nowhere
where no one ever visits.
And if we remember from the Iliad Achilles had the same choice, Achilles remember had
the choice he could have stayed home and lived a long but undistinguished life or he
could go to Troy and there he could die young but be remembered forever and ever, he goes
to Troy.
What Odysseus does is he makes exactly that same choice on a kind of eternal scale.
It's even more astounding I think more impressive if we remember that Odysseus makes this choice
after chronologically not in the order of narration but after chronologically he's
already been to Hades and he's seen the spirits of those people who died in the Trojan war.
Among them is Achilles and he says to Achilles he says you must be so happy down here because
everybody remembers you up there, you have a reputation that will never die and Achilles
seems to have had a change of heart between the Iliad and the Odyssey because what he
says to Odysseus here is he says better I say to break sod as a farm hand for some poor
country man on iron rations than lord it over all the exhausted dead.
What Achilles says I'd rather be the servant of a landless man than to be dead and Odysseus
has already been down there and heard Achilles say this and still he decides to leave Calypso's
island and go back out to sea.
He still persists risking his life over and over and over again to win the kind of honor
that outlives death and in a way thus defeats death.
Mark Edwards says in a book called the Homer poet of the Iliad he's talking about Achilles
but it really works for Odysseus here too.
He says that what the hero does is he conquers death by accepting it and then ranking other
things ahead of it.
That's what Odysseus does to accept death and then ranks other things ahead of it.
So over and over again in this poem Odysseus chooses the difficult and dangerous way to
keep on adding to his name to be a mortal hero rather than an anonymous immortal.
In all of these ways we see some really I think significant parallels between this poem
and the Iliad but this is a different poem and in some ways there are some really important
differences between this poem and the Iliad as well.
This poem for one thing is set in peacetime rather than in wartime and hence the ambience
for the poem is entirely different than it is in the Iliad.
There's not much ordinary life in the Iliad.
The way ordinary life gets sneaked in from time to time is with those epic similes.
We looked at that one beautiful one in the last lecture about the shepherd sitting out
on the hillside looking out at a starry night and being so happy to be there.
That's the only way, about the only way that ordinary life gets into the Iliad because
otherwise it's a war epic.
It takes place on the battlefield.
Even the Troy scenes which are closer to ordinary are not quite normal because they've been
at war for nine years, they've been under siege for over nine years and they're way
too many orphans and widows than there would be under normal peacetime.
In this poem one third of the entire poem deals with hospitality and feasts and sacrifices
and people coming to your house unexpectedly and you have to entertain them.
One third of the poem is given over to these kinds of rituals, these kinds of ceremonies
and in some ways of course we can say that's what Odysseus is trying to fight his way home
for.
He's trying to get back to that kind of life, back to the life where he's a king and a father
living in a household in safe and secure and peaceful times.
Odysseus, so that's one of the things that makes this poem quite different from the Iliad.
Another way that this poem is different is that Odysseus antagonists are very different
from the antagonists of the heroes in the Iliad.
In the Iliad you had, it was pretty much straightforward heroes facing off against one another.
They have the same armor, they have the same skills, they believe in the same codes and
so you could have straightforward, clear, no cheating kind of fights.
Here Odysseus antagonists are going to be people like giants and monsters and witches
and nymphs who don't observe any of the rules of heroic fighting and therefore have to be
opposed not with straightforward heroic strength and the code of fighting but rather with guile,
with trickery, with cheating.
Even Odysseus' triumphant return home turns out not to be a heroic victory because when
he gets home he discovers he's outnumbered by those suitors who have occupied his house.
He's outnumbered 108 to one.
He finds two allies that he can count on to help him but he's still outnumbered 108 to
three and so he can't kill them in fair fight so he has to get them trapped in a room without
their armor and then he has to mow them down in cold blood with his bow and arrow.
By the way he's been gone for twenty years by the time he gets back and all of these
108 suitors are camping out in his house because they're trying to force Penelope to
accept one of them as her husband and thus he will become the next king of Ithaca.
Everybody thinks that Odysseus must be dead after twenty years so when he gets home Odysseus
sneaks into his house as a beggar and then he kills the 108 when he has his weapons,
they have their weapons locked in another room so even that's not really a heroic fight
in the way that the heroic fights take place in the Iliad.
And so his epithet, his heroic epithet as opposed to those heroic epithets, that is
the little adjective that goes along with the name usually in the poem when it's mentioned,
his heroic epithet as opposed to something like swift footed or great armed, his epithet
is wily or many faceted, that is tricky Odysseus and so again it makes the ambience of this
poem very different and his own skills are going to be quite different than those of
the characters in the Iliad.
One of Odysseus' great skills is his ability to tell stories, to fabricate, to tell lies,
to make stuff up when he's in a tight spot.
The heroes of the Trojan Wars are straight speakers, they speak from the heart and in
fact in Book Nine of the Iliad when Eggamemnon sends an embassy to Achilles, before they
start talking Achilles said let's speak from the heart, let's speak truth to one another
and then he says, I hate that man like the very gates of death who says one thing but
hides another in his heart, well saying one thing and hiding another in his heart becomes
the hallmark of Odysseus, he lies all the time even when he doesn't have to and when
he introduces himself to the phyachians for three days they're very polite, they haven't
asked him who he is, they fed him for three days, at the end of three days he finally
decides to tell him who he is and what he says about himself at a banquet, he stands
up and he announces this is who I am, he says I am Lairty's son Odysseus, men hold
me formidable for guile in peace and war, this fame has gone abroad to the sky's rim,
so when he tells the phyachians I'm Odysseus, I'm the tricky one, I am known for guile
as far as the world extends.
Even Athena admires him for this, Athena who is his sort of special goddess protector
says we're just alike, she said I love the way you make up stories even when you don't
have to, you just reflexively tell lies and it was for this reason that James Joyce called
him the most complete man in all of literature and hence his title of his book Ulysses which
is just the Latin name for Odysseus.
The difference between the heroic world of the Iliad and the peacetime world of the Odyssey
can best be illustrated in one tiny little episode which is so beautiful, when Odysseus
goes down to Hades he runs across the spirits of many of the people who were killed in the
Trojan War and one of them is Aeus, now Aeus was the second best fighter in the Achaian
army and when Achilles is killed and that beautiful armor of Achilles is going to be
given to the next best and the next most valuable warrior in the Achaian army, Aeus is ready
to step forward to get it because he's quite sure he's going to, the army instead awards
it to Odysseus and Aeus is so shamed by not getting that armor that he goes out and kills
himself.
Now Odysseus meets him in Hades and what Odysseus says is he says, I'm so sorry it all worked
out this way, I thought I'd have known that armor was going to cause, what Odysseus tries
to do is to mollify this spirit a little bit and the difference, distance between the heroic
world that Aeus comes from and then not quite so heroic world that Odysseus comes from
as a parent in that Aeus listens to him and then doesn't speak a word to him, he just
very slowly turns and walks back among the shades without even acknowledging that Odysseus
has spoken to him.
So that in one kind of way this is like, I don't know, like somebody from the old heroic
world looking at somebody who's dead, who's dead because he was believed in honor, looking
at someone who's still alive because he's compromised his honor in so many ways already
and will compromise it some more before he gets home.
The distance between the heroic world and this world is also reflected in some of Odysseus
disguises and some of the epithets or some of the epic similes that are used to describe
him.
When he gets home he has to disguise himself as a beggar and for three days he gets bumped
around and kicked around and people make fun of him and throw things at him.
This in his own house, he's still disguised as a beggar, he's allowed to sleep in a hallway
but it's a drafty hallway and he gets cold at night and he keeps rolling back and forth
trying to find a place to stay warm and the poet tells us that he rolls back and forth
like a sausage being turned on a spit.
Now if we can't imagine Achilles or A.S. ever disguising himself as a beggar and it's
even more impossible to imagine Achilles being compared to a sausage on a spit.
So there's a different ambience, there's a different world here.
Because one other final difference that I want to mention, and this one I think is really
important too, because there are so many domestic scenes and because so many of Odysseus' opponents
work by indirection here, women characters play a far more important part in this poem
than they do in the Iliad.
In the Iliad we had mostly slave women, except for the few wives and mothers we get to see
back at Troy.
In this poem we have Helen, we have Cersei, we have Calypso, we have Penelope and they
are formidable women who really easily control all the men in the poem except possibly Odysseus
and Odysseus sometimes needs help to be able to manage to deal with them.
Helen is Helen of Troy, she's back in Sparta, back with Menelaus, Telemachus, Odysseus'
son visits looking for news of his dad and she is marvelously in charge of her household.
She is a woman of a certain age, of a certain experience who now has Menelaus wrapped around
her finger once again and just charms the socks off of young Telemachus.
Cersei changes men into swine and Odysseus is not turned into a swine only because he
has a magic herb from Hermes which prevents that from happening to him and Calypso manages
to keep Odysseus with her until she is forced to release him by Zeus himself which means
that to escape from her Odysseus needed some help too.
Back home, back in Ithaca, Penelope has in some way metaphorically changed 108 suitors
into swine as well, she's as powerful as Cersei.
She has had nothing but her wit in order to hold these suitors at bay for 20 years and
they've all wanted her, her beauty, her intelligence, the position that she would grant to the one
who marries her.
In all of these kinds of ways she is totally desirable and she's managed to keep these
men at bay but what has happened is over these 20 years those young men have turned
into swine as surely as Odysseus men did, they just camp out at Odysseus' house corrupting
his maids, eating his beef, drinking his wine and just waiting for her to make her final
choice.
When Odysseus comes home and kills all of them, I think this is one of the great scenes
in the entire poem, when Odysseus comes home and has killed all of the suitors then he
cleans up and Athena fixes him up so his hair is nice and he looks really good and he stands
up and he says, hi dear, I'm home and he doesn't use those words but he says essentially that
and what we expect, what Telemachus expects, I think what Odysseus expects too, is that
what she will do is she will simply collapse into his arms, she'll say, oh thank God you're
home.
She doesn't.
Penelope is a woman who's guile, who's trickiness, whose deceitfulness is as great as Odysseus
and she's had to use her wit to keep 108 suitors at arm's length for 20 years.
And so what she does is she says, well a lot of guys have come by in the last 20 years
claiming to be Odysseus, maybe you're Odysseus, maybe you're not.
If you are Odysseus, time will tell and there will be ways that we will identify each other,
we'll know each other for who we are.
She says in the meantime, take the big bed that's in my bedroom and move out in the
hall and you can sleep there, at which point Odysseus loses his temper.
He says, I built that bed with my own hands and one of the posts is a living tree and
if that bed can be moved, someone has been in my bedroom since I've been here.
At which point Penelope simply smiles and says, I guess you really are Odysseus after
all.
She makes him lose his temper.
She makes him lose control.
She does this in a way that he's been so good throughout the entire poem, he gets home
and his wife manages to make him lose his temper.
It's a great, great moment.
They spend that night making love and telling each other stories about the last 20 years.
Athena actually holds back the dawn a little bit so that they will have a longer time to
get all of their stories told and we hope at the end of the poem, we hope that these
two will be able to live happily ever after as equals in a way that we could not imagine
in the Iliad.
That's one of the ways in which women are so powerful in this poem.
The impact of these two poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey on subsequent history of literature
is incalculable.
It bequeathed to all of subsequent Western civilization and literature the idea of personal
heroism to be true to oneself, regardless of consequences to others, and we'll encounter
that kind of heroism again in Greek tragedy.
We'll see it in some of Shakespeare's characters, notably Coriolanus or Hotspur in the One
Henry Fourplay.
We'll run across it again in Gertis Faust.
We'll even run across it in a couple of the series, will be by William Faulkner of Blasch
Jolens and Emily Gersen, and we'll run across it again in Chinima Achebe's Oconco in Things
Fall Apart.
But if Achilles is the straightforward, honest to his bones hero, a guy who doesn't lie and
who fights fair and who fights by the heroic code, Odysseus is the trickster, the wily
one, and we'll meet him again in the Chinese novel Monkey, we'll meet him again in many
of the tales in Chaucer in the One Thousand One Nights, all the way down to Tom and Jerry
cartoons.
We'll even see a little bit of him, I think, in Huck Finn when we get to Huck Finn.
Huck is going to be a hero too, a different kind of hero, not a military hero, but there
will be elements of Huck Finn that we're going to run across here too.
In our course, that is, these two different kinds of heroes, a hero who lives by the straightforward
heroic code, and the hero who lives by his guile, by his wits, by his tricks, those two
kinds of heroes will never go away, and we'll keep encountering them over and over again
as we move ahead.
In our next program, we will be leaving the heroic world for a brief time to travel to
China, and as we started out by saying, China is going to be the foil body of literature
in this first unit, where other people were describing heroes and heroic battles and heroic
codes and defining the nature of the hero and writing about events that are larger than
life that feature gods and goddesses.
The Chinese are going to spend their classic period of literature writing about ordinary
people, doing ordinary things.
One of the oldest pieces of literature in the entire Chinese tradition turns out to be,
interestingly and wonderfully, turns out to be a book of lyric poems, which are subjective,
which are personal, and which speak with ordinary people about ordinary things.
That will be the next time in our next lecture.
