Lecture 44, Nagib Mahfuz's The Cairo Trilogy.
In our last lecture, we talked about William Faulkner, who created the mythical Yaknipotoffa
County in order to tell the story of the American South from before the Civil War to
about the time of the 1940s.
This time we consider Nagib Mahfuz, a writer who did something comparable for Egypt, specifically
for Cairo, between the period from 1917 to 1944 in the three novels that make up the
Cairo Trilogy, titled Palace Walk, Palace of Desire and Sugar Street.
There are some other partly interesting parallels between the writers.
As well, Faulkner was considered pretty much a regional writer until the Nobel Prize brought
him to the attention of the rest of the world.
Mahfuz was well known in the Arab world as an important novelist, but he didn't really
come to the attention of the Western world and Western readers until after the Nobel
Prize had spotlighted him in 1988.
So that today, as Faulkner is considered one of the greatest of all American novelists,
so Mahfuz is considered to be one of the greatest of all Arabic novelists.
As with Rabindranath Tagore and Kawabata Yasunari, we need to consider Mahfuz in terms of the
influence that Western fiction had on him and the way that all kinds of cross currents,
Western and Eastern, old and new, traditional, religious and modern materialist cultures
oppose and mingle with each other in his themes and techniques.
Just a word about the novel's form.
The Arabic world didn't really have a tradition, a novel tradition, until the 20th century.
There had been other narrative forms, and we had a chance to look at at least one of
them in the 1001 Nights many, many lectures ago, but it had nothing like the novel as
we've been defining it and watching its development from the time at least of Don Quixote.
As in India and Japan, Western influence was very strong in Egypt, and Egypt began around
1883 in the form of British occupation, and that Western influence was intensified when
Egypt was made an English protectorate during World War I.
It meant that writers like Mahfuz had access to a tradition in literature that reached
back for several centuries and had undergone a lot of different transformations.
The Western novel had developed from the time of Don Quixote to the realist novel of
Flaubert, to the psychological realist novel of James and Conrad, to the modernist novel
of Joyce.
The most important literary forms in Arabic had always been poetic or in poetry so that
when the novel tradition came to places like Egypt, writers had to master that entire novel
tradition in all of its evolutionary permutations in order to begin to write Arabic novels,
which amazingly is precisely what Mahfuz did.
His first novels, written in the 1930s, were really historical romances in the manner of
Sir Walter Scott.
They were, of course, based on Egypt's past rather than on Scotland's past, but the formal
model was that of Sir Walter Scott.
About 1945, he began writing realist novels in the manner of Flaubert, and the Cairo trilogy,
which we'll take a look at in this lecture, belongs to this phase.
His acknowledged influences for this period included Balzac and Tolstoy and Thomas Mann
and Marcel Proust, all of whom had written works which defined an entire era by tracing
a family or a set of related characters across several generations.
By 1959, Mahfuz was moving into his modernist phase, his so-called modernist phase, using
broken chronology and fragmented narrative and multiple points of view and stream of
consciousness, and all kinds of other devices that we've identified as modern in the works
of Proust and Joyce and Faulkner.
His 1972 novel, Mirror, in fact, has some really striking resemblances to Faulkner's
As I Lay Dying, in its use of 54 different characters to reflect different aspects of
modern Egyptian society and culture.
So it's really no exaggeration to say that Mahfuz brought the novel into Arabic literature,
and by recapitulating all of the stages of development of the Western novel and adapting
them to his own culture, he created a new literary form for the Arabic world, combining
the best features of the old and new East and West, European and Arabic.
The novels that we'll be looking at today belong to his realist phase, and fortunately
we've had enough experience in this course with realism that we have a pretty good idea
when we open up a novel that we know is going to be a realist novel.
We pretty much know what to expect and how to deal with it.
Essentially a realist novel is going to give us chronological plots with clear beginnings
and middles and ends.
It's going to give us fairly well-defined characters, unified characters, who move from
novel to novel.
There are going to be enough references to Egyptian history and to historical figures
to give the books a sense of authority and authenticity, and in the use of setting in
one of the oldest parts of Cairo, Mahfuz very much reminds us of the way Joyce uses Dublin
in Dubliners or Ulysses.
The book is full of carefully observed details of everyday life in the manner of Flaubert,
for example.
It's been said, in fact, that many of the rituals and customs which are no longer observed
in Egypt today would probably have disappeared and entirely vanished had it not been for
the fact that they were very carefully recorded by Mahfuz, particularly in the first novel
in this trilogy.
The subject of the trilogy is a middle-class family, and that's no surprise either.
That's the expected subject of realists from the time of Flaubert and Ibsen, and he traces
the members of that middle-class family across three generations from 1917 to 1944.
The point of view of his novels is third person omniscient, and again, that's not really
a surprise.
That's the manner of Flaubert or Dostoevsky or Tagore, and so all of this is familiar,
and so when we open his books, we can open them with some confidence about what we're
dealing with.
But there are some important differences from the way we defined realism earlier in these
books as well.
By the time he wrote these books, Mahfuz had read James Joyce, and beginning with the
second volume, Palace of Desire, he makes significant use of stream of consciousness,
a technique that we've seen in our course in Joyce and Kalobata and Faulkner.
And critics have noticed how influenced Mahfuz is by the philosophy of Henri Bergson and
his idea of time as duration and experience, rather than as a measurable process that we
can define with clocks and calendars.
We've seen Bergson's influence on Proust and Pirandello, and we know that Mahfuz read both
Bergson and Proust, so Bergson really has a double chance to influence the novels with
Mahfuz.
And so much of the interior lives of the characters in Mahfuz's trilogy deals with
memory in a way that's reminiscent of Proust, the remembrance of things past.
And we know that Mahfuz always acknowledged the influence of that book upon him and always
admitted his great admiration for it.
In fact, if we remember saying back in our lecture on Proust, the time was the great
enemy in Proust's novel, it may very well be the real protagonist of Mahfuz's in a
way that we'll come back to in a bit.
So Mahfuz's novels are definitely realist in mode, but if they are definitely realist
in mode, they also participate in some of the techniques and devices we've been defining
as modern or modernist.
The novels cover a period, as we said, in Egyptian history from 1917, which is in the
middle of World War I to 1944, just before the end of World War II.
At the beginning of the first novel, which is called Palace Walk, Egypt was still officially
a part of the Ottoman Empire, but it had been occupied by England since 1883 and had
been made a British protectorate in 1914.
The novel makes clear that there was very, very strong anti-British feeling in Egypt
during the war, so strong, in fact, that it allowed the Egyptians to hope that the Germans
would win and when they won to expel the British, especially since one of Germany's allies
in the First World War was the Ottoman Empire, of which, as we said, Egypt was still officially
a part.
When the Allies won in 1918 and the English thus maintained their hold on Egypt, a movement
for independence swept the country, which culminated in a series of demonstrations in 1919, which
produced a fairly large number of martyrs for Egyptian nationalism, including one son
of the family at the center of Palace Walk.
Constitutional monarchy was established in Egypt in 1923, but that didn't really end
the struggle since now there were three factions, the king, the English and Egyptian leaders
who could make shifting alliances for real control of the country.
When the trilogy ends in 1944, two grandsons of the original family are in prison detention
camps, one for being a member of a group called the Muslim Brethren, which is committed to
restoring political and social control of the country back to the Quran, and the other
for being a Marxist and working for the victory of socialism in Egypt.
It's against that social and political background that Mahfouz sets his novel of a family over
three generations.
We watch as politics gradually invades the family in a way that reflects its impact on
the generations of Egyptians who lived through these turbulent times when all of Egypt was
going through painful and difficult changes.
The first two-thirds of the first volume, Palace Walk, gives us the life of the family
of Ahmad Abed El-Jawad in 1917 and 1918.
It's a very traditional Muslim family for its time.
Its father is a merchant who runs a grocery store, and it is a deeply religious family.
God's name is on everyone's lips at almost every moment of every day.
The father is also an absolute patriarch, running the family with a kind of iron and
unsmiling control that brooks no hint of opposition from either his wife or his five children.
But he's also what Rashid El-Anani in his book on Mahfouz calls a bundle of contradictions.
At home he is an absolute autocrat, but in the larger world outside the home he's a
witty and cheerful friend, he's a respected businessman, and at night he is something
of a libertine who spends his time with his friends, drinking in the company of mistresses,
mostly drawn from the world of professional singers, because he absolutely loves music.
We may have some trouble with this character, not because he's not credible, because he
is, but we're likely to draw back a little morally from a character who's so oblivious
to the rights of the rest of his family, especially his wife, and from what we might take to be
a kind of blatant hypocrisy and the difference between his home life and his life at night
away from home.
But I think that we probably have to suspend some of our judgments and values the same
way we did in our understanding of gender relations in the tale of Genji in order to understand
that Ahmad Abed El-Jawad is a representative of a long cultural tradition, an embodiment
of Egypt's past that is violently challenged during the rest of the trilogy.
For him at any rate, in his own life, his contradictions seem to work.
Whatever we might think of him, his children adore him even when they're frightened of
him, and his wife thinks of herself as a blessed woman, when even after 25 years of confinement
to the house, one day she ventures out to a mosque, and when her husband finds out about
it, he punishes her by sending her home to her mother.
The first part of the trilogy establishes this family and its routines as a kind of
baseline for the world of the three novels, describing a way of life that will almost
entirely have disappeared by the end of the third novel.
The novel, as we said just a moment ago, records the impact of political events in Egypt on
this family.
Every afternoon, the family members, minus the father who's always still at work, meet
for coffee and to talk to share what's happened to them during the course of the day.
Gradually, as these meetings move on through the book, we notice that events on the streets
outside, especially political events, start taking up more and more time at these gatherings.
There's at one point the British occupying army actually set up a camp just outside the
El Jouad house, which symbolically, in a way, indicates the state of Egypt in a difficult
time.
The family's routine is disrupted by events on the streets of Cairo, but it is absolutely
devastated when the second eldest son, Fami, is shot and killed in a demonstration.
He's been a sort of favorite child in the household.
He was serious.
He was scholarly.
He was attending law school when he's caught up in the demonstrations and the rebellion
of 1919.
After his death, the family tries to maintain normal routines.
The two daughters of the family get married during the course of the first novel, and
the eldest son marries once and gets divorced.
But even though they try to maintain a normal routine, the family will never quite be the
same again.
Ahmad Abed El Jouad suspends all of his nighttime life for five years to mourn for Fami, and
Ahmad's wife never quite recovers from the loss of such a splendid son.
The first volume ends shortly after Fami's death.
The second volume is called Palace of Desire, and it traces the slow decline of the parents,
but it really focuses on the next generation, especially on Kamal, who was a child of nine
or ten in the first volume.
Social changes in Egypt are indicated in the second volume when the two daughters of Ahmad
Abed El Jouad marry into relationships of virtual equality with their husbands.
That's as opposed to the kind of relationship their mother had with her husband.
And when the eldest son, who really tries to maintain his father's patriarchal control
in his own family, goes through two quick marriages and divorces, learning that the
old ways simply don't work anymore the way they did for his father.
He eventually manages a stable marriage, only by marrying one of his father's former mistresses,
a professional singer, and although the family is shocked, she is shrewd enough to be able
to allow her husband a certain amount of freedom while still maintaining a strict control of
the marriage.
But the real focus of that second volume is Kamal, the youngest son, who in the process
of this novel comes to reject many traditional Egyptian values, including those of religion.
In school and in his own research, he studies Western thinkers like Auguste Comte and Henri
Bergson and Charles Darwin, and in the process he comes to doubt many of the values by which
he was raised and which embody so much of traditional Egyptian culture.
His older brother also tells him about his father's nightly adventures with alcohol
and sex, and so his disillusionment with what he has always believed in is virtually total.
In a kind of splendidly symbolic scene, Kamal's father has come across an article in a journal
written on Darwin that Kamal had quietly written and published, thinking that his father would
never come across this journal.
In the scene, the father calls his son to account by asserting that the truth about the origins
of life are in the Quran, which tells of Adam being formed out of clay and given breath
by God.
He demands an explanation from his son for his seeming defense of Darwin's theory.
In the process, he asks Kamal whether this Charles Darwin is one of his teachers at school.
So the gap between generations, at least intellectually, could not be more clearly drawn, and here
Kamal is a perfect representation of his entire generation, caught between the values of his
mother and father, whom he loves and admires, and the new ways of thinking brought into
Egypt in the 20th century.
Kamal's dilemma, caught between the old and the new, is really beautifully focused in
this second volume by his infatuation for a young woman, Aida, who's the sister of
his best friend at school.
She's the daughter of an aristocrat who, for political reasons, had been exiled to
France and so Aida has been raised in France, in Paris, and she returns half-westernized,
wearing western clothes and sporting a lot of western manners.
She knows more about Catholicism than she does about Islam, and she associates very
freely with her brother's friends, including Kamal, retaining none of the inhibitions of
Kamal's sisters, who spent the time until they were married, sequestered in the house,
whose only contact with the outside world was through lattices on the second floor porch
of the family's home.
Once when invited on a picnic by Aida's brother, Aida and her little sister come along, and
the menu includes ham, sandwiches, and beer, both of which are forbidden by strict Islamic
dietary codes and were unknown in Kamal's house.
Kamal falls hopelessly, romantically, platonically in love with Aida, and much of the second
volume of the trilogy is devoted to his thinking and dreaming about her.
Eventually, she winds up marrying a man of her own class, and in the process, Mufouz
allows us to see through Kamal's romantic vision of her to see her essential cruelty
and selfishness and the damage that she manages to wreak on Kamal.
Now, insofar as Aida is an embodiment of some of the western values that are carrying Kamal
away from his traditional family and into closer alliance with the modern world, she
is an ambiguous symbol.
In fact, Kamal winds up absolutely paralyzed by the tensions between the old and the new,
between eastern and western, between traditional and modern, and even by the end of the third
volume, he hasn't yet found himself.
At the end of the third volume, he's still single, he's still living at home.
By the end of that third novel, both of his parents have died, and he lives in a virtual
empty house accompanied only by one of his sisters, who's had so much trauma in her
life that she's become a kind of mental invalid, and one very old servant who's been around
since the very beginning of the first volume.
He's still, at the end of that third volume, unable to commit himself to anything.
He's lost all of his old faiths, he's beset by skepticism and doubt, and he lives by a
kind of paradox, pitting one idea against another in the hope that one day truth, which
he still really believes in, will declare itself to him and give him something to believe
in some way to act.
His internal monologues, which Mahfouz learned in part from reading Joyce, are really wonderful.
So some of the best parts of this second volume, and they portray in very immediate ways the
kind of struggle of the modern Egyptian to reconcile the conflicting forces at work in
his society and his culture.
The third and final volume of the trilogy is called Sugar Street, and it follows the
fortunes of the family up to 1944, near the end of World War II.
In it, the great old patriarch Ahmed Abed El-Jawad yields slowly and inexorably to time in a series
of heart attacks and strokes that lead finally to his death.
He dies on the night of an air raid.
Though as he is, he has to leave the house to go to the air raid shelter, and Kamal has
to actually carry him back home, a sign that the relationship between father and son has
reversed itself, and he dies later that night.
If Mahfouz learned from the realist writers how to document and detail the pictures of
Egyptian society that he gives us, he also learned a great deal more than that from them.
We remember the way that Flaubert and Ibsen could take details from a physical setting
and then use them symbolically.
So here, in Kamal's seduction from traditional beliefs, symbolized by a half-westernized woman
is one of those brilliant kinds of uses of symbol that the realists would have been proud
of, and it's a particularly nice touch, I think, that the patriarch dies on the night
of an air raid.
He dies on the night of an air raid, airplanes being the most advanced product of western
science and technology, and so it seems perfectly appropriate that he should die on a night
of an air raid.
On the last pages of the third volume, Ahmad's wife dies, and with her passes the most deeply
religious and committed Muslim in the book.
Her father was a religious teacher, and she has inherited his piety, if not his learning.
When she dies, Kamal, on whose consciousness the event is most clearly registered and delivered
to us, realizes that he has lost the one person in the world who loved him most, but he also
realizes that he has long since given up her belief system.
So at Novel's end, he finds himself still caught between two ways of thinking and believing.
As he says to himself, he's a skeptic even of his own skepticism.
He is a really strikingly drawn portrait of the dilemma of modern humans, whether in
Egypt, or France, or America, or almost anywhere else in the world.
It's just that the realist mode locates Kamal solidly in an Egyptian context and gives us
specifically Egyptian reasons for why it happens.
By the end of the trilogy, the El Jawad family has declined in many ways from its heyday
at the beginning.
There have been a series of deaths, including some of the grandchildren and even one great
grandchild has died.
The certainty of and absolutes of the parent's generation have all eroded.
And two of the grandchildren are in prison waiting trial as subversives.
As we mentioned earlier, time in some ways seems to be the protagonist of the entire
trilogy.
And as it's been for every writer since Gilgamesh, time is the great destroyer here, taking
the once vital and almost godlike Ahmad Abed El Jawad with his magnificent good looks and
his lust for living and his bigger than life appetites, his never failing good health and
high spirits and slowly, slowly eating away at him until he dies on the night of an air
raid, a pitiful old man who has to be carried home by his son.
And it carries away to his wife, always energetic, always optimistic, always comforting, always
supporting.
And it carries her often to a coma, which doesn't even let her say goodbye to her family, which
gathers at her bedside at the time of her death.
We get to watch this process in detail over the course of three novels.
Individual human beings succumb to time's power, and the trilogy records that process
in really, really precise detail.
But there's another side to time, one which Mufouz learned from Bergson, and that's collective
time or evolutionary time in which every individual serves as a brick in building the edifice
of a kind of generic mankind, which is eternal and which therefore transcends the ravages
of time on any individual.
Rashid El Anani quotes Mufouz on this subject in his book on Mufouz.
This is what Mufouz has to say about the difference between individual and collective time.
As El Anani argues in his book, if time destroys the individual, it also promotes a kind of
social progress or evolution, so that if Fami, the brilliant young son of the original family
dies, he simply wills the time that he hasn't used on to the next generation.
And his death, in fact, makes possible the next stage of development in Egypt.
In that generation, two young men who would have been Fami's nephews had he lived long
enough become his incarnation.
They are jailed at Novel's End for carrying on the revolution for which he gave his life.
The one, the Muslim brother, has a wife who will deliver a child while he's in prison,
so that in a purely biological way, while he's in prison and his grandmother is dying,
a new generation will be born to take the place of the one that's passing away.
But for Mufouz, there is far more to it than biological.
At the end of the trilogy, Kamal is still paralyzed with doubt and uncertainty.
He's still caught between two worlds, unable to make a commitment to either one, but he
visits at the very end, he visits the two brothers, his nephews, in prison.
As he tells a friend afterwards, the communist nephew has told him that he believes that
one has a duty to one's work and one's marriage.
That is a kind of given of life, but beyond that, he says, he believes that everyone has
a duty to what he calls the perpetual revolution, by which he means this.
An unceasing effort to further the will of life represented by its progress toward the
ideal.
Kamal is really deeply moved by his nephew's resolve, and he promises to find some set
of beliefs by which he can live wherever they lead him.
He says that his nephew also told him this.
I believe in life and in people.
I feel obliged to advocate their highest ideals as long as I believe them to be true, since
shrinking from that would be a cowardly evasion of duty.
I also see myself compelled to revolt against ideals I believe to be false, since recoiling
from this rebellion would be a form of treason.
This is the meaning of perpetual revolution.
As El Anani notes, this is the other half of the meaning of time from Afuz.
Individual time has destroyed Fami and his parents and everyone who ever lived.
But collective time in the meanwhile has moved forward.
Fami gave his life for political freedom, which Egypt needed before it could think about
anything else.
But a generation later, with political freedom achieved, people in collective time have to
push forward toward social justice, making the political revolution not an end in itself,
but a means to an end, a step in collective and evolutionary time.
As Kamal's nephew puts it, the duty common to all human beings is perpetual revolution,
and that is nothing other than an unceasing effort to further the will of life represented
by its progress toward the ideal.
So, in this way, Mahfuz's trilogy is both a story of a family and of individuals within
that family as they face the destructive powers of time and a story of generations moving
forward through time, building on the achievements of the past, correcting their errors, moving
toward what Kamal's nephew calls the ideal.
And all of this is embodied in a specific moment of Egyptian history, making it we at
one more grand achievement in the realist mode of fiction.
We've seen in writers like Tagore and Mahfuz how talented authors can use realism to describe
and define what happens when a traditional way of life and a traditional culture is confronted
by patterns of thought and behavior, in both cases the new patterns coming from the West
to India or to Egypt.
And in a way, Dostoevsky did something of the same thing in Notes from Underground.
In all the cases we've looked at so far, the site of conflict as presented by these writers
has been in the consciousness of a single individual, torn between ways of thinking and believing
and behaving, whether that person is the underground man, the protagonist of Tagore's The Broken
Ties or The Hungry Stones, or Kamal in Mahfuz's trilogy.
Next time we'll take up a similar kind of novel, again in the realist mode, to find
out what happens when English missionaries make contact with and settle into a village
in Nigeria whose way of life has been established for many generations, and once again the central
conflict between old and new, indigenous and Western will be recounted and recorded in
the mind and heart of one of the greatest men of the village.
Next time, Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart.
