Lecture 38 – Kafka's The Metamorphosis
One morning, upon awakening from agitated dreams, Gregor Samsa found himself in his
bed, transformed into a monstrous vermin.
That turns out to be one of the most famous first sentences in all of literature.
A monstrous vermin, a monstrous insect, to be precise.
That first sentence has stimulated hundreds of critics into trying to find out how to
read this story and a lot of other writers into emulating Kafka's techniques as he
writes it.
As we noted in our last lecture, this is a rich period of experimentation in all of
the arts.
Kafka is one of the most innovative and one of the most radical experimenters of all
the writers we're going to be looking at in this period.
And already from this first sentence, we can tell there are two things that are very, very
innovative and very radical and very unusual about this sentence.
From Aristotle onward, it was always understood that every story had to have a neat, tidy
beginning, middle, and end.
And that had been refined over the years into a pattern which suggested that you had to
do exposition first.
That is, you had to tell enough information so that we know what's going on in the story.
And then there's rising action or complication leading to a climax and then the unraveling,
which is in the French word for that is dé nu mâ, which is usually what the word that's
used to describe that.
Here the climax happens in the very first sentence of the story.
The rest of the story from here on out is dé nu mâ, which shows the unraveling, which
shows the consequences of life for Gregor Sampsa and his family for having Gregor wake
up one morning after agitated dreams to discover that he had been transformed into a giant
vermin.
The second way in which this is a radically different and unusual kind of story is the
fact that once this transformation happens in the first sentence, from here on out Kafka
uses standard, realist techniques in the telling of his story, despite the fact that we are
dealing with what have to be some rather unusual circumstances.
That first sentence suggests that we're dealing with a fairy tale or a surrealistic fantasy
because ordinary cause-effect laws seem to have been suspended for the purpose of that
first sentence.
It makes us think that this is perhaps science fiction or fantasy or since dreams are mentioned
in that first sentence we think maybe this is just a dream that he's having.
But none of that happens.
The bug once Gregor has been transformed into an insect is treated in the most literal
way imaginable.
And again, it's sort of surprising the narrator is not surprised.
He's not horrified.
He's not shocked.
He simply says one morning he had been transformed into an insect and then he just goes on to
describe in great detail what life is like for Gregor now that he's a bug.
And the setting for this story is no fairy tale kingdom, but a pretty humdrum place with
tiring and boring jobs and demanding schedules and difficult bosses and the vermin, the insect
is really an insect.
So that what happens is once we're given that initial stunning first sentence the narrative
techniques force us to treat events that happen in the rest of the story in a realistic
way despite the defiance of natural law which is suggested by that first sentence.
What happens in the rest of the plot of the story is that Gregor of course can't go to
work as an insect and when he's late for work when he doesn't show up for work his
boss shows up and yells at him through the closed bedroom door.
Gregor tries to open the door but he doesn't know how to work all these new legs of his,
these arms or legs yet, and he can't figure out how to open up the door.
Eventually he does figure out how to do it with his mouth and he gets his mouth on the
knob and turns it and opens the door and as soon as the boss sees Gregor, a giant insect
inside his bedroom, the boss runs off down the stairs in horror.
The rest of the family turns out not to be horrified, not shocked, just mostly irritated.
It turns out that Gregor is the leading breadwinner in the family, he's the one who's held the
family together with his job and so they're not stunned in the way that we'd expect them
to be.
I mean if you think in ordinary life if I walked into a room and you know one of my children
had just been transformed into a giant insect I would probably be shocked, this family isn't.
They're just mostly annoyed, just irritated with him.
At first they feed him and they try to care for him but then they get jobs to replace
the money that he's not bringing in anymore, they re-focus their lives and as they do that
they leave him more and more to himself.
He emerges from his room during the course of the story three times, each time he precipitates
some disaster in the family and at the end the family abandons him.
He dies and the maid sweeps him into a dustpan and drops him into the garbage while the father,
the mother and his sister go to the country on a picnic.
And as we mentioned before all of these things that happen are handled in such a prosaic
way by the narrator that the family isn't horrified suggests that this is an ordinary
affair, this is just something that happens, it can happen in any family, it's just one
of those unfortunate things.
When we as experienced readers hit a patch like this, you know we assume that we're dealing
with something like metaphor or parable whose symbols we need to interpret and we think
well perhaps what we're being told here is that modern humans are becoming like insects
for example, we might read it that way.
But Kafka makes it really difficult for us to do this.
Once Gregor gets the hang of using all of his legs he finds it really exhilarating,
really exciting to be able to walk up the side of a wall, to walk across the ceiling
and walk back down the other side.
And we think well perhaps he's feeling a kind of release in transcending the plane of his
old life, transcending all of the ways he used to live escaping from the drudgery and
the humdrum and the agony of his old life.
But we also notice that as he walks up the wall and across the ceiling and down the other
side of the wall he leaves a kind of sticky gluey substance everywhere he walks.
But after a while the room starts to smell bad.
When the sister comes in in fact she has to hold her breath until she can get over the
window and throw the window open and then she sticks her head out, takes a breath of
fresh air.
The reason why it smells so bad is because as Gregor gets used to his new life he discovers
that he likes rotten food so much better than he likes fresh food that the family start
serving him rotten food.
So what happens is you know we suddenly realize this is real bug slime, this is not metaphoric
bug slime, he's leaving real slime as he goes across the ceiling and the odor is that
of rot, the rot, the smell of rotten food and as one critic says our sort of metaphoric
reading gets slimed along with the walls and the ceilings because what Kafka keeps doing
is he continues to make us think of Gregor as a real bug, not as a metaphor, as a real
insect who's living a full, complete insect's life at this point and this happens over and
over again throughout the story.
Every time we think we're getting the hang of reading this in some symbolic way Kafka
pushes us back into some kind of literal level and makes us read it at the literal level
again and yet we can't help trying to read this story to find some kind of parabolic
or metaphoric or allegorical meaning in it in some symbolic way to read this story to
say what it is that Kafka is saying to us.
It's just that in the way he tells the story Kafka keeps reassuring us that this isn't
a symbolic story but about a man who wakes up one morning to discover that he's been
transformed into a giant insect.
However, since we can't help but try to read this let me suggest a couple of the ways in
which some of the more important and famous ways in which this story has been read and
suggest some of the ways in which various kinds of critics have teased meaning out of
this.
Let's go back at the end and talk about meaning generally in a story like this.
Some critics have said this story is an expressionist story.
Expressionism agrees with Proust.
Expressionism is a movement both in literature and in the arts, in the visual arts.
Expressionism agrees with Proust that the direct representation of reality doesn't accurately
describe the way we experience the world.
Rather, each one of us lives in an inner world on which that outer world impinges.
Proust reinvented the novel, as we remember, to make it more accurately reflect that inner
world.
Expressionism gives up the realistic representation of the external world and uses objects as
transmitters of internal attitudes so that an object is not described the way it looks
in the world, but the way it feels by painting from the inside out rather than from the outside
in, so that an object in an expressionist painting is an expression rather than a representation.
If we think, for example, one of the more famous expressionist paintings that we all
know is Edvard Munch's The Scream.
Edvard Munch's The Scream is not a naturalistic or representational painting, but it does
describe what spiritual agony, what fear, what neurosis, what alienation feels like,
and it's embodied in a non-representational image, which expresses better than would
say some representational picture of the world outside, what it feels like to live in the
modern world.
It's looking at the world from the inside out.
And perhaps it's been suggested Kafka's story is something like this, a story of a man who's
turned into a bug is similar, expressing in some ways what it feels like to be a human
in the 20th century, at least under certain circumstances.
Marxists have had their turn at this story, and Marxists have said that it's a story
about a man who's turned into an insect, and that serves as a metaphor for the alienation
and deformation of human beings who are trapped in mechanical and unfulfilling work processes.
Marxists would say that modern man and woman is so alienated from work or from life that
the transformation in this story allows Gregor to escape from an inhuman way of life.
And that explains the Marxists would say all the emphasis on work that happens in the first
part of the story.
And there is a lot of emphasis on work in the first part of the story.
We find out what a terrible job Gregor had and how much he hated it and how awful it
was, but he still went back to it every day having to do it because the family depends
on his income.
So what the Marxists would say in some kind of metaphoric way is that his work has already
turned into an insect, so the metamorphosis is really merely an outward sign of what was
already an accomplished internal transformation.
Freudians and psychoanalytic critics have had their turn too, and this has turned out to
be a rich story for them.
We know that Kafka had a very difficult relationship with his father, and Freudians and
psychoanalytic critics have seen that relationship reflected in the relationship between Gregor
and his father in this story.
A few months before he wrote this story, Kafka wrote a story called The Judgment.
A young man about to be married goes to visit his father.
His father judges his son.
He calls him a bad son, a deceitful friend, a nasty man, and he sentences his son to
death.
The son rushes out the door, finds the nearest bridge, leaps off the bridge, and drowns himself.
And as critics have said, this seems like a really transparent, edible fantasy, a father
condemning his son to death and the son having to obey going out and doing it.
So does this one in some ways.
This one seems like a transparent, edible fantasy in some ways too.
We know that Kafka had read Freud's The Interpretation of Dreams.
That one was published in 1900, so that was about a dozen years before this story is published.
And when Kafka read Freud, he was interested, if not always entirely convinced about Freud's
theories about the unconscious motives and buried impulses and the fact that so much
of what we do comes from some level of consciousness that we can't get access to.
In the story, Gregor is the breadwinner of the family, which means that he has in many
ways usurped his father's role.
And in a Freudian kind of reading, he may very well feel guilty about that usurpation.
And then beyond that, there are some scenes in this story that seem inescapably Freudian.
If you look at them with Freudian eyes, you can't help but see these things in that way.
One time when the mother comes in to see Gregor, she is so overwhelmed by the state of Gregor
in the room that she faints, Gregor rushes out of the room to get his sister to get some
medication for his mother.
And when Greta, his sister, comes rushing back into the room, she pulls the door shut
behind her and then inadvertently locks Gregor out.
And it's about that time.
So the mother and Greta are inside.
Gregor is pressed up against the door.
It's at that moment that the father comes home.
The father comes home and finds Gregor between himself and his wife, pressed up against a
bedroom door, no less, and he starts throwing apples at Gregor.
And the chaos that follows, the door to the bedroom opens and the mother rushes out.
She's already half naked and she seems to be losing more of her clothes as he rushes
out and clings on to the father begging him not to kill their son.
That seems about as Freudian as it's possible to get.
A father trying to kill a son who has come between him and his wife, who with her clothes
falling off, hangs on his neck and begs him not to kill their son.
As some critics have said, we haven't had anything quite this explicitly edible in literature
since Sophocles Oedipus rexed many, many years earlier.
So this reading for Freudians is about fathers and sons.
Having usurped the father's role as head of the household, Gregor is made to feel guilty
by his father and his own guilt as well contributes to this.
He's made by that guilt into a kind of human insect who has to be killed so that the father
can assume his rightful place as head of the family, his breadwinner, and the family
is restored.
And it is interesting in this story, whether Freudian or not, it is interesting that as
Gregor begins his slow decline toward death, the father revives.
The father eventually gets a new job, he regains his strength, he becomes the breadwinner,
he wears a uniform, he takes his family on a picnic.
And there's this kind of amazing kind of chiasmus pattern that happens here so that Gregor's
dissent is balanced absolutely by the father's rise.
And this can seem remarkably Freudian if we read it with Freudian anticipations or perspective
as well.
The most common metaphoric reading is probably political or social.
And this reading suggests that what the story is about is about circumstances in the modern
world and the implications of those circumstances for the individual.
In this story, the individual is pitted against hostile forces or against hostile systems that
are relentless, that are impersonal, that run our lives in ways that we never quite understand.
Those systems can be governmental, they can be cultural, they can be any other vast bureaucracy
that runs our lives.
They can even be the family because the family turns out to be one of these institutions
that works by inexorable laws as well.
They all operate as far as the lost individual is concerned by inscrutable laws which are
also inexorable.
You can't do anything about them, but they're also almost impossible to understand.
In a typical kind of Kafka situation, a man is accused of a crime and then he's made the
stand trial without ever knowing exactly what he's accused of or how the justice system
works or who his accusers are or how he could possibly reach them to find out what the charge
is against him.
There's a really telling and wonderful and stunning little parable in Kafka's novel,
The Trial, in which a countryman goes to the law.
The law is a gate and in front of that gate sits a gatekeeper.
For years, this countryman every day goes up and tries to get into that gate, tries to
get through the gate, tries to gain access to the law.
He tries everything.
He tries cajolery.
He tries bribery.
He tries begging to get admission through that gate.
The gatekeeper always refuses, but not permanently.
He always just says, just for today, I can't let you in today but come back tomorrow.
I can't let you in now, try later.
It's always suggested that it's not a permanent refusal and one day you may actually get in
this door.
For years and years, this man every day comes up to this gate and keeps asking for admission
and keeps getting the same answer over and over.
For many years, the countryman is on the verge of death and as he's dying, just before
he dies, he goes to ask the gatekeeper why in all of these years, no one else ever has
come to try to get in that gate.
The gatekeeper says, this gate existed only for you and when you die, it will be closed
forever.
Well, that's a perfectly typical Kafkaist situation and you understand the parable,
you understand what he means.
If you've ever tried, if you've had some particular weird problem with the Social Security Administration
or with your credit card company or with somebody, you know that what can happen is you can get
lost in this terrible bureaucracy that works by all kinds of rules that you never quite
understand and it may be that after years and years and years, you never actually do
get in that doorway and when you finally give up, you were told that that doorway was for
you alone and now that you're not going to ask anymore, it will be closed forever.
In most of Kafka's stories, this is the situation, reality, ordinary reality becomes some kind
of nightmare in which all the institutions that used to be refuges for us, institutions
like the church, like universities, like governments, fail us and fail to, because they fail to
recognize us as individuals.
As long as we can fit into the ordinary day-to-day machinery and as long as we don't have any
particular problem, we might not notice, but let us put a particular problem come up
one day and then try to get some attention and see what happens in these situations.
Kafka, of course, to make this even more touching and more poignant, Kafka was, of course, a
Jew living in Prague in the years just before and during and after World War I and critics
have seen his work as prophetic of what will happen to his people in the near future and
in fact, all three of Kafka's sisters died in concentration camps.
Kafka probably would have died there himself, except that he died of tuberculosis before
that could happen.
In a way, people who do this social or political reading of the story have seen connections
between this story and the one that we did in an earlier program on Dostoevsky's Underground
Man, whereas the Underground Man foreshadows the modern city dweller, Kafka's Greger foreshadows
what happens to minorities and outcasts and the disabled, anyone who is anyway different
from the majority in a world that's increasingly impersonal and increasingly regimented, or
anyone with a special problem or need.
It's always if you have a special problem that you run into this Kafka-esque world.
Overlapping with this reading, to some extent, is a kind of existential reading which says
that the story describes a world in which there may or may not be a God, but if there
is one, he's simply the vast and impersonal authority behind those inscrutable laws that
govern our lives.
He's remote, and we all stand accused of crimes of which we're unaware.
We seek justice at courts whose rules we never understand, and our final answer is always
that the gatekeeper gives to the countryman.
This was your gate, now it will be closed forever.
In this reading, critics have seen that in so many ways this feels like a parable about
modern man or woman cut off from all traditional moorings and trying to make sense.
Out of it existence, it's increasingly regimented, increasingly authoritarian, and increasingly
incomprehensible.
In this story, the institution turns out not to be government or the law or the university
of the church.
Here, the institution turns out to be the family, because in this story, parents and
siblings don't recognize or care for each other very much, and the family too operates
by inexorable laws that we don't quite grasp.
Gregor, during the course of the story, goes from being a he who had kept the family together,
doing an awful job and doing the best he could, even though he hated it.
By the end of the story, he becomes an it that the family wants dead so they can get
on with their lives.
Once he's thrown into his ash can, the family goes on with their picnic.
It's springtime, and the parents notice that Greta has become a shapely girl ready for
marriage, and on the way home, they're happily talking about marrying off Greta, and all
living happily ever after.
No one thinks of Gregor.
The question that we need to ask at the end of the story, is this a positive or negative
characteristic of the family?
Is it a good thing that the family could get over this horror that happened to them, or
is this a kind of judgment on the family?
That suggests another connection with Dostoevsky's notes from Underground.
There in his story, there was a man who was so diminished by the system into such cowardice
and slavery that he becomes a mouse in a hole, spitting at whoever goes by.
Here he becomes an insect who dies so that his family can get back to the way their lives
were before his transformation, whether that life is seen as admirable or reprehensible.
In a very brilliant essay, and this I'm going to be following to some extent for the rest
of my time here, in a very brilliant essay, a critic named David Egan Schweiler says that
what happens at the end of this story can be accounted for by two parables from Kafka's
notebooks.
The first one is called The Silence of the Sirens, and it's about Odysseus in Homer's
Odyssey, whose point Kafka says is that even inadequate or childish evidence can save us
as long as we don't see too deeply into the nature of things.
The story is the story about Odysseus, who stuffs wax into the ears of his sailors and
then has himself tied to the mast.
So his sailors will not hear the songs of the sirens.
He will be able to hear it, but since he's tied to the mast he won't be able to do anything.
So Odysseus in the Odyssey becomes the only man ever to hear the songs of the siren and
live to tell about it.
The actual situation, Kafka said, must have been much simpler.
He said the siren songs could have penetrated any wax in anybody's ears, and the passion
of someone hearing the songs of the siren could have snapped any ropes that tied him
to the mast.
What really happened, he said, is that the sirens saw Odysseus sailing into their harbor
so full of confidence that they were aghast, and they stood there not singing with their
mouths hanging open in astonishment at the confidence of this man, and Odysseus seeing
their mouths open thinks that they're singing and thinks that he had outwitted them.
That's Kafka's retelling of the story from the Odyssey.
And what Egan Schreiler suggests is that's what's really in a way happening here.
Gregor's family never hears the siren song.
Gregor does.
They aren't turned into vermin.
He is.
Because their insight is less keen than his, they can recover back into middle class life.
They don't see the horror that he does, and hence can recover back into picnics and
wedding plans.
Gregor, having seen that horror that the rest of the family never will, withdraws and
dies into what Egan Schreiler calls pure parable, leaving the family to ordinary life.
They haven't heard the sirens, but they think they have, and they think that they have defeated
them.
When Egan Schreiler says dying into parable, he has another Kafka parable in mind.
This one he gives in German in his essay, and this is my translation of the Kafka parable.
Many complain that the words of the wise are always only parables, but are useless in daily
life.
And daily life is all that we have.
When a wise man says, cross over, he doesn't mean that one should go over to some specific
place, which we would do anyway if the end result were worth it, but he means some mythical
over there, which we don't know, and which he can't specify any more precisely, and he
therefore can't help us at all.
All of these parables merely say that the incomprehensible is incomprehensible, and we
already knew that.
But that which we have to deal with every day is another thing altogether.
About this, someone once said, why do you reject this?
If you would follow the parables, then you would become a parable and thereby free yourself
from everyday concerns.
The other one said, I bet that is also a parable.
The first said, you have won.
The second said, but unfortunately only in parable.
The first said, no, in reality, in parable you have lost.
Okay, to sort through that just a little bit, the first part describes Gregor, who goes
into some fabulous leander, becomes a parable and loses his daily cares.
The parable is always incomprehensible, even though it can be experienced, but the interpretation
of parables is always comprehensible because it is valid only in the everyday world.
And it's comprehensible because we narrow the parable down and put it into the limitations
and categories and conventions of everyday life.
Interpretation accommodates parable to life, but it does so by shrinking it, by reducing
its precepts to the scale of everyday life, which is why the first speaker says in parable
you have lost.
According to Egan Schweiler in this story Kafka dramatizes the contrast between parable
and interpretation or between parable and everyday life.
Gregor's family acts out an interpretation of the parable, reducing it to the scale of
the everyday, and in that world they win, both in the usefulness of their interpretation
and its consequences in the ordinary world.
That means, however, that they've lost in parable while Gregor has won in parable and
lost in the everyday world.
And we're left with our own decision about interpreting it.
We can win as we reduce the fable to manageable patterns, and we can do that.
We can make it an expressionist story, a Marxist story, a Freudian story, an existential story,
a social story.
But to be aware that when we do that, whenever we interpret it, we lose in parable because
we have just reduced the parable.
Egan Schweiler says that the greatness of this story is that Kafka in it preserves the parable,
the mystery of the inner life, while acknowledging that people like Gregor's family, who don't
see life as mysterious, can still have their say as well.
Like Kafka's Odysseus, they're limited enough to win in a world which they see in their
own terms and interpret in their own way.
Egan Schweiler ends his article by citing a letter from a woman friend of Kafka's that
was sent to Max Brod, who was Kafka's literary executor and biographer, a letter that Brod
later on included in the biography.
She says this in the letter that she writes, and she's writing about Kafka when she writes
this.
She says, we are all able to live because in some way we retreated into lies, blindness,
enthusiasm, optimism, some belief or other, pessimism, or something else.
But he hasn't ever retreated into such a defensive refuge.
He is as absolutely incapable of lying as he is of getting drunk.
There are intelligent people who don't want to compromise, but they wear colored glasses
and with them see everything differently.
Therefore they don't have to compromise.
Therefore they can be fast typists and have women.
He stands beside them and looks in astonishment at all of it, the typewriters and the women.
He will never understand it.
That's a really profound thing to say about Kafka, I think.
It is a really insightful letter that was written by that woman.
But the point for us is that Kafka managed to incorporate into this fiction both the
mysteries of existence as seen by Gregor and as seen in Parable and the promises of refuge
for those whose sight isn't so keen, like his family, and this is the interpretation
of Parable.
He does both sides so well that we can still argue to this day over which side wins.
Every interpretation is, of course, a reduction of the Parable, which means every time we
interpret it, every time we come up with some reading of it, we win in life.
But that also means simultaneously that we lose in Parable.
Kafka has, by this time, inspired three generations of writers, including such innovative and
extraordinarily experimental writers as Elaine Robb-Griet and Samuel Beckett and Harold Pinter
and Donald Bartlemay and Robert Coover, among others.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez said once that he was just about fell out of bed when he read that
first sentence of the story that one morning when Gregor Sampsa woke up, he had found that
he had been transformed into a giant vermin.
And Marquez said that if he had known that you could write stories like that, he would
have started writing stories a lot sooner.
And what that means, what Marquez was suggesting, is part of the inspiration for what became
the magic realist movement in Latin and South America throughout the 70s and 80s and 90s
and is still an ongoing movement, is traceable back to Kafka and back to this story.
Next time, we said that this is a period of experimentation in all of the arts.
So while fiction was moving away from realism in the directions that were suggested by Proust
and Joyce and Kafka, the same thing is happening in drama.
Next time, we'll take a look at a figure who along with Bertold Brecht, whom we'll look
at in the following lecture, is as important for modern drama as Proust and Joyce and Kafka
are for modern fiction.
We'll be looking at Luigi Pirandello and at his perhaps his most famous play, Six Characters
in Search of an Author.
