These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, The History of World Literature, Part 4.
Lecture 37, Joyce's Dubliners.
In our last lecture with Marcel Proust, The Remembrance of Things Past,
we began what we said was going to be a really rich period of experimentation in literature,
especially in fiction.
Virtually every writer that we talk about from here on out through the rest of this course
will be, in some ways, redefining literature and how it works.
If we remember the period that we're talking about,
we remember that this is not exactly unique to literature.
At the same time that this is going on in literature,
all of the arts are in a rich period of experimentation.
This is the age of cubism and abstract expressionism and dadaism and found objects
and ready-made sculpture and pop art and performance art and in music.
Remember, this is the age of polytonality with two more home keys.
Atonality, which doesn't have a whole home key at all,
and the twelve-tone scale, which required us to reorient our ears from the eight-tone scale
that we had become accustomed to.
Social historians like to say that all of these experiments are related in some way
to the massive dislocations at the beginning of the 20th century
and running up through the middle of the 20th century, including two world wars
and a host of smaller ones in the Depression, in the rise of communism,
in the rise of fascism, and the threat of a nuclear holocaust,
as well as the more literal holocaust in the killings of millions of Jews.
But aesthetic historians point out that some of these experiments would have happened anyway,
simply because experience seemed different to people at the beginning of the 20th century
than it ever had in history before,
and artists were compelled to try to find new ways to express this new sense of experience
and what was different between it and what had come before.
Joyce was one of the great experimenters at the beginning of the 20th century.
His most accessible innovative work is probably Ulysses, which was published in 1922.
There's one whole teaching company course which is dedicated to that,
and which is there's no better way in the world that I can think of to go through James Joyce's Ulysses
than to have an expert at your elbow helping you through each section by section.
Finnegan's Wake, which he published in 1939, is even more experimental.
It's so complex that it has provided careers for quite a few scholars and critics and teachers
since it was published in 1939.
What we're going to do in this lecture is we're going to talk about one of Joyce's earlier works,
Dubliners, which was a collection of short stories, which he published in 1914.
What we're going to try to do in this lecture is to see,
one, how his work is related to that of earlier writers that we've looked at in this course,
two, to look at two of the stories themselves to see how they work,
and then if we can to see how in those two stories that we consider,
how we can see the seeds of later James Joyce's work in them.
In lecture 34, when we talked about Rabindranath Tagore,
we mentioned Joyce in connection with the recreation of the short story.
He was one of the writers, as we mentioned then, who helped to shift the focus of the modern short story
from the external world and from the world of plot to the internal world, the mental world,
in which the story is really not so much about what happens to the protagonist
as in a series of mental adjustments that that protagonist make
because of experiences he has during the course of the story.
And so the Joyce helped to shift the idea of the modern short story
from a heavily plotted one to a story in which nothing much seems to happen,
but which all of the events, all of the major events are internal,
are mental or internal rather than external.
Joyce's own version of this internal event was what he called an epiphany.
An epiphany, the word literally means a showing forth or a revelation.
It's associated with the season of the Christian church here that begins on January 6th,
which commemorates the visits of the wise men to the infant Jesus.
Joyce adapted the term to describe a kind of moment of revelation or discovery.
Sometimes these moments of revelation or discovery happen unexpectedly.
A character within the story will suddenly realize or recognize something
that he or she had not recognized before or discover something that had been hidden from consciousness.
It can happen in a moment which is totally unexpected.
It can be a little event which triggers this,
but the revelation itself, the moment of discovery is quite profound when it happens.
Early in his career, Joyce actually kept what he called an epiphany notebook
in which he recorded bits of overheard conversation and other moments
in which revelations seemed to have occurred,
and we know that he used some of those epiphanies from his epiphany notebook
in the stories that follow.
The Dubliners, or Dubliners, not the Dubliners, it's Dubliners, contains 15 stories,
each one of which has its own, at least one epiphany, sometimes more than one.
The unity of the book, what holds all those 15 stories together,
is the fact that they're all set in Dublin, where Joyce had been born,
although he was living in Italy when he wrote most of these stories in this book.
Throughout Joyce's life, he had an interesting love-hate relationship with Ireland and with Dublin.
He set virtually everything that he wrote in Ireland, and particularly Dublin,
but he also found Dublin to be narrow and oppressive and materialistic and hypocritical
and appallingly subservient to the Catholic Church.
He saw its culture as petty and parochial and stifling,
and he saw that culture as crushing out the lives of its individual citizens,
and Joyce always looked toward Europe, toward what he considered to be the much broader
and more liberal traditions of Europe as an alternative to the culture of Dublin
which he had grown up.
It's one of the reasons why Joyce spent most of his life on the continent rather than in Dublin.
He left Ireland for good in 1903.
He said that he had intended Dubliners as a chapter in the moral history of Ireland.
He said he chose Dublin because Dublin was, as far as he was concerned,
at least symbolically what he called the center of paralysis,
the kind of paralysis results from narrowness, from isolation,
and from too strict an observance of conventionality.
The 15 stories in Dubliners are divided into four aspects,
childhood, adolescence, mature life, and public life.
And then the last one, the dead, is a kind of a summary story
which gathers together a lot of themes in the first 14
and recapitulates them in one grand summation.
If we look at those four categories of stories,
we notice that he put them in chronological order in the final collection of the book.
So there are three stories that deal with childhood,
and four which deal with adolescence,
and four which deal with the mature life,
and three which deal with the public life,
and then the dead comes as a summation at the end.
What we want to do in this lecture is to go through two of those stories
to show how Joyce's stories work,
and then send you off to read the rest of them
because all of the rest of them are equally rich
as the two that we're going to be looking at in this lecture.
The first one that we'll look at is a story called Arabi.
Arabi is the third story in the collection,
which, as you remember, that's of childhood.
It's the third and final childhood story in this collection of stories.
It's a very short story, and nothing much seems to happen in it.
It illustrates that devaluation of plot in favor of internal events
that Joyce helped to bring about in the invention of the modern short story.
In the story, a young boy has an adolescent crush
on an older sister of one of his friends.
She's never given an actual name.
She's just simply called Mangon's sister.
Mangon is the name of the boy's friend,
and the boy has been interested in her
for perhaps something like six months when the story begins.
He always tries to make sure that he's playing with Mangon
when Mangon is called in for tea in the afternoon,
because that way he walks with Mangon to Mangon's door,
and that way he gets to stand beside the sister for a few moments.
And he also tells us that in the morning he has developed this ritual.
He knows about the time that she leaves for school,
so he always makes sure that he gets ready just a few minutes ahead of that time,
and then he stands by the upstairs window and watches,
and as soon as she leaves the house to go to school,
he leaves just a moment later so he can follow her,
so he can walk behind her and watch her as she walks toward school.
At some point, she goes off to her convent school,
and he goes off to his school and their paths diverge,
and that's the end of it, but every morning he wants at least to follow her.
We discovered that they haven't, as yet in all of this time,
he's been admiring her, has had this great crush on her.
They haven't spoken a word, and when one afternoon she does speak to him,
she asks him if he's going to Erebi,
which is a presumably splendid bazaar that's going to happen in another part of town.
He's really so confused by the fact that she's actually spoken to him
that he doesn't quite know how to answer.
As far as we can tell, he wasn't planning on going to the bazaar,
but he tells her sort of impulsively that if he does go,
he'll bring something back for her.
Then we jump ahead to the week of the bazaar,
and in the week of the bazaar, he's become so obsessed with the idea
of going to the bazaar and bringing something back for her
that he neglects his homework and he can't really focus on anything.
On Saturday morning, Saturday is the day,
Saturday evening is the evening he's going to the bazaar.
On Saturday evening, Saturday morning, he reminds his uncle,
with whom he lives, that when his uncle comes home,
he will need some money to go to the bazaar,
and his uncle says, yes, I remember that you're going to the bazaar,
I'll be home and I'll give you the money.
But when Saturday night comes, his uncle gets home very, very late.
It becomes clear that his uncle has stopped and had a pint here and there
along the way in various pubs on the way home,
and he gets home very late on Saturday night.
And the boy can't leave until he gets the money,
so it's very, very late by the time the boy actually leaves for the bazaar.
It's, in fact, after 9 p.m. when he leaves.
And so he arrives at the bazaar just as the bazaar is closing up.
He stops at the one booth which is still open
and pretends to look at tea sets,
which is what are being sold in that booth that's still open.
And then as he's standing there, the lights go out
and there's darkness that descends over this whole hall,
and then we get the last sentence of the story, which is this one.
Gazing up into the darkness,
I saw myself as a creature driven and derided by vanity,
and my eyes burned with anguish and anger.
Well, as we said, there's not much plot here,
but what Joyce does, and this is a sort of suggestion
and anticipation of what Joyce will do
ever so much more richly in Ulysses and Finnegan's Wake later,
is he manages to load up every single sentence of his story
until it achieves a richness of texture
that's almost unparalleled in the history of prose fiction
up until his day.
And that rich texture works in two different ways.
The first one is that he does a very, very rich
and detailed evocation of the reality of the city of Dublin.
Whole libraries have been written about Joyce's use of the buildings
and the streets and the pubs and the advertising brochures
and the streets and the alleys of Dublin.
He does this, of course, most richly in Ulysses,
but he does that here too, making the details of the city
so palpable that we actually seem to be there
as we read these stories.
And as we also know, thousands of pilgrims
go to Dublin every year on Bloomsday
to follow around the course of Stephen Dedalus
and Leopold Bloom on that one day that's described in Ulysses.
Here, we get a lot of those details of Dublin as well,
but it's important here, as in Ulysses, to remember
that Joyce is not including these details
just for their own sake.
Had he done so, had he used them just for their own sake,
it would have made Joyce a realist writer,
put him solidly in the realist tradition.
But like Flaubert, like Ibsen, like Chekhov,
for Joyce, every one of these details,
these physical details he used of Dublin,
functions as function as a symbol in the story itself.
There are too many of them to detail here,
but the cumulative effect,
if you read the entire collection of stories
and see the cumulative effect of blind alleys,
we would call them dead-end streets
and empty houses and dark rooms
and passages and stairways that are shrouded in darkness,
all suggest a kind of moral darkness,
a kind of moral blindness, a sort of spiritual emptiness,
a kind of emotional repression,
and all of the details that he uses
to evoke the city of Dublin serve this sort of symbolic function.
And so the book, as he said, is about Dublin in this way,
so that in addition to being stories about individual protagonists,
this is also a story of Dublin,
and the evocation of the city of Dublin
helps us to understand the way in which this book
is a collection of stories about the city of Dublin.
As a little digression about his use of symbols,
he was such an admirer of Ibsen
that he taught himself Norwegian
so that he could read Ibsen in the original language.
And then he wrote an essay about Ibsen in a journal.
Ibsen happened to read the essay,
and Ibsen was so impressed that he wrote a letter to Joyce saying,
thank you for such a sympathetic understanding of my work,
and Joyce was thrilled.
So it's no wonder that some of Ibsen's techniques
wore off onto Joyce,
despite the fact that they are working in different genres.
The second way in which Joyce fills up every sentence with texture
also has to do with symbols.
Every detail in every single sentence
supports the final epiphany.
This story, if we read it carefully,
as we have to read a Joyce story carefully,
if we read the story carefully,
we notice that this story is full of references to medieval quests,
which makes the trip to the bazaar to bring home a gift,
a kind of medieval romance,
the kind that we remember Don Quixote read too many of.
The details of the trip to the bazaar become obstacles to overcome,
the way a knight has to overcome obstacles on a quest.
He has to go through a crowded vulgar marketplace.
His uncle's later rival and drunkenness is another obstacle.
And then really interestingly,
the train ride that he has on the way to the bazaar that Saturday night
goes through a sort of blasted landscape of ruined houses
that suggests in very specific ways the really awful landscape
of Robert Browning's Child Roland,
that terrible landscape through which Child Harold has to ride
in his, Child Roland rather, has to ride in his poem.
A second chain of references in this story
makes his love for Mangan sister into something almost religious.
He bears his love, we are told,
for her through the crowded marketplace full of hostile people
like a chalice.
He calls her name in strange prayers and praises,
the bazaar when he gets to it feels like an empty church.
And he sees two men counting money on a salver,
which is a plate which is used in the Eucharist in the Mass.
This makes that quest, that medieval quest,
into kind of an ultimate medieval quest,
makes it into a kind of quest for a holy grail.
Mangan's sister in this series of metaphors and illusions
becomes a courtly lady and a holy figure simultaneously,
perhaps a kind of holy grail herself.
And all of this, all of that interesting illusionary work
that Joyce does makes the deflation that happens
at the end so much worse.
The bazaar turns out to be nothing like what he expected.
The only booth that's still open is selling the kind of tea sets
that you can buy anywhere in Dublin.
The two men counting money maybe allude to the money changers
in the temple whom Jesus drives out in the New Testament story.
The young woman who's selling tea sets is flirting
with two young men who are standing at her booth.
It's just totally deflating and totally disappointing in every way.
And in that final sentence for him, everything comes crashing down.
He feels himself as he says,
driven and derided by vanity in his eyes,
burned with anguish and anger.
And the alliteration, driven and derided, anguish and anger,
make the crash feel more decisive.
And it's in this way that Joyce manages in every single sentence
to write a prose story which is as rich and textured
as poetry usually is.
The story is then another epiphany, another loss of illusions,
another triumph of commercial and ugly Dublin over a boy's dreams.
And it's a good example of how rich and densely textured Joyce's prose really is.
If we turn to the second story that we're going to consider today,
this one is the dead.
It's the last story in the collection.
And this one is everyone's favorite story in the book.
We can't do it justice in the few minutes we have,
but we can suggest a few things to watch for when you read it.
Again, the plot is not too complicated.
During the Christmas season, two elderly women,
the Morgan sisters and their niece Mary Jane,
hold their annual holiday party.
Mary Jane's piano students are all invited,
and then longtime family friends and relatives are invited to this party.
Among the guests is the Morgan's nephew, Gabriel Conroy and his wife Greta.
They have come in from a ways and it's snowing,
so they have gotten a sitter for the night,
and they're going to stay in a hotel in Dublin after the party is over that night.
The earlier part of the story is about the party itself.
And by the time we get to this story, after having read the first 14 in Joyce,
we know that we have to read very carefully.
Every detail is there for some reason.
As the story progresses, we shift more and more to Gabriel's point of view,
and we see about the last half of the story through his eyes.
He's a respectable man. He's a person of culture.
He's a college teacher. He writes book reviews for the local paper.
And like Joyce himself, Gabriel's orientation,
his intellectual orientation is more toward the continent than it is toward Ireland.
It's usually a happy night for Gabriel.
He carves the meat and the fowl at the table.
He makes a speech that goes with a toast to his old aunts and Mary Jane.
But this night, three disconcerting things happen to him to interfere with his happiness.
The first is when he first arrives, he's taking off his galoshes and his coat,
and he makes a passing remark to Lily, the maid, who gives him a really sharp retort.
It's not aimed at him, but at men,
with one of whom she seems to have had a recent unhappy experience.
But Gabriel is unnerved.
He thinks his dinner speech may be wrong for the class of people that he's going to be addressing,
and he worries about it to begin the evening.
Then his wife teases him in front of his aunts
about his desire for the use of umbrellas and galoshes
and dressing up warmly and making the children eat healthy foods and taking exercise.
For a while, he takes the teasing in good part,
but then he gets nettle when he thinks Greta may have carried it slightly too far.
Then, thirdly, he is teased by a mis-iver as a colleague at the party
about his preference for continental vis-a-vis Irish things.
He gets nettle again, and he overreacts.
He tells her in kind of a heat that he isn't interested in Ireland.
He isn't interested in anything Irish at all.
He knows that he's overreacted,
but he worries that she'll be at the table judging his speech.
But she leaves before dinner,
and everything goes off at dinner without a hitch.
His toast is a success.
He's the center of attention, and everything works well.
As he and Greta are getting ready to leave,
he's down putting on his galoshes, his famous galoshes and his coat.
And a tenor who's at the party has agreed,
most of the guests have already left, has agreed to sing one song.
And Gabriel, when he's getting on his galoshes,
looks up the stairs and sees Greta leaning toward the music.
She's leaning against the rail, and then she's leaning in toward the music.
At that moment, seeing that picture of her, he's absolutely overcome with love for her.
And on the way back to the hotel then,
he remembers the favorite intimate moments that they've had together.
By the time he gets to the hotel, he wants to recapture that.
And he has a kind of vision of the intimacy and the passionate love that they'll make in the room.
But when they get there, she seems abstracted.
She seems unresponsive.
And when he presses her, she finally tells him
that the song, the tenor sang,
was a song that was sung to her once by a young man named Michael Fury,
who sang it outside her window the night she was going to,
before she was going to leave for school.
Michael Fury, she says, was already ill.
It was pouring rain, and he died a few days later.
As she says, I think he died for me.
Gabriel has never known about Michael Fury.
And now, having heard about him, he's overcome with shame and sadness.
He thinks about what a poor part he must have played in Greta's life,
with his concern for shirt fronts and book reviews and galoshes and umbrellas,
while she carried in her heart the memory of a young boy
who had died in the blaze of youth for her.
The scene, if we remember, is very reminiscent of the scene at the end of Ibsen's adults' house.
And this is not an accident, either.
Torvald Hilmar, remember, in that play,
was anxious to make love to Nora after she had danced to Tarantella,
only that night to have her confront him with her decision to leave.
Gabriel's epiphany then happens in the hotel room.
Greta has fallen asleep crying,
and he thinks of all the people at the party,
many of them old and frail,
drifting towards death to join Michael Fury,
who had told Greta that he hadn't wanted to live without her.
And then come the last two famous paragraphs of this story.
Generous tears filled Gabriel's eyes.
He had never felt like that himself towards any woman,
but he knew that such a feeling must be love.
The tears gathered more thickly in his eyes,
and in the partial darkness,
he imagined he saw the form of a young man standing under a dripping tree.
Other forms were near.
His soul had approached that region where dwell the vast hosts of the dead.
He was conscious of, but could not apprehend,
their wayward and flickering existence.
His own identity was fading out into a grey, impalpable world.
The solid world itself, which these dead had one time reared
and lived in, was dissolving and dwindling.
A few light taps upon the pain made him turn to the window.
It had begun to snow again.
He watched sleepily the flakes,
silver and dark falling obliquely against the lamp light.
The time had come for him to set out on his journey westward.
Yes, the newspapers were right.
Snow was general all over Ireland.
It was falling on every part of the dark central plain,
on the treeless hills,
falling softly upon the bog of Allen,
and farther westward,
softly falling into the dark, mutinous Shannon waves.
It was falling too upon every part of the lonely churchyard
on the hill where Michael Fury lay buried.
It lay thickly drifted on the crooked crosses and headstones,
on the spears of the little gate, on the barren thorns.
His soul swooned slowly as he heard the snow falling
faintly through the universe
and faintly falling like the descent of their last end
upon all the living and the dead.
Well, this is a truly amazingly rich story.
We need, you need when you read it to savor every single word
to decide what every item contributes to the final epiphany.
When you read The Dubliners, my suggestion is,
this is a suggested text.
There's a really wonderful text that's available.
It's called James Joyce's Dubliners,
colon and illustrated edition.
It's edited by two editors by names of Jackson and McGinley.
And what they do is they fill in a lot of this dense texture,
give us backgrounds and footnotes and photographs
and illustrations to help us fill in that dense texture
of every single Joyce story.
And in fact, in what I'm going to tell you about this story
over the next couple of minutes is in part derived from their book.
We can't do all of the details of this story
to show how every detail in this story leads up to this epiphany,
but just a couple of random ones will kind of suggest how Joyce works.
At the party, Gabriel notices a picture of the balcony scene
from Romeo and Juliet above the piano.
And this, of course, is a foreshadowing
of the way that Michael Fury will stand beneath Greta's window
and then later on die as Romeo is going to die
in the Romeo and Juliet story.
And Julia sings a song from a Bellini opera
when she has a chance to sing at the party that night.
The song she sings is called A Raid for the Bridal,
maybe an inappropriate song for a woman of advanced years.
But the footnote will tell you that in the opera,
that song is sung by a woman named Elvira
who is just about to go mad.
The talk at the dinner table already anticipates
this drift toward death that Gabriel feels at the end of the book
because it circles all of the talk around the table,
circles around people who are no longer with them.
It all circles around the past.
And the focal point of the dinner conversation
is probably Mr. Brown's sort of muddled version of trappist monks
who sleep in their own coffins.
The song that the tenor sings that Greta listens to
as Gabriel watches her from below the stairs
is called The Last of Rock Royal.
And it's about lovers from different classes
who are kept apart by the man's mother.
And like the Romeo and Juliet story,
this ends in at least one death
and in some version it ends in two.
We can't tell which version of the song
that the tenor was actually singing.
At the end of the story, when Gabriel hears the tapping
of snowflakes on the window,
I think we're supposed to remember the scene in Wuthering Heights
when the ghost of Catherine taps on Mr. Lockwood's window,
begging to be let in.
As Gabriel imagines, the ghost of Michael Fury
is trying to get into his room, into his life,
into his and Greta's life together.
Michael and Gabriel, the two central male characters of the story,
take their names from two biblical angels,
one of whom is the one who informed Mary
that she was to be the bear of the Messiah,
the other one of whom was the leader of God's armies.
In Milton's Paradise Lost,
Milton gives us a picture of God
giving principal command to Michael
and second command to Gabriel,
which is exactly in Gabriel's awareness
the way they rank by the end of the story.
Michael comes first, Gabriel comes second.
And he already feels, by the end of the story,
he feels dead and forgotten,
while Michael Fury, who's been dead for many years,
has a passion, a love that is so vital and so vibrant
that it still lives on years after his own death.
The Morgan Party is after New Year's.
We know that.
And while the exact date of the party is not given,
most critics think it must have been January 6th.
It must have been Epiphany.
At least if it isn't, that would have made a perfect date
for the ultimate Epiphany
in a collection of stories about Epiphanes.
This is the final Epiphany of a book of a collection
of stories about Epiphanes,
and January 6th would have made a perfect date for that party.
The snow at the outset of the party
is a kind of a symbol of escape, of freedom.
Gabriel feels trapped initially at his aunt's party,
and he looks yearningly at the snow-covered landscape outside,
imagining there's freedom out there.
But by the end, snow has become a symbol of death,
of oblivion, of covering over everyone and everything.
Snow is general over Ireland, Gabriel thinks.
And so, in all of these ways, once again,
what Joyce does is manage to pack
every single line of every single story with detail.
We remember Flo Baer impressing Henry James so much
because James said Flo Baer was the first writer
who had taken prose in fiction as seriously as poetry,
making every word count, and we certainly can see how that works
in the prose of James Joyce.
If we ask about the meaning of the dead, this last story,
it can have many, many meanings.
In one way, it's Gabriel's own dawning awareness
that it doesn't matter who we are or how important we are in life.
Death is the final answer to everything for everyone,
and we are all on the way to becoming specters.
It's also in some really important way, I think,
Gabriel's own reconciliation with Ireland.
Earlier, Miss Ivers had said,
asked him to visit Western Ireland in the summer,
and he says he can't, he doesn't like Ireland,
he was going to the continent for the summer.
Now, as he watches the snow,
he feels his spirit drifting westward toward Galway,
where his wife came from and Michael Fury is buried.
And I think third and finally, the story in some ways is about art.
What Gabriel achieves at the end of this story
is a kind of detachment, a kind of emptying out of the ego,
which is similar to what we remember John Keats saying about Shakespeare,
what he called negative capability.
What happens is that Gabriel empties out his ego,
and this emptying out of ego, this detachment,
is what Joyce thought was absolutely necessary for an artist to have.
This doesn't mean that Gabriel himself is going to become an artist,
it's just that we look back at those first three events at the party
and we realize that every single one of those events
was an attack on Gabriel's ego.
Gabriel's ego has been under attack for this whole night
and at the end of it, he finally lets it go, he empties himself out.
And we assume that what's going to happen,
we can't tell if this epiphany is permanent,
but we have to assume that by the next morning
he will wake up a sadder and wiser man.
He will wake up with a different relationship to Greta,
he will wake up with a different relationship to his aunts,
to all human beings.
The last story gathers all of these symbols and themes
of the whole collection of stories into a kind of summation.
It's a good story in its own right, it's been oftentimes anthologized,
but it's even better if we come to it at the end of a collection.
These techniques, of course, will be honed and refined
in the works yet to be written in Ulysses and in Finnegan's wake
and so that we have ahead of us after we finish the Dubliner
as a whole world of magnificent literature in James Joyce.
Next time, we will look at another 20th century experimentalist in fiction
who goes in a very different direction from Joyce,
but whose innovations are going to prove to be equally influential.
We're going to be talking about Franz Kafka
and we'll talk about his most famous short story,
The Metamorphosis, in our next lecture.
