Lecture 3 The Hebrew Bible
The subject for today's lecture is one of the most influential and important books in
history.
Particularly, this is true in the history of the Western world, and that's the Old Testament.
It's a book which is important not just for literature, of course, but it's a book which
has been important for culture as well.
Since the 4th century, almost everyone in the West has worked in some measure or other
within what's been called the Judeo-Christian culture, which means that everyone who wrote
within that culture is writing somehow in the framework of the stories that were told
for the first time in the Old Testament, whether consciously or not.
It's also a sacred book for a billion Jews and Christians in the world, and it's an
important book for 800 million Muslims as well.
It's, of course, we'll try to remember throughout the course of this lecture that it's the Old
Testament only for Christians, for whom the New Testament was the transcendence or the
fulfilling of this.
And of course, the people who wrote this book were not aware of the fact that they were
preparing it as a preparation for something else.
So we'll try to remember during the course of this lecture to call it by one of its Hebrew
names, the Tanakh, which is made up of the first letters of the Hebrew words for law,
prophets, and writings.
In terms of date, the Torah, which was the first five books of the Tanakh, was assembled
about the 10th century BCE.
The Tanakh tells the story of the Hebrew migration into Canaan, somewhere we think around 2000
BCE.
There was, at this time, there was a huge movement of Semitic peoples into the area,
the Amorites, the Edomites, and the Molo-Bites, and really importantly, the ancestors of Phoenicians.
The Phoenicians later on in our course are going to provide the unforgettable Daito in
Virgil's Aeneid, and more immediately, they also provided many of the peoples who followed
them with a 22-character alphabet.
It was an alphabet that didn't have vowels, but it was a 22-character alphabet, which the
Hebrews adapted for their own use in their own language.
According to the story, as it's told, Abram and Sarai and Lot leave Mesopotamia from a
city called Ur and travel into Canaan, and their people settle down, living side by side
with the indigenous peoples of the area.
This is, of course, the age in the Tanakh of the great age of the patriarchs of Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob.
Later, there was a famine in Canaan, and the famine sent some of the Jewish people down
into Egypt.
This is told in the Tanakh in the story of Joseph.
People who have tried to sort of coordinate or run parallels between what's told of Jewish
history in this book and the history that we know more about from other records and other
sources have suggested that maybe the 17th to the 16th centuries BCE would be a plausible
time for some of the Hebrews to have moved into Egypt.
It was during this time that Egypt was controlled by a foreign power, and that foreign power
may very well have welcomed immigration from some of the Hebrews.
According to the story, after the Egyptians recovered their own country and drove out
the foreign invaders, they enslaved the children of Israel, and then they were freed from that
slavery in Egypt by the greatest hero in Hebrew history by Moses.
Once they had been led out of the land of Egypt, they spent 40 years wandering in the
wilderness, and then moved back into recapture parts of Canaan.
This is told in the story of Joshua and Judges, the books of Joshua and Judges.
And again, historians who have tried to figure out dates for this have suggested that the
13th century BCE might be a kind of plausible time for this to have happened.
Some scholars have said that we can actually think of the first seven books of the Tanakh
as in a way being a kind of Jewish epic.
It goes from the creation to the possession of the promised land, and it does hold together
that there is a kind of national epic, even though by the time we get to this part of
the Tanakh, there is much, much history yet to come.
If we think of this as an epic, as we think of this as a kind of epic structure, an epic
arc, it begins with the fall, the creation, and then the fall, and the expulsion from
the Garden of Eden, the first murder, the degradation, which leads to the flood.
And then, of course, the flood begins universal history all over again, because as Adam and
Eve were the progenitors of all human beings in Eden, Noah and his wife and children become
the progenitors of all human beings after the flood.
It tells the beginnings of uniquely Hebrew history with the covenant that's made between
Yahweh and Abraham.
It tells about the Egyptian experience.
It tells about the Exodus, and it tells then about the return from Egypt and back into
the promised land.
The people to come in the Tanakh version of Hebrew history are, of course, lots and lots
of things, the wars with a lot of local peoples, including the wars, most especially with the
Philistines.
Secondly, there was the coming of Monarchy.
Saul was the first king that the Hebrews had, and then through the golden age of Hebrew
history, under Kings David and Solomon, the division of the kingdom into two kingdoms,
the northern and the southern, the conquest by Assyria of the northern kingdom, the conquest
of Babylon by the southern kingdom, the Babylonian captivity, and then the return from the Babylonian
captivity under the Persians.
So there's much, much history left to come, but if we look at those first seven books
and think of them as a kind of national epic, we can perhaps make some generalizations about
what kind of book we're dealing with here, what kind of literature this is.
The Hebrew thought shows some striking similarities to the thought and literature and culture of
the peoples who surrounded them.
It turned out that the Hebrews were always going to be surrounded by some very large
powers, whoever was dominant in the east throughout most of the Old Testament period, it's going
to be either the Babylonians or the Assyrians, later on the Persians, and there was always
Egypt to the south.
So they were surrounded by some very powerful peoples, and it would be surprising that if
they hadn't been influenced by those peoples.
As we mentioned last time when we were talking about Gilgamesh, the Old Testament creation
account owes something to the story of the creation of Ankhidu in the Gilgamesh epic.
The flood story, there are lots of parallels, there are some differences too, but there
are lots of parallels between the flood story in Gilgamesh and this one.
There's a really interesting replication of a story, the story that's told by Moses when
his mother puts him in a pitch-line basket and sets him in the river, he floats down
and is rescued by an Egyptian princess.
That story had been told a thousand years earlier about the first Akkadian emperor, Sargon the
Great, and so here we have the exact same story told a thousand years later told now
about Moses rather than about Sargon, which is really kind of interesting.
The original idea of Sheol or the place that we go after we die in the Old Testament sounds
remarkably like the pictures we get of the afterlife in Mesopotamia, and there are many,
many other parallels.
In terms of Egypt, one really striking thing that scholars noticed very early and are still
sort of puzzled and pleased about is that if you read Psalm 104 in the Tanakh, it sounds
remarkably like the Pharaoh Akhenaten's hymn to the sun, and so that there are some connections
between Hebrew literature and Egyptian literature as well.
But having said that, having said that the Hebrews learned much from the peoples who
surrounded them, they also were, or at least they became, monotheists.
They believed that there's only one God, or at least perhaps that the outset believed
there were many gods, but they had one of their own, one who was their very own.
The first commandment says, thou shalt have no other gods before me, which implies that
there are other gods.
It's just that you only have one God, you people just have one God.
And this, of course, is the stunning change in history from the polytheistic religions
of the Mesopotamians and the Egyptians, and later we'll get to see these polytheistic
religions show up again with the Greeks and with the Romans.
And the second stunning thing about their monotheism is that maybe not originally, but
eventually, the God of the Hebrews became a universal God, a God who was also the God
of the Assyrians and the Persians and the Egyptians, even if they didn't know it.
Even if the Persians and the Egyptians didn't know that this was their God, he was their
God, he was a universal God.
And it turns out in Hebrew thought that God was so big Yahweh, their God was so big that
he could actually use those peoples to punish the children of Israel if they failed to keep
their end of the covenant.
The covenant is the second really stunning contribution that the Hebrews made to history
and to literature.
They believed that their God, Yahweh, had made a covenant with his people, a contract
in which people and God could meet and bind themselves to each other.
This is so stunningly original because the gods of other cultures were enough like humans
that they could be insulted, they could be angry, they could be jealous, they could be
whimsical, they could do pretty much whatever they wanted.
A God in the Iliad, for example, can one day get really interested in somebody, a warrior,
help him have a splendid day on the battlefield and then lose interest and go off and do something
else the next day, leaving that warrior out there as a sitting duck for everybody trying
to get even for what all the help he'd had from the God the next day.
This happens, it just happens.
They are unpredictable, they are whimsical, they cannot be pinned down.
The Epicureans in Rome later on were going to say that if a God had to keep books on
humans what would be the advantage of being a God and many of the polytheistic religions
treat their gods in that sort of way.
This God, Yahweh, submits himself to a rule of law as do his people and he promises that
he will behave in certain ways if they behave in certain ways.
This is in a way, you could think about this spatially if you want, God makes himself small
enough to fit into the law and the people he expects are going to make themselves big
enough to meet him in that law.
God and his people can understand and meet one another in that law.
The earliest covenant listed in the Tanakh is the one between Abram and Yahweh in which
Yahweh says that if you will have all of the males in your house circumcised and you will
honor me as your God, in exchange for that I will give you the promised land and I will
also make your seed numberless as the stars in the sky or as the sands on the seashore.
This covenant was renewed with Isaac and with Jacob and then it's reaffirmed when Yahweh
delivers his people from Egypt and then is spelled out more explicitly in the Ten Commandments.
In the Ten Commandments God tells more specifically what he expects and also makes more specific
what the rewards and punishments will be for either keeping or not keeping that law.
Which means that from the very outset, the Hebrews knew what their God wanted.
They knew what he expected and that makes life so much easier than if you have a lot
of different gods telling you a lot of different things who may or may not care about you,
who may or may not be paying attention anyway.
There's a wonderful story that's told in Abraham about Abraham and Yahweh wants to
destroy Sodom because he said it's a very wicked city and Abraham has a nephew lot
living in that city and he says I shouldn't be talking to you this way because I'm nobody
and I'm just dust and ashes but if you destroy that city, if there are 50 righteous people
in there, you'll have to destroy the 50 righteous along with all the unrighteous.
That doesn't sound like something you promised to do and Yahweh says okay for 50 I'll spare
the city and then Abraham says well I shouldn't do this but what about 40, what if we had 40?
He uses what in fact logicians call the argument of the hare and he keeps shaving the number
down.
Would you save the city for 40, for 35, for 30, for 25, for 20?
He gets it all the way down to 10 and Yahweh finally says for the sake of 40 or 30 or
10 I will not destroy it.
You could argue with God because God has already told you that he's not going to destroy
the wicked or the righteous with the wicked and so you can argue with him and the city
gets spared.
It's one of those wonderful stories that tells us how firmly the Hebrews believed in
this covenant idea, this idea of a contract.
The combination of monotheism and the idea of the covenant led the Jews to create a document,
the Tanakh, which falls about a third of the way between history and literature and theology.
It is history insofar as it's a story of a people achieving an identity, a land of
their own.
It's literature insofar as it uses such devices as characterization and symbols and invented
speeches and interior monologue and its theology insofar as it shows that when the nation keeps
Yahweh's commandments, things go well with them and when they don't, they don't and then
later on they discovered that Yahweh could even use the Assyrians or the Babylonians
or some other people to punish them.
So the Tanakh becomes in part history, part theology and part literature.
Robert Alter in a really, really good book on the Old Testament says you can call it
either historicized fiction or fictionalized history depending on where you want the emphasis
to fall if you want it to see more as literature which has some history in it or more as history
which has some literature in it.
The relationship between the gods and humans, as we said, is going to be a part of every
single epic that we're going to deal with.
But in Gilgamesh or in Homer or in Aeneid or in Beowulf, it's going to be a part of
the context for the epic.
The vision that the epic gives us is squarely on human beings, the focus is on human beings.
In this book, it occupies center stage.
The relationship between gods and the gods and the humans is what this book is really
about.
And that combination of genres, the fact that it is part history, part theology, part literature,
results in some stunning paradoxes, some really amazingly sort of mind-numbing paradoxes.
The Jews in the Old Testament argue that God makes history.
God is in charge of history, no question.
They also believe that human beings make history.
They believed that God created a harmonious universe.
And they believed that in many ways the universe is kind of a model.
They believe that we are God's creatures, part of his plan.
And they also believe that we are free agents capable of making our own plans which may or
may not coincide with God's.
In the introduction to the Old Testament in the Norton anthology of world literature,
the editors say this about this stunning use of paradox.
The religious attitudes of the Hebrews appear in the story that they told of the creation
of the world and of humankind.
This creation is the work of one God who is omnipotent and omniscient and who creates
a perfect and harmonious order.
The disorder that we see all around us, physical and moral, is not God's creation but Adam
and Eve's.
It is the consequence of humankind's disobedience.
The story not only reconciles the undeniable existence of evil and disorder in the world
with the conception of God's infinite justice, but also attributes to humanity itself and
independence of God's free will, which in this case had been used for evil.
The Hebrew God is not limited in his power by other deities who oppose his will as in
the Greek stories of Zeus and his undisciplined family.
His power over inanimate nature is infinite.
In all the range of his creation there is only one being able to resist humankind.
Because God is all-powerful, even this resistance on Adam and Eve's part is in some mysterious
way a manifestation of God's will.
How this can be is not explained by the story, and we are left with the mystery that still
eludes us, the coexistence of God's prescient power and humanity's unrestricted free will.
That's the central paradox, and it's amazing because you can tell two stories which say
different things and they both are likely to be true because paradox is at the heart
of this vision of this book, which is part theology, part history, and part literature.
Robert Alter in his book The Art of Biblical Narratives suggests that one of the ways that
the Tanakh writers express this paradox is by telling the same story twice in two different
ways, both of which are true, but which are mutually exclusive and unreconcilable with
each other.
This is his example, and it's a very, very good one.
He demonstrates his point by considering two versions of the David's story.
This is the early part of David's story, particularly in terms of David's relationship with the
reigning King Saul.
These two stories are set side by side in 1 Samuel 16 and 1 Samuel 17, and they are put
side by side, but they are very, very different, going over the same ground in very, very different
ways.
In the 16th chapter of 1 Samuel, God tells Samuel to go to Jesse's house where the
next king lives, and to anoint the man who will be the next king of Israel.
Samuel goes to Jesse's house, and Jesse has his oldest son as a strapping, good-looking
young man, and he says, okay, I'm ready to anoint him, and Yahweh says, not that one.
Samuel says, well, let's go to the second son, and then he says, not that one.
He goes through all of the sons of Jesse, and God says, no, not that one, not that
one.
Finally, Samuel says, do you have any other sons?
Jesse says, yes, we have one.
The youngest one is out taking care of the sheep, and he said, well, you better send
for him, so he sends for him, and Yahweh says, that's the one.
At that point, Samuel anoints him, and then we are told, the spirit of the Lord came upon
David.
At about the same time, the spirit of the Lord departs from Saul, and as we remember
the story, Saul is then possessed by evil spirits.
He has deep depression, and he flies into towering rages, and he becomes virtually uncontrollable,
and his physicians say, the only thing that can help him is we have to find a musician.
He has to have music, and so a search is sent out, and they turn up David, and David turns
out to be a really good harpist.
So David comes to play music for Saul, and it soothes Saul's spirit, and Saul gentles
down, and Saul loves him, and David becomes Saul's armor-bearer.
That's the story that's told in 1 Samuel 16.
In that story, David doesn't speak a word.
He's entirely a passive agent, acted upon by Yahweh, who's clearly running the show,
running history, and all David does is to appear at the right place and do what he's
supposed to do, and by the time the story's done, we understand that he's on his way
to becoming the next king, because now he's already been taken into the royal household,
and Saul loves him very much.
Chapter 17, we get a different story.
In 1 Samuel 17, the children of Israel are at war with the Philistines, and the Philistines
have this huge giant named Goliath, who every day about noon comes out and challenges any
Israelite to a single combat.
When David shows up one day, his father sends him to the brothers, his older brothers are
in the army, and so Jesse sends David with some food and just to find out how the brothers
are doing, and David happens to be there when Goliath delivers his daily challenge.
David is, first of all, appalled that no Hebrew will take up that challenge, and secondly,
he's also really intrigued to find out that Saul has offered his oldest daughter's hand
in marriage to someone who can kill Goliath.
David says, well, I could do that, and his brothers try to shush him up.
They think he's just being a smart aleck kid.
I mean, if nobody in the army is going to challenge him, what makes you think you can
do it?
But David repeats it often enough to enough people.
Saul eventually hears about it.
Saul sends for David, and he appears before Saul, and he repeats his offer to go kill
Goliath, and Saul tries to talk him out of it, too.
Saul says, this is not a great idea, and then David insists, he says, yes, I'm going to
do it, and Saul sees he can't talk him out of it, and Saul says, at least take my armor,
at least wear my armor.
And David said, I have no idea how to wear armor, I have no idea what to do with armor.
And well, we know what happens.
Next in the story, he goes out and kills Goliath, and after he kills Goliath, then Saul says,
who was that kid anyway?
Whose son is he?
Where did he come from?
And so, in this version of the story, David secures his own foothold on the rise to the
crown by taking pretty much initiative on his own.
He also speaks very well.
He doesn't talk at all in the last chapter.
This one, he speaks very well, and at the end of the story, Saul begins to feel that first
little tingle of unease at the possibility of a really dangerous rival.
He's going to have to marry his oldest daughter to this guy now, and he's already beginning
to worry a little bit about David, even though, as he says, he doesn't know who David is.
So you've got two versions of the story, and you say, well, okay, could we take those
two versions, and could we marry them somehow so they could tell the same story?
And the answer is no, they really can't be married in that kind of way.
In one, David is Saul's armor bearer.
In the other, he has no idea what to do with armor.
In one, David has long been Saul's harpist, and Saul loves him.
In the other one, Saul doesn't even know who David is.
In the one, God is running the show.
In the other one, David is pretty much making his own way.
The story, as Alter points out, is really kind of wonderful for later stories of David,
because it shows two very different sides of David, who will be a fairly complicated
character in later Tanakh stories.
Saul loves him.
He's a talented musician who will one day write some of the most, by tradition anyway,
write some of the most beautiful Psalms, and he's the kind of man who later on will weep
for the death of Jonathan and who will weep for the death of his own son.
That's one side of David.
There is another side of David that portrays him as a very fierce warrior and a strategist,
a rival whom Saul does very well to worry about at this point, who later on will be
able to plot his way very, very carefully and very, very brilliantly right up to the
throne.
So, you know, this is all part of David, but these two versions of the David story, sitting
side by side, Alter says, this is part of the way the Tanakh writers give us that paradox,
which lies at the very heart of the Old Testament.
As Alter says, sort of summing up his version of the summary or the analysis of this episode
says, the joining of the two accounts leaves a swaying in the dynamic interplay between
two theologies, two conceptions of kingship and history, two views of David the man.
In one, the king is imagined as God's instrument, elected through God's own initiative, manifesting
his authority by commanding the realm of spirits good and evil, a figure who brings healing
and inspires love.
In the other account, the king's election is, one might say, ratified rather than initiated
by God.
Instead of the spirit descending, we have a young man ascending through his own resourcefulness,
cool courage, and quick reflexes, and also through his rhetorical skill.
Now, historically, there are other explanations for these doublets, as Alter calls them, two
versions of the same story, because it happens a lot in the Tanakh.
It even happens, as you might remember in that creation story, there are two versions
of the story of creation in the first chapters of Genesis.
Some of the other explanations are more historical in nature.
It's said that the people who put this book together might have gotten two different stories
from two different traditions, and they couldn't decide or couldn't afford to get rid of one
of them, so they kept them both in.
One might be an overlay on the first.
There are lots of other explanations.
Alter thinks that they are deliberate rhetorical devices.
He thinks this is one of the ways in which the Hebrews managed to express this central
paradox, which lies at the very, very heart of their book, whichever it is, whether it
was deliberate or not.
For us, it does point to that paradox and gives us one very, very great way of understanding
how to read this book as a book of literature, because this has been the Hebrews' greatest
contribution to literature and theology.
It became a formative story for all of Western literature and Western culture ever since.
Every writer, at least till the beginning of the 20th century, and many of them beyond
that, will know these stories, which will form a background for their values and for
their beliefs and their assumptions.
Even secular literature is going to be touched by this, because in so many ways secular literature
is going to have to assume this as a kind of a background, as a context for the stories
that are being told.
Flaubert said once that he knew Cervantes Don Quixote by heart before he learned how
to read, and although that sounds sort of paradoxical, in a way that has been true for
these Old Testament stories, these Tanakh stories, because so many of these stories
are stories that all of us knew by heart before we even learned how to read.
Of course, it helped with the Tanakh stories that a complete code of ethics comes along
with them.
As we'll discover when we look at, later on, at the religion of the Greeks and of
the Romans, we will discover that ethics does not feature as a very important part of those
stories.
Here, a completely developed code of ethics comes along, that Judaism was going to be
queeth in large measure to Christianity later on, and to a lesser extent, of the world's
other great monotheistic religion, Islam.
We'll keep running across these stories over and over again in the lectures that lie ahead.
When we get to Beowulf, we'll discover, with some surprise, I think, that the flood story
and the creation story both appear in Beowulf.
The flood story appears it's engraved on the hilt of a sword that Beowulf uses to try
to kill Grendel's mother with, and the creation story, clearly from Genesis, is sung by one
of the bards who sits and sings songs at Rothgar's Mead Hall after a banquet one night.
Grendel himself is going to be understood in part as someone who is descended from Cain
in the Cain-enable story.
By the time we get to Beowulf already, we will see some of the ways in which these stories
are finding their way into other people's mythologies and other people's literature.
When we get to the romantics, we talk about Johann Wolfgang von Gerta, where we'll discover
that Gerta uses a story from the Tanakh, the story of Job, and uses that as a frame around
his story of Faust.
And seven lectures ahead, we'll get to see one of the ways in which this Tanakh makes
its way into Western culture so thoroughly.
When we get to our lecture on the New Testament, one of the things we'll discover is we'll
see that the Gospel of Matthew in the New Testament works very, very hard to incorporate
as much of this Tanakh into his work as he can.
It becomes part of the very fabric of Matthew's Gospel.
He wants to keep saying over and over again so that the scripture might be fulfilled as
it is written, and he brings huge swatches of this Tanakh into the New Testament, which
means that it becomes part of the fabric for Christianity, and of course as Christianity
then becomes the dominant religion of the Western world, all of a sudden huge parts
of the Old Testament are going to be brought in as parts of that.
Next time, we will be back to the epic proper.
While Moses was leading his people toward the Promised Land, the Trojan War was becoming
a defining moment for the Greeks.
Homer turns out to be the kind of Sin Lechionini of the Greek world, taking a lot of stories
about the Trojan War, pulling them all together, making them into one grand narrative, or perhaps
two grand narratives, one of which will be the Iliad, and one which will be the Odyssey,
and those will be the subjects of our next two lectures.
