Lecture 31, Twain's Huckleberry Finn.
We are on our third realist writer in this lecture, and I think as we've already seen,
realism is a very large movement which could accommodate within it a fairly significant
amount of variation.
I think we saw that Olo Dostoevsky was seriously a realist writer.
He's quite different as a realist from Flaubert, and this time we'll see that Mark Twain, the
American realist, is going to be very different from both Dostoevsky and Flaubert.
Mark Twain was the first American writer, first major American writer, first important American
writer born west of the Mississippi River.
He was born in Florida, Missouri, although he grew up in Hannibal, and that's the city
that's most closely associated with him to this day.
In itself, being born west of the Mississippi doesn't sound like too big a deal, but it's
part of the context of American realism, which grew up in very different circumstances from
realism in Europe.
Twain was born in 1835, and when he was born, America was still in its romantic movement,
and the romantic movement in America was most closely associated with the East Coast at
a time when America was expanding westward.
The important writers of the age were all those writers who had, they all seemed to have
three names, William Cullen Bryant, James Fenimore Cooper, Ralph Waldo Emerson, John Greenleaf
Whittier, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
So much of the literature of that period, therefore, in America, was idealized, was hopeful, could
be a little bit sentimental, and it expressed a faith in a benign natural order and a benevolent
deity, whatever that deity happened to be for the individual writer.
Twain was born Samuel Langhorn Clemens, he had three names too, and he was born at a
time when America was expanding westward, when farms were being carved out of what would
later become the Midwest, and the far west was full of miners and lumbermen and trappers.
Life in those places was rough and primitive, sometimes dangerous, it had had very little
in common with the kind of elegancees and the moralisms and the sentimentalism of Concord
and Boston and the Hudson River Valley School.
Literature in these places turned away from that elegant Atlantic seaboard tradition to
depict life more the way it really was locally, colorful, crude, and sometimes very funny.
These little tiny western movements in literature, and most often the pieces that were written
were published first in newspapers and local newspapers, were the beginnings of realism
in America.
Sometimes in fact the early movement in realism is called regionalism in America, because
it was so closely tied to the customs and manners and dialect of a particular place.
The counterpoint in painting at this same, about this same period would have been the
canvases of say George Bingham, who painted fur traders or bargemen on the Missouri River
to show what life was like west of the Appalachians.
Twain got his start in this regionalist movement.
The perspective that he adopted in his early writings was that of an indigenous westerner
who had grown up on the Mississippi in towns that had been visited by rafts and barges
and steamboats.
Most of his early experiences as a printer, as a soldier, as a newspaper writer, as a
steamboat pilot, as a prospector, as a miner, in places all the way from Missouri to San
Francisco, gave him a first-hand experience of life that was very different from that
in a Longfellow or Whittier poem.
Even his name, the pen name that he chose, has a kind of regional ring to it.
We know that Mark Twain is the call telling a pilot how deep the water is beneath a steamship.
Twain, however, did have two names.
He was Samuel Langhorn Clemens in the east, and he was Mark Twain in the west, and when
he wrote things.
And those two names have suggested a kind of bifurcation in the life and personality
and temperament of Mark Twain.
Not quite schizophrenic, but at least it left a deep division in his life, which his biographers
have often noticed, because he really tried to live in both worlds.
He married very respectively.
He built a huge house in Hartford, Connecticut.
He wrote for the Atlantic Monthly, and he went to literary dinners with the Whittiers
and Longfellows of the world.
He became, in fact, the first regional writer who was accepted into the American literary
establishment, and therefore brought regionalism or American realism into the mainstream.
In his early writings, Twain began as a regional humorist in the tradition of Artemis Ward
or G.W.
Harris.
But one of the things he did from very early on is that in every piece that he wrote from
this western perspective, he also incorporated the eastern perspective into his writing and
then allowed the two to face off against one another.
This was noticed and developed in a really brilliant book, a kind of classic work on
Mark Twain by now, by Henry Nash Smith, called Mark Twain, the Development of a Writer.
And what he does is he analyzes those two voices in Twain's early writing, the eastern
voice and the western voice.
Twain really made his national reputation the first piece that came that everybody
read of Mark Twain's was called the Notorious Jumping Frog of Calaveras County, which I
guess everyone has read at some time or another.
He called it a tall tale or a backwood's piece.
The teller of the tale is a regional character named Simon Wheeler, who lives in a decaying
mining camp and who spends all of his time in front of a stove in a rundown tavern.
He tells his story in regional vernacular language, a long ways from the refinements
of Boston literature.
But what makes the point of the story, what gives it an added richness, is the fact that
he tells it to an easterner who finds the story just pointless and tedious and it's telling
very monotonous.
He gets very impatient with the way Simon tells the story because it seems to get nowhere
and when it finally ends it seems to have no real point.
And so in the story, that easterner who hears the story is a representative of Eastern literature,
at least at the Eastern sensibility, who finds the story not worth bothering with.
And this would become Twain's mode in much of his early writing.
He would set the two contrasting viewpoints side by side and then allow the regional,
the vernacular point of view, to win.
In fact, as millions of readers have validated ever since, Simon Wheeler's story of the
jumping frog is very funny.
It's told absolutely deadpan by Simon Wheeler.
He doesn't seem to know that it's funny, but it's a very, very funny story.
And so, and that means that the easterner is wrong.
The easterner doesn't get it because his agenda is so different from Simon Wheeler's.
And so what Twain is really insisting from very early on in his writing career is that
if Eastern literature is prettier, Western literature is more honest, is closer to experience
and in its own way, it's a refutation of Eastern respectability and sentimental moralizing.
It is also, and this is really important for early Twain, it is also a declaration of democracy.
It's a declaration of the values and integrity of the common man and the common woman.
And at that point, American regionalism comes very closely into line with European realism.
Henry Nash Smith traces these two voices in Twain's early writing through roughing
it, life on the Mississippi, eventually all the way up to the work that we're going to
look at today, the adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
In Huck Finn, Twain allows a regional character, a 12-year-old river rat, to tell his own story
in his own language.
Huck had already appeared in an earlier book by Mark Twain, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer.
There Huck was a kind of a practical sidekick to Tom and Tom's overheated literary imagination.
He's a kind of Sancho Ponza to Tom's Don Quixote.
But while Tom Sawyer uses regional dialects, it is told by an omniscient narrator in standard
English.
Here on the other hand, is part of the first paragraph of Huck Finn to show you the difference.
This is the language of Huck Finn.
You don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of The Adventures
of Tom Sawyer, but that ain't no matter.
That book was made by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly.
There was things which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth.
That is nothing.
I never seen anybody but lied one time or another, without it was Aunt Polly or the
widow, or maybe Mary.
That's the voice.
That's the voice we're going to get in Huck Finn, and it is everything that we get in
the novel is going to be seen through this character's eyes, is going to be evaluated
by him, and so the regional point of view in one sense is all that we have in this book.
Now, the opposing point of view, we said that Twain always incorporated the other point
of view, the more respectable, the conventional, into his works.
Where does that one show up in this book?
It shows up in two ways.
It most clearly shows up in those towns along the banks of the Mississippi River, inhabited
by the people who will try to tame Huck.
At the outset, those people are represented by the widow Douglas and Ms. Watson, who try
to change Huck from a regional to a conventional character by sending him to school, by sending
him to church, by sending him to Sunday school.
But there also, this conventional point of view, is also represented by Tom Sawyer himself,
who is a conventional boy, a very conventional boy, with his head stuffed full of romantic
adventure literature.
He's so respectable, in fact, that he won't let Huck join his gang of cutthroat outlaws
until he allows himself to be adopted by the widow Douglas and settles down and lives a
respectable life.
That's how respectable Tom Sawyer is.
From all of this civilizing pressure, all of these towns along the way, Huck, who's
a regional character at heart, decides to run away.
That's one of the ways in which respectable conventional values occur in the book.
But more importantly, that respectable, sure society that Huck tries to run away from turns
out to be inside Huck himself, in his own conscience, which has been shaped by the society he's
trying to escape.
He always carries it with him inside himself.
And this, in fact, turns out to be one of the real brilliances of the book.
Twain locates a great debate between convention and rebellion, between respectability and
individuality, between shore and raft, between official and vernacular values inside the head
of a 12-year-old river rat.
This is a stroke of genius.
It turned out not to be an easy book for Twain to write.
He worked on it off and on for about seven years, and he kept hitting places where he
didn't know where to go next or how to develop the novel in the next stage.
And so then he would lay it aside for a couple of months or even a couple of years before
he would come back and work on it again.
He seems to have started with the idea of taking Huck on a raft down the Mississippi, stopping
at places that Twain knew from growing up and which he had learned in a different kind
of way as a riverboat pilot.
But when Huck escapes when he first lights out, he stops on Jackson Island.
And then, like Robinson Crusoe, he discovers there's someone else on the island.
That someone else turns out to be Jim, a runaway slave who belongs to Miss Watson.
So Huck, of course, knows him.
He's shocked to hear that Jim has run away, but the two are now fellow fugitives, and so
he promises not to tell anyone.
The two are therefore now combined.
They're both regional outcasts and away from shore society, and they create a bond between
them that will turn out to be one of the best things in the entire novel.
But with the addition of Jim, the plan got more complicated because it makes no sense
to be taking a raft down the Mississippi, deeper and deeper into slave territory.
The novel is, after all, set in the 1840s, which is two decades yet before the Civil
War.
It makes no sense to be going down the Mississippi, deeper into slave territory, when what Jim
wants to do is to free his wife and his children as well.
So Twain came up with a new plan.
The new plan was to have them float down the Mississippi until they reach Cairo, Illinois.
And that's the point at which the Ohio joins the Mississippi.
There he was going to have them trade in their raft for a canoe and then take a canoe and
go upriver into free territory, perhaps eventually finding their way to the underground railroad
The trouble with that plan was, in theory it worked out fine, but Twain didn't know
the Ohio River, so he couldn't very well set a story on the banks of a river that he didn't
know about.
So he has the Miss Cairo in the fog.
They watch for it intently, but it's a really foggy night when they go past it, and they
don't even see the lights of the city, so they sail right past Cairo and then continue
to float down the Mississippi.
Here's a point at which Twain said he really didn't know what to do with the book, didn't
know how to go on from here.
So he destroys the raft, he has a steamboat coming up the river at night, hitting the
raft and the raft splits, and Jim goes off one side and Huck goes off the other side,
he splits them up, and then he laid the novel aside for about two years.
He didn't know where to go with it from here.
I think also what may have been happening, this is just a guess, we don't know this,
but I'm guessing that he was also discovering unexpected depths in this regional character
of Huck Finn.
In chapter 15, Huck plays a trick on Jim, and Jim is so hurt that Huck says he wishes
he'd never done it, and he says that there's a kind of wigwam that they have on the raft
to protect them from the elements, and Huck says he went into that wigwam and he humbled
himself to Jim, and he says he's never been sorry he did it, and he was so sorry that
he'd played that trick.
There's a real bond that is it's developing between Huck and Jim, and it turns out there's
more to Huckleberry Finn than we might have thought if we'd only known him from the Tom
Sawyer book.
Then in chapter 16, Jim tells Huck that when he gets to a free state, he wants to be able
to work and make enough money to buy his wife, and then he and his wife will work long enough
and hard enough until they have enough money to buy their children, and he says if they're
not for sale, he will pay an abolitionist to steal them.
This initial reaction to this is what we might expect from someone like Huck in his culture
at his time.
He says, it most froze me to hear such talk.
He wouldn't ever dare to talk such talk in his life before.
Just see what a difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about free.
It was according to the old saying, give her nigger an inch and he'll take an L.
Huck's eye, this is what comes of my not thinking.
Here was this nigger, which I, his as good as help to run away, coming right out flatfooted
and saying he would steal his children, children that belonged to a man I didn't even know,
a man that hadn't ever done me no harm.
Huck says that at this moment his conscience starts to stir.
That is, he realizes he's doing something that everyone considers wrong, that he's
been taught is wrong.
And so he decides to quiet his conscience, to give himself peace of mind.
He will paddle ashore at the first opportunity and turn Jim in, so that when it gets light
he takes off in the canoe on his way to shore to turn Jim in.
And then just as he's paddling away, Jim calls out to him and here's what Jim says.
Pretty soon, I'll be a shouting for joy and I'll say, it's all an accounts of Huck.
I's a free man and I couldn't ever been free if it hadn't been for Huck.
Huck done it.
Jim won't ever forget you, Huck.
Used the best friend Jim's ever had and used the only friend old Jim's got now.
Well, Huck says that speech took all the tuck out of him.
He says he's not sure now whether he should turn Jim in or not.
And then before he can get to shore, he runs into a skiff with two minutes who are searching
for five runaway slaves.
They ask Huck whether there's anyone else aboard his raft and he says yes.
And they say, white or black.
And Huck hesitates a moment and he said, he's white.
And then he rose back to the raft in really low spirits, thinking that by now he's started
down a slippery slope to damnation.
And once you're started, the slide gets easier and easier.
But then before he gets back to the raft, he thinks, would I have felt better if I had
turned Jim in?
And he thinks, no, I just feel bad in a different way.
So he decides, and here's what he decides just before he gets back to the raft.
What's the use you learnin' to do right when it's troublesome to do right and ain't no
trouble to do wrong and the wages is just the same?
I was stuck.
I couldn't answer that.
So I reckoned I wouldn't bother no more about it, but after this always do whichever come
handiest at the time.
It's one of the great moments in American fiction.
Huck's conscience has been trained by shore society.
And that shore society tells him that Jim is property and therefore it is his duty to
turn Jim in.
That is, he carries all these shore values inside himself.
But at this moment, at this particular moment in the novel, he transcends those shore values.
He believes that helping Jim is wrong, but he does it anyway and he justifies it to himself
on the basis of expediency.
He says, if I'm gonna feel bad either way, I might as well do the wrong thing or whatever
comes easiest to time, doing the wrong thing is easiest here.
At this point, and this is a really, really optimistic moment in American literature,
at this point, Twain is telling us that a good heart can overcome a diseased conscience.
We can reject or at least transcend some of our training.
It's a wonderfully optimistic moment.
Two years later, Twain took up the novel again.
He has Huck, who's been split up from Jim now, spend some time with the Grangerford family,
who's engaged in a long, long running feud with the Shepardsons.
And in that episode, we get to see the last remnants of a kind of debased aristocratic
code of honor in the South.
Then Huck and Jim are reunited and the trip goes on, still heading South.
It's justified now by having the raft taken over by two con men who call themselves the
King and the Duke.
And for a few chapters, we get a satire on shore society from the point of view of the
vernacular characters on the raft.
It also explains why that raft is still heading South, because Jim and Huck aren't in charge
of the raft anymore.
The King and the Duke stop at every shore town and they exploit the weaknesses of shore
society.
They exploit its religious sentimentalism, its greed, its willingness to sacrifice personal
integrity for social approval, and we get to see how human beings behave when they're
part of a mob.
None of it's very attractive, and it all makes what some scholars have called the community
of saints on the raft look so much better by contrast.
This is the very best of the regional world.
Two friends, a white and a black, drifting down the Mississippi on a raft, their integrity
and loyalty contrasting in every possible way with the corruptions of the respectable
values of the shore society.
As Henry Nash Smith in his edition of the Riverside edition of this novel says in the
introduction, it is a contrast between the raft connoting freedom, security, happiness,
harmony with physical nature, and the society of the towns along the shore, connoting vulgarity,
and malice, and fraud, and greed, and violence.
The great climax of this book however happens in chapter 31, and this is one of the greatest
moments I think in all of world literature.
The King and the Duke have turned Jim in for the $40 reward.
Huck is back to where he was in chapter 16, except that now Jim has actually been captured,
so if Huck wants to help him this time, he'll actually have to defy the law, not just lie
to a couple of slave catchers.
This time Huck goes through a very long battle with his own conscience.
It's much more intense, it's much longer, and because Huck is giving his story in his
own words, he tells us what he thinks.
And one of the things that's really, really good, I don't have time to go through this,
but read it carefully when you read it, is to notice how many theological terms there
are in Huck's debate this time.
We know where he's learned this.
He's learned this from Sunday school, he's learned this from church.
The theological terms tells us that he is repeating to himself everything that he has
been taught by a sure society.
And so here, despite the fact that he's spent the entire novel trying to run away from it,
we're becoming more and more aware that he carries these values inside him.
He will never be quite free of them.
Huck agonizes thinking that Providence, and Providence is one of those theological words,
he agonizes thinking that Providence is letting him know he was being watched all the time
he was helping Jim escape.
And then he says, well, I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself
by saying I was brung up wicked, and so I weren't so much to blame, but something inside
of me kept saying, there was the Sunday school, you could have gone to it, and if you had
done it, they'd have learnt you there, that people that acts as I'd been acting about
that nigger goes to everlasting fire.
So Huck, his battle with his conscience done, decides to write a note to Miss Watson, telling
her where Jim is, and then he says for a moment he feels all clean inside.
But before he decides to send the letter, he holds it in his hand for a bit, and he's
starts to think about the trip down the river with Jim.
He thinks about floating down the river and laughing and talking, and Jim's saying Huck
is the best friend he ever had, and remembering that Jim used to not wake up Huck, but take
extra watches so Huck could sleep, and then he looks at the note in his hand.
And this is the kind of climactic moment of the whole novel.
He says, it was a close place.
I took it up and held it in my hand.
I was a trembling because I'd got to decide forever, but Twix, two things, and I noted.
I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then says to myself, all right then, I'll
go to hell and tore it up.
That is, at this moment he decides he will help Jim escape.
This is maybe the high watermark of the novel, and Hemingway, Ernest Hemingway said all modern
American fiction starts at that moment, that spot right there.
It's a stark confrontation between sure society and the raft, between conventional and regional
values between society and the individual, and Huck by all accounts does the right thing.
He allows his regional values to trump those he's learned from the sure society.
He really believes he's going to hell, but he turns his back on the rest of the world.
Doing what he believes is wrong because his vernacular heart is pure.
And the implication once again is that we can outgrow our training.
We can become better people and we've been brought up to be by being true to ourselves.
From this moment in his spring, you know, hundreds of American stories about boys and
sometimes girls too, leaving home to try to outgrow everything that they've been taught,
and to try to discover for themselves what's right and what's wrong.
Hemingway's own Nick Adams is another Huck Finn, learning how to transcend the values
that he's been taught in his middle class world to discover how to live for himself.
Wayne laid aside the novel for a while and then he came back to it to finish it in a
way that nobody has ever liked very much.
Huck goes to the farm where Jim has been locked up and he announces that he's Tom Sawyer.
The farm belongs to the Phelps family who are related to Tom, so that makes the impersonation
a little bit more difficult.
But he manages it and he's trying to figure out how to free Jim when the real Tom Sawyer
shows up who has to pretend to be Huck Finn because Huck is pretending to be Tom Sawyer.
Once Tom is back, we're back to the Tom Sawyer book with Tom concocting elaborate escape
plans based on his reading of romantic adventure literature.
He calls the plan to free Jim a great evasion and Huck becomes his sidekick again.
Much of Tom's plan comes from Alexander Dumas, the Count of Monte Cristo, and so Jim is made
to write messages on tin plates.
He's made to water a flower with his tears.
He's made to mark the passing days on the wall of his prison with a nail, and Tom and
Huck catch snakes and spiders and rats to introduce them into the cell to make the scene more
authentic.
Finally, to finish it all off, Tom figures that just to free Jim is not going to be too
exciting, so he leaves notes all over where people will find them, telling them where
and when Jim is going to be freed, so the night when Huck comes to action and Tom actually
comes to free Jim, there's a gang of armed men waiting for them and Tom actually gets
shot in the leg in the process.
After all these shenanigans are done, Tom announces that Miss Watson has died and that
she freed Jim in her will, so all of this has been just a game, it has been for nothing.
We understand Tom's part in it, that's the way he is.
What we don't understand is Huck's part, agreeing to turn Jim into a prop in the Great
Evasion Plan.
What's happened to the brotherhood of the raft?
What became of Huck's decision to go to hell rather than desert Jim?
At the end, Huck's loyalty is back to Tom, not to Jim.
He's a Sancho Ponza to Tom's Don Quixote.
The long trip down the river is pushed into the background in order to give Tom the kind
of adventure that he thinks is important.
And so the ending raises all kinds of questions about Huck's stature and growth.
Has he learned anything about slavery?
What was his real relationship to Jim?
What becomes of it at the end?
Did Huck grow and change some or not?
Can we transcend what we've been taught?
Some readers and critics think that Twain just gave up on the novel at the end, couldn't
figure out what to do with it, and so he just reverted back to the kind of slapstick humor
of Tom Sawyer just to finish it off, and if so, that makes the book a kind of artistic
failure.
Others have a more sober assessment.
They believe that Twain knew exactly what he was doing, and what he is saying at the
end of this novel is that we don't learn from experience.
We cannot transcend our training.
We'll always carry with us our shore values wherever we go.
In this reading, Huck is willing to help Jim earlier because he needs Jim on the raft,
and it's simple expediency for him to save Jim then.
Once he's back on shore, he reverts to back what being what he's been taught to be.
In chapters 21 and 22, in one of the towns where the king and the duke make the raft
stop, a man named Sherburn kills a drunk named Boggs in the middle of Main Street.
A mob gathers to lynch Sherburn, who waits on the roof of his house with his rifle.
When they arrive, he tells them, the first man who steps forward, he's going to kill.
They'll get him because they have him outnumbered, but then he blisters this crowd with a lecture
about their cowardice, their conformity, their failure to be really real men.
The lynch mob, after listening to him for a while, nobody wants to be the first one
to take the first step, so the lynch mob dissolves and retreats, as Huck says, looking tolerable
cheap.
As Twain aged, this became his view of what he called the damned human race, and he spells
that view out in such late stories as the man who corrupted Hadleyburg or the mysterious
stranger.
This reading, so this pessimistic reading of the end of Huck Finn, squares with the
later Twain, who lost his faith both in regional man and in all men.
It makes Twain, in a way, into another representative realist, since they believed, as we talked
about when we did Madame Bovary, that character and circumstance are fate, which we cannot
escape.
And the ending of this, if we take this pessimistic reading, what Twain is telling us, that in
fact, that's true for Huck Finn, as it is for Emma Bovary.
Next time, we will stay in America to look at the poems of a woman who, as much as the
realists were challenging the romantic assumptions about life and values, challenged her whole
world from her retreat in an upstairs room in a house in Amherst, Massachusetts.
Next time, we will take up the poems of one of America's most original poets, Emily Dickinson.
