Lecture 2 The Epic of Gilgamesh
We begin our journey through the literature of the world with one of the oldest literary
works that we have, The Epic of Gilgamesh.
The modern text, the standard version on which most modern translations are based, comes
from a 7th century BCE copy that was found in the library of the Assyrian king, Assurbanipal.
But the poem itself has to be much older than that, dating back to shortly after 2800 BCE,
when presumably a historical king, Gilgamesh, was king of a Sumerian city of Uruk, which
is near the Arabian Gulf.
He must have been a colorful and exciting figure because shortly after his death, people
started making up legends and stories about him, and a lot of them have survived.
There were many, many individual stories about his exploits.
Those stories were passed on through succeeding civilizations so that when the Sumerians were
overrun by the Akkadians and the Akkadians were overrun by the Babylonians and the Babylonians
were overrun by the Assyrians, each one of them took the story over and then retold it
for themselves.
It even made it outside the Middle East into places like Asia Minor with the Hittites and
into places like Syria.
But it has survived through many, many changes of culture in the Middle East, somewhere in
the 2nd millennium BCE, someone took all those stories and wove them into one narrative.
We're not sure we know who did that, but the scribe whose name is on the bottom of one
set of tablets is Sin Lekki Unini.
And so that we will give him credit for that at any rate, whether he's the one who actually
wove these together or if he was just copying these tablets, we don't know.
But Sin Lekki Unini will work as well for this poem, as Homer's name does for the Iliad
and the Odyssey, and we'll stick with that.
The poem then was pretty much lost until the 19th century, and in the 19th century it was
rediscovered in a really exciting story, which is told in another teaching company course,
one which gets told in the introduction to most translations that you'll find.
The poem itself is divided into two parts, two unequal parts.
The first part is pretty much a straightforward heroic story about the exploits of a legendary
king.
When we say that Gilgamesh is heroic, we're using the word heroic in pretty much the same
way that all early peoples would have used that term.
Heroic means larger than life, and his adventures are also larger than life.
Gilgamesh, as Achilles will be later, as Aeneas will be later, is semi-divine.
He has a divine mother and a human father, and so hence he's bigger than life in all
respects.
He's got more courage, he's got more strength, he's got more size, he's got more appetites,
he's got more ambition, he's got more energy, he has more everything than ordinary people
does.
And so the epic poem in this case is the story of a heroic adventures about a larger than
life character.
He begins the poem, in fact, as a ruler who's pretty much wearing out his people, because
they're just ordinary people, and he's semi-divine, and they can't keep up with him.
His appetites for war and sex particularly seem to have been annoying them and wearing
them out, and eventually what they do is they go to the gods and they pray for deliverance.
They say, we need some relief from this guy.
The gods answer the request by creating a partner, a companion for Gilgamesh.
They make him out in the wilderness, they create him out of clay and hair, they call
him Enkidu, and then they drop him down among the animals and he is raised by animals, living
with animals.
He grows up that way until he is discovered by a trapper.
A trapper sees him and is frightened at what he might do to his traps, and so he goes to
the city to see what he can do.
Enkidu, by the way, turns out to be a perfect complement for Gilgamesh.
If Enkidu is half human and half animal, Gilgamesh is half human and half divine, so if you put
the two of them together, they make up one totally extraordinary human being.
When the trapper goes to the city, he comes back out into the wilderness with a hierophant
or a temple priestess, a temple prostitute.
She opens herself to Enkidu, and as the poem says, they make love for seven nights and
six days.
And then when Enkidu is exhausted and wants to go back to the animals, the animals reject
him.
Something has happened.
He's made a transition from purely animal life into some kind of human life, and sex
has been the portal that's taken him from that one to the other.
Once he's rejected by the animals, he goes back to the hierophant who takes him to a
group of shepherds, and the group of shepherds then teaches him how to groom himself, how
to eat human clothes, how to eat human food, how to do all the kind of human things, and
when he's learned that, then the hierophant takes him the rest of the way into the city.
When he gets to the city, the first person he meets is Gilgamesh, and the two confront
one another, and they have a huge wrestling match in the middle of town.
It's a very close fought match, but eventually Gilgamesh throws Enkidu, and when he helps
him up, the two become fast friends.
They become best buddies.
This is the first example in all of literature of that kind of male-male bonding that we'll
get later on with Achilles and Patroclus and the Iliad, or David and Jonathan in the Old
Testament.
Now that Gilgamesh has a friend, he decides to channel some of that energy, and to use
it for a purpose that is going to be very common in these first works of literature
that we do in this course.
That is, he decides that he and Enkidu are going to go out and win a name for themselves.
They are going to win a name that will last beyond their own deaths.
They're going to seek a kind of immortality by being the kind of people about whom stories
are told.
They decide to go to the cedar forests where there is a monstrous creature named Humbaba
who guards these cedar forests, and they make their way to the cedar forests.
They confront Humbaba, and they eventually wind up killing him.
The fight with Humbaba is a little disappointing because the text is badly damaged at this
point, so we're not quite sure what happens.
Humbaba at the very end seems to grow pathetic and ask for a beg for his life, and they kill
him anyway.
He has something called seven splendors, and we're not quite sure what those seven splendors
are.
Seven splendors that the heroes might have thought they could have taken on themselves,
but the god Enlil, who is slightly annoyed by what they're doing, takes those seven
splendors, whatever they are, and scatters them to other places.
There's a sort of subtext that modern readers have discovered in this, and the subtext is
that because there is no wood or stone in Sumeria, you needed those things for building,
and so you always had to go somewhere abroad to get stone and wood.
Perhaps this story is a kind of retelling of an adventure to the cedar forests to bring
home timbers.
At any rate, they kill Humbaba and presumably bring home cedars for building the city of
Uruk, and Samuel Noah Kramer, who was the dean of American Sumerologist, says that
we have here the very first St. George and the Dragon Story in all of history, and it
is something like that.
The transition to the second part of the poem is done by the death of Enkidu.
When Gilgamesh and Enkidu come home, they have a big parade for them in Uruk, and they
look like marvelous, handsome, strapping, wonderful young men.
They look so good, in fact, that the goddess Ishtar, the goddess of love, falls in love
with Gilgamesh and asks him to be her consort.
He turns her down, and he does it somewhat rudely.
He's not friendly in his refusal, and he reminds her that the last consort she's had
have not done very well, and he has no intention of becoming one of them.
Ishtar is insulted.
She sends down the Bull of Heaven to the city of Uruk to savage the city of Uruk, but Gilgamesh
and Enkidu, one more time, do one more heroic thing, and they kill the Bull of Heaven.
The gods now decide that the heroes in this time have gone too far.
They've moved into somehow, into forbidden territory, and that one of them has to die,
and that one is going to wind up being Enkidu.
Gilgamesh then stays by Enkidu while he dies.
He sits by his bedside.
He holds him in his arms, and he holds him in his arms even after Enkidu has died.
He holds him, and he holds him until, as the poem poignantly puts it, until a maggot drops
out of his nose, and then he lets him go to be buried.
Gilgamesh, two things happen to Gilgamesh in this process of sitting by Enkidu.
The first is that he sees what physical death looks like.
He knows what it means to die now.
Secondly, in the process of holding his friend through death and after death, he also understands
in a very emotional way that he too is going to die.
He doesn't know, we all know, yes, I'm going to die.
What he understands is, yes, I am going to die.
What he does is, for the second part of the poem, he lays aside his kingly regalia and
goes out on a more spiritual quest, looking for a more literal remedy against death than
simply a name that will live on beyond him.
The second part of the story is that spiritual quest.
Gilgamesh puts aside his regalia, he puts on animal skins, and he travels to the ends
of the earth.
He travels past the mountains of the rising and the setting sun guarded by the scorpion
people.
He travels through twelve leagues of impenetrable darkness.
He passes through the garden of the gods, which jewels grow on all the trees, and he
comes finally to the shore of the ocean of death.
And then he travels across the ocean of death to arrive finally at the island of a man called
Utanapishti.
Utanapishti and his wife turn out to be the only two humans who have ever been granted
immortality.
That we find out was the point of this quest.
He's going to ask them, how did you do it?
How can I do it?
Utanapishti tells Gilgamesh, the Mesopotamian version of the flood story, in which it turns
out there are some similarities with the story that comes up later in the Old Testament,
of course.
The gods decide to destroy humankind, and one god works with Utanapishti, helps him
build a boat in which he can save some animals and some people.
And by the time the flood is done, the gods have repented of their action.
They say, this was really not a good idea.
They are so grateful when they discover that one human being and his family and some animals
have survived, that as a kind of gift, as a kind of thank you, they give Utanapishti
and his wife immortality.
What Utanapishti says, this was a one-time deal.
This is never going to happen again.
There's no way that it's going to happen to you.
So don't even ask because it can't possibly happen.
Well, Gilgamesh is about to go back home, empty-handed.
Utanapishti's wife says, give him this plant, this special plant.
It's a plant that doesn't make you immortal, but it does renew your youth, so you can eat
the plant and you can become young again.
And so Gilgamesh very carefully treasures this plant.
He wants to take it back and give some to the old men who sit on the walls of Uruk.
I always thought that was a really charming detail because he'd like all these old men
to grow young with him.
But one night while he's bathing in a pool on his way back to Uruk, he leaves the plant
on the shore and a snake comes up and eats the plant.
And of course, this also helps to explain how a snake renews its youth, it sheds its
skin, and it can grow young again.
But it means that Gilgamesh now returns back to Uruk empty-handed.
The quest was entirely in vain.
The connections, by the way, in passing, the connections between the flood story in this
poem and the flood story in the Old Testament have been the subject of a lot of discussion,
as you might well imagine.
There are other teaching company courses that treat this in more detail than we're going
to be able to do here.
There's also a really good book by Alexander Heidel called the Gilgamesh Epic and Old
Testament Parallels, and I recommend that to your attention if you're interested in
following this up.
The pattern of the Gilgamesh story turns out to be a pattern which has been identified
by a lot of writers since, including writers like Joseph Campbell in his Hero with a Thousand
Faces.
And the story is the same story, it's a story about a man of unusual birth who goes on a
long quest encountering strange and difficult obstacles looking for some extraordinary treasure.
He doesn't find the treasure, and then he returns home at the end of the story back to
where he started.
He has come full circle.
And that is exactly the way Gilgamesh works, Gilgamesh comes back to a rook empty-handed.
But it's also true in this pattern that you never come back to exactly the place that
you started out because you've changed in the process of taking the trip.
So when Gilgamesh comes back, somehow he seems reconciled now to the lot of being human
in a way that he wasn't before he went out the first time.
His own immortality, he decides, when he returns will be those walls of a rook.
Every single brick in those walls of a rook has his name stamped on it.
And so he says, that's going to be my immortality.
If I live on beyond my own death, it will be because I will be the man who built these
walls, who built the walls of a rook.
And the question of immortality for the Sumerians is very, very important because we know that
they did not have a vision of a happy life after death.
What happens in their lore is that after you're old, you're just worn out and you get kind
of thrown into an ash pit.
Your spirit can't be destroyed, but the spirit survives only as a kind of wingless bird living
in a dusty, dark place, eating dust.
It's not a happy thought, so that you can't look forward to a happy life after death.
So that means whatever you can do to survive with a name or reputation or the walls of
a rook is very, very important.
The poem at the end insists that Gilgamesh is not a hero so much because of what he did,
but because of what he learned.
And I always think this is a really delicate, beautiful touch too.
At the end of the poem, we remember Gilgamesh not because he fought whom Baba or not because
he brought trees back.
We don't remember that he slew the bull of heaven.
We don't remember any of those things.
What we were told at the end is he became a hero because he learned things.
And what he learned is the sum of all wisdom.
The poem is, of course, rich enough and complex enough.
It can be and has been interpreted in a variety of ways.
Enkidu's story has been understood as a kind of parable of Mesopotamian, a Mesopotamian
parable of culture, the way in which human beings move from the state of animal through
the state of wilderness, moving up into the pastoral life and finally into the city.
John Mayer, in an introduction to John Gardner's translation of the poem, does a very nice essay
on this aspect of the poem.
So that Enkidu is born as an animal, created as an animal, and then he moves into the wilderness,
then he moves into the pastoral life living with shepherds, and finally into the city.
That story, just telling it in that way and using those terms makes it sound like the story
is a story of progress.
It's an evolutionary story.
It's a story about how we outgrew our animal roots and grew to become city people, how
we became fully human by living in the city.
But as Enkidu realizes, it's also a story of the fall, because once you leave nature,
you lose that connection with nature, we lose that primal innocence that we had, and a city
man's connection with nature is never going to be the same as it was before we moved to
the city.
But when Enkidu knows he's going to die, he curses the hierophant and the trapper who
brought him out of the wilderness and took him into the city.
He later on retracts the curse, but it's clear that what he really misses, what he really
regrets the loss of is that loss of connection with nature that he had.
We understand, we can see it happening to Enkidu as he goes through his story.
He begins by living with animals, and then when he lives with the shepherd, he actually
spends his time helping them kill the very animals that he had lived with before.
There's a change indeed.
And by the time he gets to the city, of course, the connection with nature is entirely changed,
because now you actually can go out to the forest, you could kill the guardian of the
forest, plunder the trees that are out there, bring them back and build cities with them.
And of course, an interesting detail is the fact that the snake, who's going to show up
as the enemy of human happiness in the Genesis story, already assumes that role here in stealing
that plant that could have renewed his youth for Gilgamesh.
If Enkidu's story is a story about somehow, about a parable, about our simultaneous rise
into civilization and our collapse out of the union with nature, Gilgamesh seems easier
in some ways, because Gilgamesh is clearly a story about coming to terms with mortality,
which is initially and primarily terrifying.
Anybody who's ever spent time in a hospital, and we're with a loved one when he or she
died, or anyone who's ever gone through any experience like this, knows that that moment
of death can be really terrifying.
And that also there is a moment at which you realize, whatever stage of life you're actually
realized, that's going to happen to me, and that's the way Gilgamesh starts his journey.
He's terrified, he's frightened by what he's seen.
But there is also a compensatory side to this.
Sometimes it's hard to see, and I think that compensatory side gets into this poem, and
I think that's one of the reasons it makes this poem so rich, is that if we think of
ourselves as essentially infinite, then every path that we haven't taken yet is one that
we haven't taken yet, but it's still out there, we can still take it.
Everything we haven't done, we can still do, because we've got all these limitless possibilities.
There's a really wonderful book by Thomas van Nortwijk called Somewhere I Have Never
Traveled, and what he says is, there happens a moment in human life, and this is what happens
to Gilgamesh, when he suddenly realizes that he's in the middle of something, he's not
at the beginning of a journey, he's in the middle, and many of those paths that he has
not taken yet, he will never take because they're behind him now.
He also recognizes a horizon out in front of him that he had never noticed before, and
suddenly when we realize that, we realize something about ourselves that we haven't realized before,
and we are in a better position to understand who we are and what it is that we can really
do.
As van Nortwijk says in his book Somewhere I Have Never Traveled, he says, we are what
we are, we do what we can, and we can more easily learn to love ourselves and others
as flawed but game mortals than as unfulfilled deities.
All of this means that the acceptance of one's own mortality, painful though it may be, is
one prerequisite for emotional maturity, because without it, we can really never know ourselves
for what we are.
Andrew George says in his introduction to his translation of the Gilgamesh epic, is
that aside from that, which is what Gilgamesh learns by taking his journey, aside from that,
the things that he learns that are the most important, the deepest wisdom, comes to him
from Uttanapishti, because Uttanapishti has lived a long time, he's a very, very wise
old man, and what he tells him is, he says, what life is really about is playing your
role, doing what you're supposed to do, doing what's in front of you.
When Gilgamesh first shows up to talk to Uttanapishti, Uttanapishti contrasts him with a fool, which
Andrew George says is a very polite way of calling him one, saying, what are you doing?
You're king of Ruk, you're supposed to be back there taking care of your people.
What are you doing wearing animal skins and going on this feudal quest?
And what he does is, while Gilgamesh is with him, he slowly turns him around and then sends
him back home to become the good king that he never has been before.
He bays him, he puts new clothes on him, he gives him some new guidance for life, and
then he sends him home.
And when he's, we said at the outset that one of the things that was true of Gilgamesh
at the beginning, he was a bad king to start off with, he ends up being a very good king.
And so that in a way, in one way, that's what the poem is about, it's about how Gilgamesh
learned how to be a good king.
All of this is beautifully stated in a slightly older Babylonian version of this poem.
Now this little passage that I'm going to read to you isn't in the standard version,
but it's implicit in everything Utnapishti tells Gilgamesh, and it's implicit in everything
Gilgamesh does when he returns home.
The passage goes like this, when it happens when Gilgamesh reaches the shore of the river,
the ocean of death, and there there's a little inn kept by a goddess Shaduri.
And the goddess says, you look terrible Gilgamesh, you look like you've been worked over, you
look awful, what have you been doing?
And Gilgamesh says, my brother died in my arms, and I'm frightened by death, and I'm
afraid, and I'm looking for a remedy for death.
And she says this to him, she says, oh Gilgamesh, where are you wandering?
The life that you seek you never will find.
When the gods created mankind, death they dispensed to mankind, life they kept for themselves.
But you Gilgamesh, let your belly be full, enjoy yourself always by day and by night,
make merry each day, dance and play day and night.
Let your clothes be clean, let your head be washed, may you bathe in water, gaze on the
child who holds your hand, let your wife enjoy your repeated embrace, for such is the destiny
of mortal men.
And so in a way, although as I said, the standard version doesn't use that passage, that passage
is implicit in everything that Gilgamesh seems to have understood by the time he returns
to Uruk.
As Andrew George says in his introduction to his translation, he says, the message of
the Gilgamesh epic is the vanity of the hero's quest.
Pursuit of immortality is folly.
The proper duty of man is to accept the mortal life that is his lot and enjoy it to the full.
And what that means is that in so many ways this is a really, really good work for us
to start off a journey through world literature with.
It's a good work to start off with not just because it's good, which it is, or because
it's very old, which it is, but because so many of the things that we're going to encounter
in all the rest of this course for all the lectures coming up are already in this poem.
They're already here.
They're already here in a kind of template or blueprint sort of fashion, and we'll be
able to trace their development as we go through the rest of our course.
In addition to the themes and the techniques that we've already talked about, this work
for the very first time in literature deals with the relations between gods and humans.
It asks questions like, do the gods care about us?
If they care about us, what do they think about us?
How did we get here in the first place?
What's our purpose vis-a-vis the gods?
What do they owe us?
What do we owe them?
Are there things that we can do to placate them or to vitiate the damage they might do
to us?
For the first time in literature, these questions come up in this work.
And as I think we mentioned in the lecture, in the previous lecture, this is going to
be one of the themes of the entire first unit of this course, relations between gods and
humans, is going to be one of the subjects of all epic poems, and it will of course be
the primary subjects of things like the Old Testament, the Bhagavad Gita, and the New Testament.
There is also the question for the very first time in history that comes up about the immortalizing
power of art, and this one is going to, we're going to run across this over and over again
down through the history of Lit.
But Gilgamesh says that he is going to be remembered because of the walls of Uruk, because
every one of those bricks is stamped with his name.
But the poet knows that even if those walls disappear, even if those walls crumble and
fall to dust, and no one will ever be able to find them, and that name of Gilgamesh is
entirely lost to history, he will be remembered because he's the subject of this poem.
This poem now has immortalized him in a way that the simple walls of Uruk can't possibly
ever do, and that's a really interesting and powerful thing that we're going to keep
coming across as we go through this course.
This is the first poem that gives us a picture of the paradisical garden, what a garden of
the gods would look like.
As I said, Gilgamesh travels through this one, and it's a beautiful place, it's a place
in which all of the plants bear jewels instead of fruit.
We're going to run across this picture again, or a variation on this picture when we get
to Genesis, because the story of Eden, the story of Paradise there, will be another picture
of what a garden of the gods might look like.
We'll run across it again, interestingly enough, we'll run it across it in the 1001 nights.
If you know the complete story of Aladdin and his magic lamp, we're going to run across
another garden of the gods there, and there Aladdin actually gets to visit it in the same
way that Gilgamesh gets to visit it here.
We have also very interestingly, I think in this poem, we have the hunter and the shepherd
as being intermediaries between stages of human civilization.
We have the animal on the one side and completely human on the other side, that is people who
live in cities, but between them we have the hunter and the shepherd.
The trapper is the one, after all, who first discovers Enkidu and then goes to the city
to get the hierophant and bring her back, and the shepherds are the ones who teach him
how to eat human food and how to anoint his body and how to dress in human clothes, how
to behave like a human being.
This really, really interestingly is going to show up again in the Old Testament in the
story of Cain and Abel, where Cain and Abel occupy virtually the same positions as sort
of intermediaries between the world of animals, the world of nature on the one hand, and the
world of city dwellers on the other, and it's interesting to remember also in that story
Cain is the one who goes out and builds the first cities.
This is the first work of literature that uses dreams, as portents of the future, or
messages that come to us from another world.
And this, of course, we're going to run across in literature over and over again down through
all of history.
The Iliad and the Odyssey will have dreams in them that are messages which come from
outside oneself all the way down to Finnegan's Wake by the time we get to the 20th century.
This is the first poem that has in it a picture of the ferryman who can row a living man
across the ocean of death.
We're going to run across that again when we get to Virgil's Aeneid, and of course
we'll run across that yet one more time when we get to Dante's Inferno, because Dante
is going to be using some of the same characters that Aeneid does, and Aeneid here will be
following in some measure the story of what it feels like to be a living person rowed
across the rivers of death.
It's the river Styx in both Virgil and Dante.
And of course this is the first poem that gives us a journey to a fantastic place, a journey
which takes us out of ourselves and out of the world we know into a place that we've
never been before, to have experiences which will bring us back home, changed in ways that
will make home look different to us.
We'll get to see home for the first time because we have changed in the process.
And of course this is also the first poem which actually takes us into the land of the
dead.
And Kedu has a dream just before he dies in which he understands what it's going to
feel like to be dead, and so we actually get to visit the land of the dead in this poem,
which we're going to be doing again in future programs.
Odysseus will visit the land of the dead, Aeneas will visit the land of the dead, and
Dante of course will spend one third of his divine comedy there.
It is a great, great poem and it's also a wonderful read.
A couple of weeks ago I was working on this poem and I got a call from a friend who said
he had just at a bookstore, he had just come across this book and he had no idea that it
even existed and I said, what's the name of it?
He said he couldn't remember the name and he started telling me about the book and I
realized it was Gilgamesh, it was the book of Gilgamesh.
Here's a fellow who wasn't particularly literary, wasn't particularly interested in this, but
he said he just stumbled across and he said, it is the best poem I have ever read.
It is a really, really magnificent piece of literature and so it makes a really good
place for us to start.
In our next lecture we will pick up sort of from where we left off this time because the
people whom we'll be dealing with next time are people who came from Mesopotamia.
According to their own story they came from the land of the city of Ur which is another
one of those 13 Sumerian cities right down by the Arabian Gulf and who traveled then
up through what is now Turkey and then down into the land of Canaan.
When they came they brought with them the stories and the culture and so much that they had
learned from where they had come from, from the land of Mesopotamia and in the process
of their history they would also pick up some things from Egypt, but they will also in moving
into their new promised land, they will also become a really unique people who reinvented
religion and who in the process reinvented literature, who reinvented history, who reinvented
theology and whose contribution to the literature of the world is the Old Testament.
That will be next in our next lecture, the Old Testament.
Thank you.
