These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, The History of World Literature, Part 3.
The subject of this lecture is the Chinese novel, The Story of the Stone, and in this lecture, we're actually going to be pursuing two of the themes that we've been pursuing since the very beginning of our course.
The one is the development of the novel as we've traced it in various cultures across time.
And the second one is related, and that is back in lecture 19, we actually talked about the rise of vernacular literature in China, and we'll have another detail or two to add to that as we talk about the story of the stone.
This one picks up the story of the rise of vernacular literature, the development of the novel in China, about 200 years after Monkey, which was the novel that we looked at in lecture 19.
It's about 200 years because although this is one of the most important novels in all of Chinese history, its text, the provenance of the text is still something of a question.
And modern scholars are still not very sure about the authenticity, the veracity, the reliability of the text from which all modern editions are taken.
Its author was Cao Xiu Qin. He was born, we know, about somewhere around 1720, and he died about 1763, but the novel that he wrote was not published until 1792.
In those 29 years that elapsed between his death and the publication of the novel, the novel circulated in various manuscript editions.
The one thing they all had in common was they all had 80 chapters, and the narrative ended at a very, very critical place, leaving us wondering what was going to happen next.
Then in 1792, an edition was brought out, a new edition of this novel, by two men who said they had edited it, and this one had 120 chapters.
The question about where these last 40 chapters came from has been one that's teased scholars down through history, and the provenance of those 40 chapters is still much debated.
There are some scholars, some modern scholars, who think that they may perhaps have actually been written by the original author, and that the two men who brought out the edition actually did what they said they did, that is, they just edited it.
But for our purposes, since the 120-chapter version is the one that made the huge mark on Chinese literature, will proceed as though it's a unified work, and not worry too much about the text, although I wanted you to know that that's still an ongoing question in the history of Chinese literature.
In any case, whoever wrote those last 40 chapters, the work seems to have been something of a family project, and there was more than one hand involved in the writing of it in the first place.
Various members of the Cao family seemed to have suggested changes and interpretations, and had left some of their marks in the margins of some of the manuscripts that were circulating during those 30 years in the 80-chapter version,
so that it's assumed that usually that even that the first 80 chapters were the work of more than one hand, wherever the last 40 chapters came from.
It was a family project in part because it is a family history. It charts the decline of a family from high status and wealth to one living in really reduced circumstances,
one that's even by the end of the novel is held in suspicion by the imperial power that it had served for many generations.
It is a fictionalized account of that family history, and some license has been taken with regard to characters and events,
but in general scholars have verified the outline of the fortunes of that family in the period covered by the novel.
So in some ways, while it's a fictionalized account, it is based on a real historical family and the real historical decline of that family.
In terms of Western equivalents, if we think of something to compare it to, something that we might be able to help us understand this,
we might think of it as a kind of combination of the novels of Jane Austen and Marcel Proust, the Remembrance of Things Past, and Thomas Mann's Buddenbrooks.
It's like Jane Austen's novels, and it's in its focus on the domestic life of an extended family, particularly focused on the lives of the women within that family.
It's like Proust in that it remembers a way of life that has since vanished.
By the time the author was writing this, the family was no longer enjoying the status and prestige that it had in earlier days,
and it's like Thomas Mann and its portrayal of the decline of a great family over several generations.
But having said that, these are Western equivalents, in order to get the kind of uniquely Chinese flavor of this book,
we need to remind ourselves one more time of the circumstances in which the novel arose in China.
As we pointed out in Lecture 19, The One on Monkey, it was a vernacular form vis-à-vis the classical forms of Chinese poetry and the official annals.
It seems to have grown out of storytelling traditions, whose origins in China were with Buddhism,
and the Buddhist storytellers who used stories in the vernacular in order to teach Buddhist principles and to convert people to Buddhism.
In this way, there's a very strong parallel between this and the Zhateka, the Indian collection of Buddhist stories that we looked at back in Lecture 12.
And something similar seems to have happened in China in the same kind of way, involving the same religion.
By the time of the Tang poets, which we looked at in Lecture 13, there was a class of professional storytellers in China
who were telling stories more for entertainment than for edification.
Some of these stories were published, at least not the complete stories, but the kind of outlines that storytellers worked with.
So we have some fairly clear ideas of how they worked and how they structured their stories and how these stories worked.
And so we know something about them.
The Chinese novel, as far as we know, grew out of these stories that were told by professional storytellers.
And from those origins, the Chinese novel takes some of its characteristics.
For example, we can tell by the outlines that storytellers like to end each day's recital on a note of high suspense,
kind of encouraging the people to come back the next day to find out what happens next.
This, as we remember, is also Scheherazade's technique in the 1001 Nights as a way of managing to stay alive for one day at a time.
In the story of the stone, we actually see that same tactic, and it shows up at the end of almost every chapter in this novel,
which says, always ends with something like, if you want to know what happens next, you have to read the next chapter.
And so in a way, this transforms one of the little devices of oral storytelling into the novel.
Each chapter also begins with a little couplet summarizing its contents,
in presumably the same kind of way that professional storytellers would give a little announcement of what today's story was going to be about.
And in this way, the Chinese novel shows its origins in the storytelling on the streets of China.
But Chinese novels have other debts to other origins as well.
We've mentioned in other lectures on the novel that the essential problem for readers of the early novels is they aren't literally true.
Why should we read a story that someone made up?
So that from the very early days, it was a useful technique of the novelist to link the story in some way to history,
to include a couple of historical figures and events that would suggest that in some ways the story is true,
or at least it has the same kind of meaning that history does.
The Tale of Genji, we notice, does this.
It ties itself to specific historical periods and emperors and characters.
And Cervantes, we notice when we did Don Quixote, pretends that his novel is based on archival research.
His eventual source, the one he settles on, beginning with Chapter 9, is the one that's done by an Arab historian,
a historian who actually wrote the history of Don Quixote.
Another way, that was one way, is to link it to history, to tie it to history in some kind of way.
Another way to make a kind of truth in the novel was to fill the novel with such densely realistic picture of contemporary life
that either would have to think he's reading a true story.
We talked about this when we talked about Don Quixote and said that Daniel Defoe had done this with Robinson Crusoe.
In fact, he put so much detail in that volume that most of the people who read it thought they were reading a true story.
They couldn't imagine anybody would make up this kind of detail and were a little miffed when they found out that they had been reading a made-up story.
Henry James said, and I think we noted this in the very first lecture in this series,
Henry James said that the first job of a novelist is to create a world that's so real that you can get lost in it,
that you can get so lost in it that you can look up from a book that you're reading
and be surprised to discover that you're sitting in your own living room,
that you've gotten so caught up in this world,
and notice that two hours has gone by since you've looked up from the book last and last looked at the clock.
That second method of detail is the one that's used by the author of Stories of the Story of the Stone.
It is so dense with the details of ordinary life in a family compound in 18th century Peking that it feels like a real world.
We get drawn into it as if it were.
The novel is in fact extraordinarily episodic and it has many, many little digressions and tangents and side streams that go off.
And as anybody who's ever read the novel will say, you know, you could have cleaned up this novel quite a bit.
You could have by eliminating some of these subplots and some of these minor characters.
You wouldn't damage the larger story and you might even, in fact, make it easier to follow.
But all of those tangents, all of those digressions, all of those little subchannels,
really help to convince us that this is a real world that we're reading about.
It feels like a real world because so much of this wouldn't have to be included in the work of art.
The fact that it's included here makes it feel more like history than like art.
It is perhaps also one reason why early Chinese novels are so long.
This one runs to five volumes in the Penguin Classics edition.
So when you sit down to read it, prepare for a good long solid read.
This is one little tiny digression of our own since we've been talking about the development of the novel across these last lectures.
One of the extraordinary things about the novel Monkey, which we did back in lecture 19,
is that the monkey doesn't use either of these two methods to validate itself, to make itself into some kind of truth.
It is so loosely tied to history that it can't use that method to establish its veracity, its validity, its truth.
And its events are so fantastic that they prevent us from thinking that it's part of our ordinary world.
So what Monkey, very early in the history of the novel, what the point that Monkey makes
is that the fantastic can carry as much truth as realistic fiction,
a point which was reaffirmed by Candide, by Voltaire that we looked at in our last lecture.
At the very center of this novel is a character named Bao Yu,
who's the pampered son of the Jia family.
He's the son of a very Confucian father,
and his father believes in duty and responsibility and public service,
but his son, Bao Yu, grows up sensitive, compassionate, and warm-hearted,
almost in every way the exact opposite of his father.
He's imaginative enough to feel the sorrows and sufferings of other people,
and the book is full of occasions in which he makes generous gestures
showing how much he sympathizes, how much he cares about other people.
When he's one-year-old, there's a kind of traditional Chinese ritual
in which a baby is placed down and a whole bunch of objects are put in front of him,
and by what he chooses to pick up, it is decided that you can predict something about his future.
When Bao Yu is one-year-old and they put these objects in front of him,
he chooses hair ornaments and face makeup.
His strict father thinks that this foretells either a life of femininity
or a licentious life, and he's very disgusted with his son's choices.
What it actually reveals, and we find this out as we get through the novel,
what it really reveals for Bao Yu is a preference for women over men.
While he's still a very young boy, he says in the kind of childish way
the children express themselves, he says that girls he thinks are made of water
and boys are made of mud, and for the rest of his life he will feel sort of purified
in the presence of women and sullied in the presence of men,
so that he grows up with a sensibility that's closer to that of the women
than the men in the novel, and it's a sensibility which he's allowed to develop
by being allowed to spend his adolescence in living in a garden on the family compound
with the adolescent women, both the members of the family and the servants.
And that garden becomes a really powerful metaphor in this novel
suggesting the flower of adolescence and the possibilities of youthful love
and that last moment of adolescence before one has to move off into adulthood.
The primary focus of his attentions in the garden is his young cousin named Dai Yu,
who is beautiful, who is delicate, who is sensitive, who is poetic.
In every way she's sort of an ideal woman and she's also deeply neurotic.
She's an orphan who is being raised by the family in the Jia compound.
She and Bao Yu have been friends, best friends since early childhood.
They seem destined for each other in a kind of romantic way.
We assume all the way through the novel that eventually they will wind up marrying each other.
But she is deeply aware of the fact that she has no family or political backing
and she always feels something going outside her in that family compound
and that compels her to seek constant reassurance from Bao Yu.
And then when he tries to reassure her to misunderstand and misinterpret everything
that he says and does.
So their story turns out to be one of inevitable misunderstandings
and hurt feelings and tears.
And although they really truly love each other, we do understand that as we read the book.
They never quite arrive at that perfect communication that they both want,
that they both believe is important for a lifetime together.
We realize that had they married, they probably wouldn't have been happy
and theirs does turn out in the novel to be a tragic love story.
In the end, she dies of consumption on the same day that Bao Yu,
having suffered a complete mental and nervous breakdown,
is tricked into a marriage with his healthier and more practical cousin Bao Chai.
Da Yu's last words, just before she dies,
and hears about the marriage of Bao Yu says,
her last words are Bao Yu, how could you, how could you?
C.T. Shia in his commentary on the novel, on this aspect of the novel,
this relationship between these two people, says this.
Da Yu is very demanding toward Bao Yu,
challenging him under every pretext to avow the kind of love for her
that would shatter the symbolic bond of Locket and Jade.
The symbolic bond of Locket and Jade is a series of symbols
that seems to foretell that Bao Yu and Bao Chai will wind up together.
A teenager with a boy's high spirits, Bao Yu is forced into adulthood
by her constant craving for reassurance.
No verbal protestation can provide the kind of security black Jade,
that is the meaning of her name, Da Yu, wants,
and a most proper girl, she shrinks from the more physical kind of proof
and upbrades Bao Yu for even the most innocuous display of affection.
So in the end, all she can claim is her own are two old handkerchiefs
which she once centered upon which she has written three poems.
Before her death, she burns these handkerchiefs,
proofs that they have been shown to be completely useless.
There is, of course, much more to the novel than this.
It is, after all, a story of the decline and fall of a family,
not a love story, but this romantic triangle is one of the hooks
on which so much of the material of the rest of the novel is hung.
One of the other things that makes this a really interesting novel is its frame.
Fortunately, in this course, we've had a lot of experience with frames,
we know how to deal with them.
This frame is used in a slightly different way than any frame we have considered so far, however.
The frame here is the story of a stone.
It's a stone that was originally cut by a goddess to repair the vault of heaven
and then was not used for the repair.
In the process, however, of being worked on by the goddess,
the stone acquires consciousness.
It's discovered in heaven by a Buddhist monk and a Taoist priest
who then take it on a trip to earth.
Ages later, another Taoist comes upon the stone, inscribed now with a lot of characters,
which he reads and from which we can tell it's the same stone
which the Buddhist monk and the Taoist priest took from heaven
and helped to live out an earthly life.
That story is now inscribed on the stone
and hence the name of the title of the story, the story of the stone.
Baoyu, the name means precious jade, is the incarnation of that stone.
And Daoyu, as it turns out, is also a resident of heaven,
a flower which was watered by that stone
and was thereby transformed into a fairy maiden
who also lives out an earthly life,
dedicated, as she says, to repaying the kindness of the stone
with what she calls a debt of tears.
So the story of Baoyu and Daoyu is really a story within a story
about earthly lives that only temporarily disrupt a pair of heavenly existences.
And of course, that frame throws everything that happens in the novel
into a really brilliantly ironic light.
The frame is even more complicated than that
because the story on the stone begins with a character named Zhenxir Yin
who dreams of a Buddhist monk and a Taoist priest carrying a stone,
which may very well be our Buddhist monk and our Taoist priest.
And he dreams about it about the same time that this priest and monk
are carrying this stone from heaven and bringing it to earth
and bringing along with it, as we know now, Daoyu, the crimson flower,
bringing them from heaven into what is called the great illusion of human life.
As these semi-divine creatures pass from heaven to earth,
they pass through an archway on which is carved the land of illusion.
And on the pillars supporting the arch, this is carved.
Truth becomes fiction when the fiction's true.
Real becomes not real where the unreal's real.
The point of that is that earthly existence is simply part of some greater life,
of a greater reality, a more real, less illusory life.
When the dreamer, Zhenxir Yin, wakes up,
his dream, that all earthly life is an illusion,
ironically makes his little daughter to him more dear than she's ever been
in her life before, the exact opposite of what the dream was supposed to teach him.
The next day, a Taoist priest and a Buddhist monk show up to tell him
that his daughter will be the cause of great unhappiness for him
and that he should send her away with them. He refuses.
But his daughter is later kidnapped and he never sees her again.
But for us, she shows up later on in the Jia family compound
as the wife of a rather unattractive man.
Zhenxir Yin, the girl's father, meanwhile loses everything he had
and one day he meets a Taoist priest who sings him a song.
Zhenxir Yin responds with a song of his own after which the priest says
you understand and the two go off together, never to be seen again.
This is the song that Zhenxir Yin sings to show that he understands.
Dengi rooms and deserted halls were once filled with insignia of rank.
Fields choked with weeds and blighted trees were once scenes of dancing and song.
While here spiders weave their webs between carved beams,
there they replace window mats with silken gauze.
Boast not that you wear your powder and rouge well,
but grieve that your temples will soon be covered with frost.
Tonight a pair of cooing doves under red bridal curtains,
tomorrow a heap of bleached bones like those of yesteryear.
Chests filled with gold, chests filled with silver,
in a twinkling beggars despised by all.
One moment we grieve over a short-lived friend,
the next we are ourselves overtaken by death.
Careful as we may be with our sons,
we cannot be certain they will not turn bandit and thieves.
We would all bring up our daughters to be ladies,
but who can say that they will not end up in courtesans' quarters?
Discontent with one's position may bring chains upon one's feet.
Yesterday it was the coat because it was not warm enough,
today it is the dragon robe because it is too long.
What bustle and confusion as one set of actors exits
and another enters, each taking the illusory for the real.
What stupidity, for in the end, in the end,
one only wears out one's fingers for someone else's true self.
The point of that song,
which is the first thing in the story that's engraved on the stone,
is that everything that happens in the novel happens in the land of illusion,
the land of not real, making all of its bustle and confusion ironic
in a kind of cosmically comic way.
We're constantly reminded of the irony as the Taoist priest and the Buddhist monk
keep reappearing throughout the novel,
and this part of their reappearance also prepares for the novel's ending.
Baoyu eventually recovers his sanity
and prepares to take his civil service examinations.
About the same time one of Baoyu's sisters and one of the maids
leave the compound to become nuns.
In the old days Baoyu would have made a big fuss about their leaving,
trying to keep them from leaving,
and now he simply says,
you have done it, what a pity that I'm not ready yet.
Then he leaves for his exams, ostensibly only for a few weeks,
but everyone seems to know that he's not going to be back and he doesn't return.
He's last seen disappearing into the mist arm in arm with a Buddhist monk and a Taoist priest,
presumably freed forever from the illusion of human life
and the agony of human desire.
So the frame for this story is a religious one,
since both Buddhism and Taoism in different ways
advocate a kind of detachment from the entanglements of the world and its desires,
ideas that we've encountered before in Zhuang Zhou and the Tale of Genji and Monkey.
So the official verdict of life in the geocompound is this one.
In the end, the stone renounces earthly life and returns to heaven.
But that is only the official verdict,
just as any novel written in the western world up until the beginning of the 20th century,
at any rate, would have had as its official verdict some version of Christianity.
Cao Shui Qin complicates this official version
by investing so much attention to the details of family life
and the complex human relationships within it
so that he draws us into the reality of the Geoclan,
so that we're shocked too every time the Taoists and the Buddhists show up,
which kind of jolts us back into realizing that what we're coming to care about,
what we're paying all this attention to, is the illusory, is the not real.
The author, I think, has a lot of sympathy for the lovers and many of his characters
as they try to find fulfillment and involvement in this life,
not detachment from it.
We remember that John Shier Yin, when he heard the story that all of...
had his dream that all of this life is illusory,
woke up to love his daughter more than he had ever loved her before.
So maybe the richness of the book,
maybe one of the reasons why it's been so powerful down through history,
is the fact that we are allowed to see everything in the novel
from two different points of view at the same time.
The point of view of life itself, with its possibilities for happiness and sorrow,
and the point of view of eternity in which none of this matters at all.
Bao Yu's renunciation of life at the end is exemplary in religious terms.
He's done exactly the right thing that he should have in religious ways.
But it's problematic for us, for the readers,
because he leaves behind a pregnant wife and a family that's declining,
and it should be his duty to lead back to better times.
Hear his confusion and his religious duties conflict with one another.
And as we watch him walk away with the Taoist Nibudist,
we understand that the dual perspective isn't just a source of richness,
but it's a really, really hard question that this novel asks.
Shia puts it this way, puts it this way.
But what Bao Yu is determined to give up is not only his sensual self,
but his active sympathy and compassion,
so that he may be released from his long obsession with suffering.
The tragic dilemma posed in the drama of Bao Yu's spiritual awaken is surely this.
Is insensibility the price of one's liberation?
Is it better to suffer and sympathize,
knowing one's complete impotence to redeem the human order?
Or is it better to seek personal salvation,
knowing that in achieving this, one becomes a mere stone,
impervious to the cries of distress around one?
It's a really, really good question.
Earlier in the novel,
a maid had been dismissed from the Shia compound and sent home,
even though she was ill.
Bao Yu finds out that she's dying in squalor in her brother's house,
and he goes to see her.
She knows, she tells him,
that she was always the prettiest and brightest of all of the maids,
which had earned her, she says wrongfully,
a reputation as a temptress, one who could bring Bao Yu to harm.
Now that she's dying,
she says that she regrets never having earned any of that reputation.
What she does is she takes two of her long fingernails,
bites them off, and places them in Bao Yu's hand,
and then she uses almost the last of her strength
to struggle out of a chemise that she wears next to her body,
and she gives it to him.
He takes off his inner jacket and gives it back to her in exchange.
This turns out it's a beautiful scene,
a touching scene full of human sympathy and warmth,
and it turns out to be the last time they see each other.
The scene is full of great tenderness,
and this is what Bao Yu gives up at Novel Zen
to go off with the Daoist and the Buddhist,
giving up all of his sensitive and sympathetic nature
to go back to being a stone.
In religious terms, that's what the novel teaches,
but the official ending doesn't necessarily square
with our emotional involvement in the life of the Jia family,
which seems to us, as it did to its author, important,
however it might look from the other side of the Great Arch.
So, like all good literature,
this novel can support a variety of readings.
It can be a Buddhist Daoist call for renunciation
of earthly entanglements.
It can be an ironic refutation of that renunciation.
It can be a tribute to the power and beauty
of human relationships, whatever they cost.
It's also a tragic love story.
It's a story about the decline of a once-great house,
and it's one of the finest tributes in all of literature
to that moment in adolescence when girls are, as Bao Yu sees them,
embodiments of the celestial, the ethereal, full of understanding.
As Bao Yu sees them, as they grow up and they marry,
they lose these qualities.
They learn greed and competition and envy and malice,
and they become just like other people,
which makes, Shia says,
makes Bao Yu a kind of catcher in the rye,
trying to prevent these girls from going off the cliff's edge
into custom and sensuality.
In the garden, the young women see Bao Yu
not as a potential lover, but as a unique male
who sympathizes with them and shares their thoughts.
The garden in this way is the last refuge
of all of these young people against growing up,
and it's why Bao Yu, until the very end,
fights so hard to preserve it.
It is also a very great read.
Its translator, David Hawks, says that down through history,
almost everyone in China who could read has read this book.
Old men argued over the merits of the two heroines,
and as he said, languishing young women all over China,
imagined themselves to be Dai Yu.
Even political changes in China haven't put this book on the shelf.
It's probably still the best-known work
by the widest variety of people.
As Hawks says in his introduction,
after admitting that a translation will never quite capture
all of the qualities of the original,
he says this.
He says,
Which are strong words coming from a translator.
In our next lecture, we will be back to Europe
and we will be in Germany for the first time in this course,
where we will see what happened
when the Enlightenment in Europe
was succeeded by the Romantic movement.
We will be taking a look next time
at one of the greatest Romantic works in history,
and also one of the greatest German works in all of German literature.
We'll be looking at Gertes Faust.
That will be our next lecture.
