Greetings! It is December 6th. Halfway around the world in the United Arab Emirates is COP28,
which is the 36th international meeting about climate change in the last 44 years.
If there were, a benevolent pro-social alien observer landed on Earth and he looked at
when these meetings were and he looked at the CO2 in the atmosphere, he could plausibly conclude
that it was these meetings themselves that were causing emissions to rise. What's going on?
We are social primates, we're also predators, and we can only state things that are socially
acceptable to the higher status people around us for risk of losing our jobs, our reputation,
the social influence that we have. There was a famous study called a smoke under the door
that 75% of people would notice if there was smoke coming from under the door for good reason
because dying in a fire is terrible. However, if they were with two confederates and the other two
people looked at the smoke and were unconcerned, 90% of humans would not report that there was
smoke coming from under the door. We are that conscious and aware of social conformity.
The problem with these climate meetings is that we can't say our truths under a structure where
the highest status silverback gorilla male or female has a different view and the narrative
is different. So in effect, we as a species are using social sorting mechanisms to solve physical
world problems. What if, what if there was some technology that was able to allow all these
high status humans in Dubai ask the questions that they really wanted to ask without any
recourse to their status or reputation. It was a total anonymous technology. That's going to be
the thought experiment of this, frankly.
Okay, so we're in Dubai. We've conferred to the delegates that please submit your questions,
pass them down the aisle. We know that your names are not on them and no one is going to know who
wrote these things. Let's see what people really have to say caring about climate sitting in the
audience here in the United Arab Emirates. I've come up with 20 questions to contribute to this
thought experiment. Okay, first let's get right to it. Can we all first agree that we have failed
in these 36 meetings to limit global carbon emissions? And can we discuss why that is before
we go any further? Here's another question. Does anyone else feel like they're at burning man?
What is the difference actually? Okay. Oh, here's a long one. The world currently uses
19 terawatts of power continuously. Due to our focus on climate, we're now adding one gigawatt of
solar PV capacity per day. Yay. However, to reach 19 terawatts at this pace would take 270 years.
Even if we could ramp up our current rate by a factor of 10 to 10 gigawatts per day,
it would still take 27 years, which is also the expected lifetime of the solar equipment.
So we would have to do this continuously forever for replacement. Said differently,
our current one gigawatt a day rate of solar PV expansion manages to get 1.9 terawatt average
power installed in 27 years. So we could support 10% of our current energy demand at the current
breakneck rate of installation. Even were this possible, it would perpetuate a tailspin
in materials and ecological consequences. Not gonna. When can we state this aloud and
start realistic plans? A reasonable question. Number four, are we here to solve the climate
situation or have these meetings evolved to maintain our social power and bootstrap our
preferred cultural strategies? Here's another question. Our climate strategies are fossil fuels
bad, renewables energy good. But since our most impressive agreement at the Paris Accord in 2015,
we've grown renewable energy faster than we imagined. But we've also grown coal capacity
by over 200 gigawatts globally. Can we have an honest conversation on why this is happening?
Brian, we didn't need to have our names on this, Brian. Next question. What is our exit strategy?
Is that for the delegates? Is that for the concept of UN convening a parties? Is that for
earthlings? Not clear. Next question. Why can't we just talk straight about demand and consumption
levels as a variable? It is implied and woven into analytically sound bites, but it is taboo to say
it. A reasonable question. Oh boy, here's another long one. Some of the world's most honored ecologists
and scientists have suggested that climate change is a symptom of a deeper problem, specifically
overshoot. The ecological term for when a species or population consumes more from its habitat
than the habitat can replenish or produces a waste stream that the habitat cannot metabolize or process.
The drivers of ecological overshoot in all known cases, wolves in a watershed, algae in a lake,
etc. are one, population size and growth rate. Two, consumption quantity and growth rate. Three,
waste stream content and growth rate. Four, ecosystem interface technologies, biological or
mechanical. And five, systems feedbacks. From the perspective of these drivers of overshoot,
what changes can we propose human societies make to mitigate these dangerous trends
of which global heating from CO2 loading in the atmosphere is merely one? Here's another question.
It's clear that the last nations alliances with oil and military power will effectively be the
last ones with world power. Would it not make sense for oil exporting nations to drastically cut back
sales now rather than waiting for rationing? Or is it just a matter of the elites being able to bug
out then? I don't fully understand the second part of that question. What if every time reducing
emissions was mentioned in the 4900 page IPCC climate report, we replaced it with
reducing energy and material use? Would that change our impact? Or would it end our funding?
Interesting question. Number 11. This is my ninth COP. I begin to wonder,
how are these conferences different than arguing with a forest fire but with good food?
Next question. Can we really simultaneously optimize for CO2 emissions, equality within
and between nations, and economic growth? Or do we have to pick two? Or do we have to pick one?
Or do we have no choice at all? Number 13 of this sample of anonymous questions.
After we returned to 350 parts per million in our atmosphere with CCS, electric cars and a
tripling of efficiency, this august and brilliant group of humans should set our sights on even
higher goals, bootstrapping AI into mining asteroids and terraforming other planets.
I've written a book on this. C Montgomery Burns. Okay. Next question. Would it be possible for
everyone before they speak at this plenary in the next 10 days to preface their contribution
by sharing one profound personal experience they've had in nature? Number 15. The inflection point of
all time oil availability is right around now. WTF do you propose to do when things start unwinding?
Globalization deconstructs. There are waves of financial failure internationally,
and hydrocarbons become more of a strategic substance than a free market commodity.
Or is that the actual plan? Number 16.
I'm going to skip that one. Number 17. Are we the right people to be at this meeting?
Climate is part of a much larger socioeconomic system. Is it time to move from convening of
parties to converging of systems? A few more questions, and then I'll think I'll have made
my point. There is a vast difference between climate effects to occur this century and the
long-term earth system effects. James Hansen and others are predicting PETM level temperatures,
which would effectively erase large complex life from most of the planet. Are we willing to
adopt accords based on avoiding a literally apocalyptic thermal maximum analogous to the one
55 million years ago, but far faster? Is anyone else embarrassed to be here?
Last question. Sultan al-Jabbar has said without fossil fuels, humanity would be back to living
in caves. Isn't it true that when our ancestors lived in caves, they slept there securely for
eight hours, and the other 16 hours per day of free life socializing, harvesting, hunting, and
playing? Modern humans spend eight hours per day in a sleeping cave, one hour in a metal transport
cave, nine hours in an office cave, five hours projecting shadows onto a screen, and maybe one
to two hours socializing. Is there a middle ground between our ancestors' caves and our current ones?
The point of this, frankly, is to point out that we are social primates, and there is a glass ceiling
or a stainless steel ceiling on how much we can say in large groups of high status humans, and as
the events of our world get more complex and more threatening, the delta between our real
description of what's going on and what can be said at these meetings is going to get wider.
The problem, of course, is this is no longer an academic smoke under the door situation.
We now live in a smoke-filled world, and the stakes couldn't be higher. So I honestly do think
this was a playful exercise, but at meetings like this and other high impact, high risk,
high status meetings, maybe there could be some sort of technology where people could start the
meeting by expanding the Overton window, by asking questions without any personal attribution to them.
I wonder if those meetings would be more effective. If you were at one of those meetings,
what sort of question would you ask, given the state of the world right now? If you were sitting
in Dubai at the convening of party 28, what question would you ask? Thank you. I will see you next week.
you
