So, welcome everyone. I am Charles Bédard. I'll be your host today. I'm a postdoctoral
researcher at Universitat de la Switzerland Italiana in Lugano, Switzerland. And today
I have the pleasure to be animating a conversation between Charles Bennett and David Deutsch
on the nature of computation, incompleteness, and mathematics. I'll please ask everyone
who's not David or Charlie to mute themselves so that we don't hear any background, any
noise in the background. So that means that among the Charles, that includes yourself,
right? Yeah, I'll keep myself unmuted, correct. I'll be animating the conversation for around
one hour, and then I'll open it up for the audience to ask questions and jump in. Well,
let me introduce our guests to continue. We have Charles Bennett. He's an IBM Fellow
at the IBM Research and a Fellow of the American Physical Society. He has been awarded the
2023 breakthrough prize in fundamental physics for his pioneer work on quantum information.
Throughout his career... Well, not just me. What about David Deutsch? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I was just thinking because he's with us, so I'll have to come up with him at some point.
So the breakthrough prize was, in fact, shared between Charlie, David Deutsch, so two of our
speakers today, and Gilles Brassard and Peter Schor. So we have two of them with us today.
So throughout his career, Charlie played an essential role in investigating and clarifying
the roles between the links between information and physics. Among other things, he co-invented
quantum cryptography, he set the basis for quantum information theory, he resolved the
Maxwell-Demons paradox, and he developed logically reversible computation. Charlie, welcome and
thanks for being here. All right, good. Glad that's over. Yeah. What was this? So we also
have David Deutsch visiting. I think actually, as Smolkowski solved Maxwell-Demons problem
and people sort of forgot about it for 50 years. Oh, okay, good. Yeah. Thanks for the note. David
Deutsch is visiting professor of physics at Oxford University, a fellow of the Royal Society and
the Institute of Physics. He has also been awarded the 2023 breakthrough prize in fundamental physics
for his pioneer work on quantum computation. David is mostly known for his discovery of
the universal quantum computer and the first quantum algorithm, yet he's also a pioneer
of constructor theory, and he's made significant contributions to the philosophy of science. David,
thank you and welcome and thank you for being here. Thank you. So I'd like to start the conversation
by discussing the theory of computation. Computers are all around us. Their usefulness in day-to-day
life is now evident, but when it comes to computers and the theory of computation,
what makes me the most intrigued is what computation is fundamentally and physically,
and what role does it play in understanding of the world around us? So, Charlie, I'll address
the first question to you, but eventually hopefully this becomes a conversation. So please, David,
if at some point you want to jump in, please feel free to react like you would in a regular
living room kind of conversation. Charlie, what is the theory of computation all about?
Well, I think it's almost, you shouldn't ask about the computation particularly, but the deep
philosophical question is about the relation between mathematics and the physics, or the way
I pose the problem of cosmology is to find a mathematical home for our classical phenomenon.
So a phenomenon is like a genome. It's the set of phenomena that we are, the world that we inhabit.
So this is both a, it's a problem. Mathematics is a structure which we think is absolute and
independent of anything physical, and yet if we, the goal of cosmology, or of science in general,
is to find a mathematical explanation of the world. In other words, to find a part of this vast
structure that is mathematics within which what we see is, is typical instead of surprising and
puzzling. And I think that's why I've gotten interested in cosmology lately, because there are some
some things that seems to be, have been learned by modern cosmology that make, make it harder to,
to feel that we've solved this problem of finding a, a model of the universe within which, within
which what we see is, is, is, is typical. So this is, this touches on the, on the question of the
distinction between what, what is and what could be, and also on the anthropic principle and what,
what questions that some people have, have asked in terms of, of self-locating uncertainty.
And it's, it also gets into a question that's very ancient in mathematics, which is
in, in, in infinity, the nature of infinity. So the, the big, some big problems in cosmology,
I must say, I, I always go and ask Andres Albrecht, because he's been thinking about cosmology for,
for much longer time. And in, in one of the workshops we, we organized, he said, well,
maybe let's take an hour, an hour now and, and wallow in, in, in prior probabilities or prior,
prior, say this is a field where you never can solve anything. And I, I, one of the main things I,
I got from him was the, the, the attitude of beating as, as, as unsatisfied with your own
ideas as you are with everybody else's. So where was I going with this? But so the problem that,
that I said was, what I think we, one way of trying to approach this is just to, to,
to think of, oh, I was saying that infinity is very important. I think we can kind of prove that
if you have a finite world in thermal equilibrium, you get a very boring world with,
with essentially because of the, the Boltzmann brain problem. And so we can get interesting things
in an infinite system, which we can't get in the finite ones, qualitatively different. And
within that, I would say what I'm trying to find out is how,
how permanent disequilibrium can arise and how from disequilibrium,
complexity in the sense of logical depth can arise and how in that, in, in the system that is
doing that, a science can arise. And I don't ask about consciousness directly, because I think it
may be a, a sort of an illusion. So here we have a whole bunch of people who think they're talking
to each other on the screens or in the room, but, and the, the big philosophical, I guess they call
it the hard problem of consciousness of trying to decide what, what it means that we feel conscious.
Maybe is, is, is asking too much. And it would be easier to say, because our consciousnesses are
not independent of one another. We, we, if a person is raised without contact with other people,
they, they don't learn to think the way, the way we do. And Charlie, I know it's not my turn yet,
but can I just say it is infinity an illusion? Well, I think it's, it's, no, I think infinity is a
math, is a mathematical notion. So I, but I think that you need infinity to get the kind of permanent
disequilibrium that you need to, to, to escape the, the Boltzmann brain problem. You may need it,
but you may have another way of doing it. So, so, so in other words, I would say that instead of
saying, asking questions like, what, is it sort of the Copernican principle to it? Is it unusual
that I, that I'm alive at this moment, or that my observer moments are, are typical? I would just
say the, the entirety of, of terrestrial civilization, or the terrestrial,
even larger than human civilization, the terrestrial, the complexity of the terrestrial world
is something that we can look at a little bit more objectively than saying, speaking of consciousness.
And so we can say, well, maybe whales are conscious in a different way. And that's not
quite a scientific question. But, but I think we need to look for a mathematical model within
which, and I think it's has to be infinite, but maybe I'm wrong, within which what we see is,
is, is typical under a kind of anthropic, as weak as, as weakly as possibly anthropic selection.
Okay, and end of speech, at least, that's sort of the reason why you're invoking infinity,
because then you could have fluctuations. Well, if you have infinitely, yeah, I don't, if I just
have an infinity, let's say, like, like, Boltzmann's idea, which gave rise to the Boltzmann bring,
of just an infinite, almost, not, not even, this is before general relativity, an infinite
universe at equilibrium, then you, you get the Boltzmann brain problem, you get the fact that
you can't believe anything that you see. Because everything happens somewhere. And I think this
problem is, is somewhat better understood in the, in the more modern cosmologies.
But I was looking at very simple cellular automata models, in which by making the model in infinite,
and it's, it's dynamics is reversible, you get something that looks like unbounded complexity
that goes on forever, but it only goes on forever because the model is infinite. And it, therefore,
it can never, it can never equilibrate and get boring. I think I got a, I got a picture of it.
I'll see if I can find an example of the model like that. Here's. Okay, so this is a reversible
cellular automaton. And the time goes horizontally, like that. And there's, there's three,
there's three domains here. It's one dimensional automaton. So this is time history. And these,
these differ just by the reversal of black and white. So there's, there's domain, domain boundaries
that, that collide here, producing this, this complicated thing that just goes on forever,
getting more and more complicated. This, this business up here is an artifact because I was
doing it with periodic boundary conditions. And this was the wraparound. It was beginning to
affect it. But if you do it on an infinite model, at Lattice, it gets. So this is the sort of thing
where you can't get this in a finite model. If you do it in a, in a finite system with local
interactions, you get something that's, that looks more like, here, I'll just do it at the beginning.
Yeah. Same model. Yeah. So it gets, it gets interesting. And then if it, if you run long
enough, it just, it's boring. Okay. And I'll stop the screen share. So that's, that's,
that's why I think infinity is important. But that's just maybe I haven't been familiar enough
with cosmology, but I think the cosmologies, I think, let's see what see what Andy says, but
that I think that the, the, the cosmologies tend to be infinite now of also not have to stop sharing
my screen. Where is that? Yeah. Screen sharing stopped. There it is. Good. Okay. I was expecting
Charlie to throw us into cosmology, but to be honest, I didn't expect on question one, we would go
on to cosmology. Thank you, Charlie. I enjoyed it. David, would you like to react? Like, maybe,
maybe you can either react to Charlie's comments and, and how very as reaction. Yeah.
Perhaps you have a, you can backtrack the question and, and, and retake the theory of
computation. Well, I think that I can, I can react and respond to your question at the same time.
Because I think the, where I disagree with, with Charlie would be right at the beginning,
sort of foundation Lee. Oh, yeah. You remember, you should say the three Rs react, respond and refute.
Simultaneously to save time. Yes.
So I'm, if you ask, what is computation? What is computation in the universe? Well,
what are computers? Well, what is that all about? If I was answering that question,
I would have to have universal and universality right in the first sentence somewhere, because I
think that's what it's all about. Computation is physical. You know, I'm sure we can all agree on
that. But I think there is still a hint of the mathematician's misconception in Charlie's
conception of the computation, computers, physics. So I would say that the, the, the
computation exists, universality exists in, in a particular property of the physical universe.
Namely that the physical universe can accommodate machines, which are universal in the sense that
they can be programmed to mimic any other machine if they run long enough and have enough memory.
And for them to have, to run long enough and have enough memory, they have to be maintained,
they, they, they have to have additional memory added. And so there has to be implicitly,
there is a background of knowledge creation. If, if there is to be a sufficiently powerful
computer, like Turing machine or something, then in the background there has to be knowledge creation.
Just like, I think I first read this in Charlie's thing, like what would happen if you found a fountain
pen on the moon, then it would, it would tell you a massive amount. It would tell you that you,
it'd been settled by people from the 19th century. Yes. Yes. Most likely. And it's very, very unlikely
that it formed spontaneously. And so the most likely explanation for it would be that there
had been a civilization. You could, you could infer a lot about the civilization by, as you say,
it's a 19th century type civilization. And, and you can analyze the ink and therefore see what kind
of squids they had there. And, and so on. So this, another thing that this
illustrates, which you didn't mention, is that there's an intimate connection between emergent,
simple emergent properties and simple microscopic quantities. In fact, there are
laws about emergent properties. And the laws about evolution and knowledge and so on are among
the ones we would use to analyze the origin of this fountain pen. So the, we would, we would,
we would gain a lot of knowledge about microscopic information from some macroscopic
information and macroscopic laws. Now, so I haven't mentioned mathematics. No, no. And the
reason I haven't mentioned mathematics, even though I totally agree that there's a mathematical world
that's sort of super infinitely large and that world contains all possible functions and all
possible laws and all possible mathematical objects, the vast majority of which we cannot
even describe. The ones we can describe are basically the ones that are computable by these
machines, which are universal within our universe. So it's no good trying to explain that via
what is going to be likely, what you are going to be likely to see, because what is typical,
what is probable and so on, that those are all determined by the laws of physics. There is no
mathematical notion of probability that applies to physics, unless we have a law of physics saying
so. And in some cases we do and in some cases we don't. And even when we do so, and where we do
have a probabilistic theory of something, the anthropic principle alone doesn't contain any
information about what the laws of physics are. I, this is an argument that I got from Dennis
Sharma a long time ago with his reaction to Brandon Carter's famous paper about the anthropic
principle. The thing is, if you think of this as how do we fix what the dimensionless constants are,
or just the laws themselves, you could think of the laws themselves as being
enumerated, like in Solomonov induction, you know, so we have all possible laws and
so on. And you ask, given what we see, what is the most likely, that is all
inapplicable to fundamental physics, because at least not via the anthropic principle, because
if you think of the set of all the class or whatever it is, the set of all
universes consistent with something, like something consistent with the fountain pen on the moon,
or consistent with what we see, or whatever you want to say, consistent with the existence of
computers, almost all of them are on the very near the boundary of that set. They are almost
all of, because the larger the dimension of the set, the more of it is contained near its boundary.
So, if the only reason why we're here is that we're anthropically selected, then it's overwhelmingly
likely that we're going to die in the next nanosecond, or picosecond, I suppose. It depends
where the chaos, how fast the chaos is going to come in on us. And since we haven't that theory
hereby refuted. So, that's not the way to get the answer. I think the way to get an answer
is not to try to derive microscopic properties that will then give you the desired emergent
properties. It is to think of emergent laws, which, among other things, will give you microscopic
laws, as well as microscopic initial conditions like the ones that produced that fountain pen.
You see, Charlie, your example has lived with me for decades, and this has changed me deeply.
Well, I was thinking of an ordinary ballpoint pen set, but you put it back at sensory...
Oh, it's evolved into a fountain pen in my mind, because of its deep significance.
The ballpoint pen would just mean you have a hole in your pocket.
It fell out of an astronaut's pocket. It's a likely explanation.
For you, David, an example of an emergent law that constrains also the microscopic laws would be
there exist universal computers. Yes.
Okay. Would you like maybe to expand a bit more, because you've contributed quite significantly
to the church-turing thesis. I think there was quite a bit of ambiguity of how we should
understand the church-turing thesis, and now you name the physicality of the universal computer.
I right away see a link. Maybe it would be good to expand a little bit on that, especially for
the audience here. Okay. Well, this is controversial, and I don't think I did. I think it was Turing.
So the way the story is usually told is that Turing, Girdle, Church, and Post all came up
with the same idea at the same time, all proved the same theorems, basically, although they had
different points of view. None of them copied from each other. Although some of them knew about
each other, but they kind of converged on a conception. But I think Turing's conception was
different. The other three all had the mathematician's misconception. They all thought that they were
doing a piece of mathematics, or as Roger Penrose would say, meta-mathematics, theory of proofs.
But Turing, the way he solved the Hilbert's decision problem, was to think of a physical
model of proof, a physical model, and then argue implicitly, explicitly, that again,
is controversial, that that argument is decisive. That is, he thought he was proving,
and he almost did prove, that no physical object can escape being part of the Turing
universal Turing machine's repertoire. The universal Turing machine is an idealized
physical machine. It's really got nothing to do with mathematics. Its physical relationship
with the rest of the universe is what he elucidated. Then he said that that solves the
decision problem, because we must regard the decision problem itself as a question about
the physical world, including mathematicians and so on. That's why he used language like
functions that would naturally be regarded as computable. Naturally, I always took that to mean
straightforwardly, computable in nature. But when I said that to mathematicians,
they howled in rage and said that I'd misunderstood it. Well, if I'd been
misunderstood it, that misunderstanding turns out to be the truth, and Turing's writings look
exactly like that truth. I think he knew. He just wasn't used to talking about physics.
He was a mathematician, but I think he did not have the mathematician's misconception.
We're all brought up to have it. We have to free ourselves.
How would you say, what is the mathematician's misconception?
Well, it's the idea that, well, okay, for present company, I can put it like this.
It's the idea that the integers and the logical operations like and or and not
are given to us by God. They are the natural things. If you can build some structure or
form some conclusion on top of those, then you have proved it. Whereas the real truth is that
the integers and the logical connectives and classical rules of inference and all that,
they are all given to us by physics alone. There is no underlying mathematical substrate
that we can appeal to. If the laws of physics were different, then we could have laws of physics
that didn't mention and or and not or integers or real numbers or they could use any mathematical
objects anywhere in the mathematical world. But the fact that they don't is a feature of the laws
of physics. With this, with this misconception comes some other misconceptions such as, for example,
that simplicity is somehow defined independently of the laws of physics.
And infinity as well, as I have written, you know, Zeno was puzzled by the fact that there's
an infinite number of points between here and the other side of the room. And how come that he can
go from one point to another and how come he can do an infinite number of things in a finite time?
Well, the answer is that what is finite or infinite physically, its relationship to
mathematical finiteness or infinite is a matter for the laws of physics to determine. And they
happen to say that this particular infinite thing in classical physics, the continuum,
can be traversed, an infinite number of steps of traversing it can be finitely performed.
So what can be finitely performed or not or and what conversely what can only be infinitely
performed, i.e. can't be performed, is mandated by the laws of physics, not vice versa. So it's
physics that tells us the difference between find an infinite, complex and simple,
and also probability, which is a sort of scam lodged in the middle of all these misconceptions.
The idea that it's a meta misconception, a meta misconception, it's a what, sorry?
Meta misconception. Well, no, no, it's a good place to hide a scam.
Of the matter. There is simply a misconception that probability is another one of these concepts
that we can help ourselves to and we haven't yet invoked any physics. We would like what we see
to have at least 0.83 probability, then we won't worry that it's strange. And that invocation
of probability we take to be sort of harmless. We don't see that there's a rich world of physics
defining what we mean by that. And in the case of probability, unlike the other things,
it doesn't even apply to most of the universe or the multiverse. It just applies to very
special situations. So there's no excuse for it. Let me just ask a little bit, a clarification,
David. If I would have been asked what's the mathematician misconception, in a nutshell,
I would have said it's the idea that proof theory is a branch of mathematics. But proof theory is
a branch of physics, ultimately. It's given rise to computer science. Computer science has its
roots into what our computers are physical objects. Now, the story you just gave us,
you started speaking of natural numbers and logical connectors. How can I bridge those two
pictures of the mathematician misconception? Well, they are the same, I think.
Maybe I'm giving a try and then tell me. Because we typically do proofs with
typical logical connectors and that will give rise to somehow our computers so that we end up
abstracting our computers with those logical connectors and those integers. And that's where
you say that taking this as a way to formalize proof is basically physical because I'm already
abstracting my physics of the computation. Yes. I think that's basically what I said.
I'm not really used to speaking in mathematical language. So I speak of it in terms of laws of
physics. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. Now, I was trying to map this, the statement proof theory is a
branch of physics. Yeah. So I think probably Turing never said this, but I'm sure if he was here
now, he would agree that proof theory is a branch of physics. Yeah. Okay. I have,
I found myself agreeing with almost everything you said until you started talking about the
mathematical mathematician's misconception, which I don't think Turing would have agreed with you
about, and which I think is actually a piece of professionalism. It's an idea that you don't like,
but you haven't shown that there's anything false about it. In fact, I think Turing
thought more about physics than his contemporaries. But I think he felt that this, the discovery of
universality meant that the physics of that we have here could be simulated by a computer.
And the physics that might exist in a very different world, perhaps one with a different
number of dimensions or one that's not even has a notion of locality, could also be simulated
by a Turing machine. In other words, I believe he felt the, he was very aware of physics and he,
but he didn't think that different, different parts of the multiverse with, think of the string
theory, the vast number of different supposed things that can come out of string theory,
of which we might be one, that they would have a different mathematics. He think he would,
I think he believed in the universality of mathematics and its ability to simulate physics.
So that's where I think that you're even calling it a misconception, is a misconception of what
Turing thought and also a, a, a disphemism rather than any kind of refutation. However,
almost everything you said at the beginning, I agreed with, I said, I take for granted that,
that, that universality of computation, the unsolvability of the problem, which is the same
thing, is the, the, the heart of, of what, what the notion of computation is. And that the,
the other thing is that, that I also didn't even say because I, I believe it so strongly,
is that this, this mathematics, this universal mathematics of, of computation is,
is capable of, of simulating physics, not only the physics that we have here,
but if you talk to Andreas, if he's still around here, there he is. Yes. In, in many models of
cosmology, now imagine that there are, that there are inaccessible parts of the universe,
which are no, no less real than ours, except that we'll never hear about them,
in which the laws of physics, such as the number of spatial dimensions and the number of temporal
dimensions, if you want, and, and, and are extremely different. And in, in almost all of them,
universal computers don't exist. They exist physically, but they don't exist. There's nobody
there to complain about it or to celebrate it. But they're there. They're like the, the desert
areas of, of, of, of the universe. But all of that could be simulated by mathematics. So I don't
think there's a, I don't think there's, I don't think there is a mathematician's misconception.
There's just the, the idea, which has been around since, since, since Galileo, that, that
whatever physics is, is discoverable by experiment and in a model level by, by mathematics.
I think that's clearly untrue. If by universe you mean
the set of all, or potentially the set of all possible mathematical entities
instantiated as physical objects, as you say, most of those would not be
simulatable by a Turing machine. No, no, I, no, they all would be simulatable by a Turing machine.
Most of them wouldn't give rise to the physical possibility of Turing machine in that part of
the universe. For example, I don't think there are a lot of Turing machines in the middle of the sun.
But in the space of all mathematical objects, there are objects which solve the halting problem.
And that such an object cannot be simulated by a Turing machine. It can, it might, there are,
there are also kind of universes where. Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I have, yeah. This is in other words,
these, these, like the, the, clean the hierarchy of all of these higher level of unsolvable problems,
what, what you, the problems that you can solve if you had an oracle for the holding problem.
Now, I have an idea that I'd like to run by
mathematicians, such as yourself, even these mathematicians, which just as I have been lately,
over the last five years, seduced by cosmology. And so think, oh, it must have the answers to all
the things I worried about since I was five. Let me try to understand it better. So, you know,
you're a mathematician and you said, you've gotten to be so fascinated with physics. All the answers
to all the things I'm wondering about in mathematics must be in physics somewhere. Let me learn some
physics. Well, anyway, this is an idea that you probably know more about as a mathematician.
But when I was writing about the, the, the, the, Chaton's omega number, the holding probability
of a universal computer with self-delimiting programs, where if you had this number, you would,
you would have an oracle for the holding problem, but it would be at a painfully slow oracle that
In other words, in order to answer any question,
you would have to run for a busy beaver amount of time.
And I said, well, this Oracle would
be universal in the sense that it would
decide all finitely refutable propositions.
In other words, problems such that you
can express them with one quantifier
over the natural numbers.
In other words, there exists a time
such that if you run this Turing machine for this amount
of time, it halts.
And then I speculated that the harder problems,
which would involve two quantifiers or more
like the twin prime conjecture, might be, by and large,
not interesting because not mathematically interesting
because they could be decided by a stronger but finitely
refutable proposition.
In other words, instead of saying there are infinitely
many twin primes, you could say that the spacing between twin
primes grows more rapidly or more slowly
than a certain function.
So in other words, one of the quantifiers,
something that has more than one quantifier,
might turn out to be a consequence of something
that has only one quantifier.
So what you're feeling about when you say natural
in mathematics, maybe these things that
are harder than the halting problem are just kind of boring
because probably most of them would be, what do I mean?
By probably, I'm invoking your scam of probability.
Probably most of them would be decided
as cases of the halting problem.
I was sure for most of what you've just said
that you were addressing, Charles,
because I'm certainly not a mathematician.
Them's fighting words, you know.
Oh, OK, OK.
If you have an idea, if you have a tentative answer,
David, go for it.
But I also thought about it.
I know exactly.
Go ahead.
No, no.
Yeah, OK.
I'm sorry, I almost said that at the point.
I think that your case, I remember that piece, Charlie,
you wrote, in which you say that you specifically
spoke about the twin prime conjecture.
But was that naturally carried over
to higher elements of the arithmetic hierarchy?
I think so, because if you're saying,
if you bound these quantifiers, you can make them go away.
And if a bound exists, it could be
that there's a proposition that decides the twin prime conjecture
by proving a stronger conjecture that is just
of the same form as a halting problem.
Yeah.
And if you had three or four quantifiers,
it could same thing, I believe the same thing could happen.
I didn't think anything.
And what if the, OK, so another sort of possible glitch
that I see is, if the spacing in the twin prime conjecture
scales, suppose, larger than busy beaver,
then no algorithm can base it.
Oh, yeah, yeah, it could.
Yeah, so that's exactly it.
In other words, if you say, irrefutable.
Yeah, certain things of that sort could exist.
So I guess this is like experimental mathematics,
except you can't do the experiments.
But it just occurred to me.
I don't know, has anybody thought about that?
How do you decide how plausible it
is that one of these higher level conjectures
could be decided by a provable.
Oh, yes, it's really a futile gesture,
because it's like, if I had a solution to the halting problem,
then maybe I could solve the twin prime conjecture
without doing any extra work.
But that's like, if my aunt had wheels,
she'd be a trolley car, because I don't
have a solution to the halting problem.
Yeah, but it might also be that you
have a solution to the halting problem, and you still can.
And you still couldn't, yes.
So how do you compare the likelihood of those two things?
And I'm sure something's thought about.
And what we mean by likelihood, but yeah.
Yeah, shut up.
But actually, basically, perhaps we
could move on on the topic of incompleteness.
And I think you bring it on.
I had a bit of a context, maybe, to get people into it.
But the incompleteness of mathematics
was perhaps we have to start it back to Hilbert, where
he was hoping to put into a single formal leximistic
theory all of mathematical truths.
And Girdel in 1931 basically put an end to this hope
by finding a statement that is true and has no proof.
But Girdel's statement is self-referential,
and it might look like an exotic kind of statements.
So it's tempting to think that these kind of statements
are an anomaly, and that we can safely ignore them
and keep doing proofs and mathematics
like we usually would have before Girdel's result.
And I assume most mathematicians live their life this way,
and I don't blame them.
But seen from an algorithmic information theory perspective,
notably due to the work of Gregory Chaitan,
one of your former colleagues, I believe, Charlie,
incompleteness is a much more widespread and inevitable
phenomenon.
So for one thing, Chaitan's result of incompleteness
does not involve self-referential statements.
And also, they're usually cast in a way
that he comes up with an infinite family of true
but unprovable statements.
And then he say, oh, I will enlarge my formal leximistic
theory to be able to prove more of those statements.
But by doing so, you only manage to prove finitely more.
But you're still in front, regardless
how big your formal leximistic theory grows,
you're always in front of an infinity of true yet
unprovable statements.
These are generally the ideas from the algorithmic information
theoretic proofs of incompleteness.
So yeah, I think algorithmic information theory
makes the case for somewhat natural.
Incompleteness becomes somewhat natural and actually
inevitable.
Charlie, would you like to react or comment or expand
on the limits of our formal leximistic theories?
Notably, I have in mind maybe some
of how we should behave with respect
to formal leximistic theories in the light
of these incompleteness theorems.
Chaitan has suggested maybe we should acquire new axioms based
on their fertility of the consequences,
the problems that they help us solving.
To me, there's a striking similarity now
between what theoretical physicists do,
where they change or update their principles
based on the problems that we're care to solve.
So do you have any remarks to make on that line
of philosophy of incompleteness?
Well, I'm more of a physicist.
So those are the things that I suggested,
which is maybe, I really love computational universality.
And the, I couldn't live, this reminds me
of what Danny Greenberger said about quantum mechanics.
He said, in any god that would know
which slit the particle went through,
I wouldn't believe in that god of the two slit experiments.
So I would say anyone who would like to live in a world
that Hilbert wanted to find, I wouldn't want to be friends
with that person.
In other words, I think that the universality and the dual
side to it is the incompleteness is just the way,
a beautiful feature of the way world is.
It's beautiful in mathematics in the same way
that quantum mechanics is beautiful in physics
or general relativity.
Nice.
Thanks.
David, what is your take on incompleteness?
And it doesn't have to be from the algorithmic information
theoretic perspective.
Just what are your thoughts?
I would agree with what Charlie just said.
It's the world that Hilbert envisaged
is a world without creativity.
And probably ultimately, if you take our world
and hobble it down to that level,
life could never have evolved.
So ours is a world in which life can evolve
because there's incompleteness in the mathematics
that describe our world.
I said mathematics just now as a concession to you all.
But what I meant is entirely a physical thing.
It's a physical property of the world,
which is responsible for the possibility of life
and then later, presumably, of intelligence and creativity.
And science and of the limitlessness of science.
So the illimitability of science is itself,
let's put it the other way around.
If science was limited, if there was a feature of the universe
that limits science in the way that Hilbert wanted
to limit mathematics, then there couldn't
have been any science in the first place.
And this is another one of those connections
between what we call emergent properties
and what we call microscopic properties.
I would like to see a way of formulating the laws of physics
that doesn't discriminate between microscopic and emergent
laws of physics.
A lot of the notorious problems we have,
like how to define entropy and the arrow of time and so on,
I think are just because we insist that the world must
be fundamentally made of microscopic laws.
So just to let you all know, constructor theory
is an attempt to have a scale independent way
of describing laws.
I think someone's raised a hand, is that?
OK.
So you said that if there was anything
that limited science in the universe, if science was somehow,
if the universe somehow limited the scope of science,
then science couldn't have gone the start in the first place.
But I can imagine that the observable universe is actually
all there is.
Beyond the observable universe, there's no matter.
There's only space.
So there's nothing to help us, I know,
form larger and larger computations.
So at some point, we reach the limit
of what we can do with computers or something like that.
And that would still be consistent with us having
to do science right now.
And I was wondering if you think it's wrong that maybe,
even if there's a world without, even beyond the observable
universe, there's no matter, that you can somehow still
have science that progresses infinitely,
or if there's another mistake, or I'm
curious about the response to that.
Yeah.
So I think that is wrong.
And it's for exactly the same reason that I was just saying.
If we characterize all possible laws
as being like our world, but it only lasts a million years,
or like our world, but it only lasts a billion years,
or then there are lots of possibilities
where it would look like our world was the actual one.
And similarly for mathematics, you
could have, it might be possible for proofs
to reach up to a million steps, but no more,
because it's so happened that the laws of physics
make all computers decay after they have performed
a million steps.
And there are many more of those worlds
than there are what we think the actual world is,
with no limits.
And that is because that's an illustration of the fact
that it's OK.
I won't say it's because the limitless one is simpler,
because that would be falling into the mathematician's
misconception.
But I want to say something like that.
I want to say that the limitless one is a good explanation
in high-level terms.
If you try to translate that into low-level terms,
you'll get to variations of it, which look like, well,
it only lasts a million years.
It only lasts two million years, and so on.
But at the high level, variations of it
are very difficult to find, because you would have to say,
OK, proof is limited by what?
You would have to have some high-level thing that
can fit into the language of talking about proofs
and limits and completeness, and so on.
So from the point of view of physics,
these are all high-level macroscopic constructs.
But I think those are the fundamental concepts in which
the laws of physics actually are expressed.
And because of that, we can say that insisting
on describing it all microscopically is perverse,
because it's much less simple.
But what we really mean is that there
are no good explanations along that route.
Very good words.
Can I summarize?
How are we going to speak?
The way I understand what you just said
is that there's other explanation of,
might well be that in some sense, it
could be that the universe ends above the observable,
that the observable universe is all there is,
but that would ruin other explanations
that can have, like, face dimensions of how science works.
Yes.
Yeah.
And if you're going to settle for that,
you might as well settle for the fairies
at the bottom of the garden.
We needn't have embarked on this great project
of mathematics and physics.
Yes.
Thanks.
David, would you relate the incompleteness phenomenon
in mathematics with fallibilism in knowledge creation
in general?
It seems like you sort of invoked it
when you invoked life.
Is that the similar idea?
Yes, it's, again, a similar idea and for the same reason,
that if fallibilism were not true
and there were infallible ways of deriving knowledge,
then when we have derived some knowledge,
it would never change.
And it would be true.
And the world would be finite, the world
would be a representation of that finite piece of knowledge.
And conversely, the real situation
is that the world is infinitely amenable to knowledge
creation, and therefore, it must be infinitely
susceptible to errors, which, however, can be corrected.
But nothing provides a firm foundation.
Not even, and I repeat what I said earlier,
not even logic, not even the logical rules of inference,
those are all conjectures.
We pick them because they seem right,
because they seem useful, they seem fruitful.
But who knows?
We may find new ones.
Are you saying that there could be a world in which pi was rational,
or a square root of 2, say?
Well, of course, that's a fairly simple case.
All it would have to do is have a different geometry from ours,
not Euclidean geometry.
I mean, pi isn't instantiated in the universe anyway.
It's an idealization.
So if you actually measure a circle,
you'll never get pi as the ratio between the radius
and the diameter and the circumference.
I was thinking of the mathematical pi.
Well, there are two different things
one might mean by the mathematical pi.
Physics allows us a certain window
onto the class of abstractions, a tiny window.
We can see some of them, we can form theories about some of them,
we can learn about some of them,
and they include Euclidean geometry with its pi.
That pi cannot be changed by anyone, not even God,
not even if we look out of a different window.
But if we did look out of a different window,
thanks to having different laws of physics,
or if the laws of physics were not what we think they are,
but are a bit different from what we think they are,
as happened with Euclidean geometry and general relativity,
then we won't find pi out there in the stuff we can look at.
We can still describe it, we can describe pi,
and we can describe the universe as it actually is,
which doesn't have pi.
And there will be other ones which we can't describe.
We can't describe, but they may have people
in them which can describe them.
And then there'll be infinitely more,
where there aren't people who can describe anything.
And be careful to conclude that therefore we don't exist,
because that is like the anthropic principle misconception.
Just because of misconceptions.
I would say the misapplication of the anthropic principle.
These places exist,
but there's nobody there to complain about it.
No, but you want to use it to deduce something
about the world we do see.
And I don't think the anthropic principle
is powerful enough to do that,
because it will only, the most it can do is put it on the edge.
Yeah, I agree, I want to say something about on the edge,
because you reminded me of that.
And I don't want to show you a picture,
is that okay now?
Yeah, sure, go ahead.
Okay, so I started worrying about this
in terms of the Boltzmann brain problem,
which most of you are familiar with,
but here's a sort of a summary of it.
The New York Times version, from Sean Carroll.
This was Boltzmann's idea that the-
We don't see it Charlie.
Oh, I'll have to stay here.
I see it, I don't see why, okay.
The reason the universe is out of equilibrium is anthropic.
That is that if the universe is infinite and at equilibrium,
but we couldn't exist in one of these typical parts.
So we're in an atypical part, anthropically selected.
But then somebody else, I think it was Edicton said,
wait a minute, if that's true, then we probably,
most probably are in the smallest fluctuation
consistent with our brain existing.
And so the idea was that you would get something like this.
Where do I go to the next screen here?
Yeah, let's see if we go down here, yes.
Yes.
Okay, so people worried about equilibration
and were in the 19th century,
they called it the heat death of the universe,
but they thought it was a different problem
for the distant future.
But Boltzmann or Eddington showed it's a problem in the present,
undermining our ability to make inferences
about conditions in the past or elsewhere,
because the inhabitants of any universe
that will eventually equilibrate
would have to make the additional postulate
that they're situated atypically early in its history.
Now that gets into David's very nice pointing out that
from a Occam's razor point of view,
a world that is just like our world,
but ends in a second from now
or a million years from now
has almost as simple a description.
So anyway, the Boltzmann brain problem says
that if world equilibrates,
then almost all places that experience
the same phenomena that we have,
these are illusory phenomena
that don't give grounds for scientific inference.
So now there's, this is a little bit like the doomsday problem,
which you can argue that the world that has civilization in it
is, has only existed for a very short time
compared to the time available to it.
And why is we so atypically early?
Maybe it's because tech civilization
is intrinsically unstable, it'll destroy itself.
Or maybe there's something that I think David would like
is perpetual noonless.
That is maybe a billion years from now,
there will still be people,
but they will be preoccupied
that some qualitatively new feature of their existence,
which they consider very important, is so new.
And they wonder why they are so near the beginning
of infinity, as David would put it.
So I would like to credit the anthropic principle
to Schopenhauer, who really expressed it in the 19th century, 1844,
before Darwin.
And here he says that the world is on the brink of self-destruction.
And we should expect to find it that way
because of this surface to volume argument
in high-dimensional space that David made.
That is that if there are many variables
and all of them have to be within a certain range
for the world to be habitable or for it to support life
or for it to support universal computation,
then with the highest probability,
we're right near the edge
and only a little, very close to self-destruction.
And this is Schopenhauer's,
he didn't put it in a mathematical terms, but if you did,
if he says, we do not live in the best of all possible worlds.
In fact, we live in very nearly the worst
of all possible worlds,
because if we imagine goodness of a world
depending on many parameters here too,
and we just take everything to lowest order,
and the goodness is a quadratic function
in the best of all possible worlds is the maximum.
And then we find that we're very close to the edge,
so we're probably right around the edge here,
and therefore we should expect the world
to be in the brink of self-destruction
as it apparently is politically right now.
And so we just have to hope that it survives.
Well, that's my comment that I thought
had to do with what we were talking about.
Yeah, again, I advocate thinking
in terms of high-level fundamental laws rather than insisting.
How do you discover what these high-level fundamental laws
because how do you...
Same, well, we already have...
Discover them or refute them, yeah.
Yeah, the same way that we discovered low-level ones,
conjecture, we have a problem
that we think might be soluble
by postulating a law of nature.
And the law of nature seems to answer that problem
and many other problems.
And so if it doesn't,
then we haven't solved the problem yet.
And the more it does, the more problems it exposes,
which we then solve and so on.
Now, we're doing this at many levels already.
I mean, there are people who have deep theories
about what it takes to win a war
and what it takes to make a stable society
and what it takes to cure depression and so on.
It's just that we have a culture that stigmatizes those
from the point of view of being fundamental.
So we only expect such knowledge
to extend to our own planet, our own time,
our own species, if that.
You know, we don't think of them as being fundamental,
but some of them, like the law of the existence
of universal computation is,
and the law of increase of entropy for that matter,
they are, from a practical point of view,
we do regard them as fundamental,
like as Eddington or someone said,
you know, if somebody tells you that the first law
of thermodynamics is wrong,
then so much the worst for the theory,
but if they say the second law is wrong,
then they must retire in deep humiliation and so on.
So we do actually have confidence in high level laws.
It's just that we have a culture
that tells us that those can't be fundamental.
We can't kind of infer things about the universe
and the big bang and the long-term survival of the universe
and bits of the universe that we can't see.
This sort of consideration is, you know,
it's considered ludicrous to try to talk about that
from using concepts like knowledge
and even computation and information and so on.
Information actually is a bit of an exception
because thanks to the mathematician's misconception,
people are inclined to think that information is fundamental
and everything might be made of bits.
But, yes, so, but-
So you like bit from it rather than it from bit.
Sorry?
You like bit from it rather than-
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So that's very much Landauer's,
you probably sympathize with what he said.
About this.
Information is physical.
Oh, yeah, well, of course, I thought we all did.
I thought that's his great contribution to the world.
Wheeler put it the other way.
He says physics is informational.
Yeah, well, that's a misconception.
That obviously can't be right.
It's the same thing as expecting us to be in a simulation
and the aliens simulating us on a giant computer.
And for some reason,
people think that that computer has got to be a Turing machine.
That's simply a non sequitur.
It's just a parochial forcing of a human concept
onto imaginary superhuman aliens.
You mean you think it might be a machine
at the higher level of the hierarchy,
which could solve the holding problem
and then was worrying about harder things?
Yes, although calling it higher level, that's from our-
I mean, in the cleaning hierarchy.
Which is, again, expressed from our point of view.
It could just have different fundamental states
and different fundamental operations.
So one of its fundamental operations might be
to solve the holding problem.
Not very slowly, like you're envisaging, but instantly.
So you could ask it questions about Turing machines
and it could answer all such questions instantly.
On the other hand, adding two and two
would have it scratching its head for a million years.
Probably like Warcase, right?
I haven't read it actually.
Oh, it's full of things like that,
about a guy who remembers everything
and is paralyzed by that and about-
Oh, right.
Well, you can't deny that in the set
of all mathematical objects, such things exist.
And therefore it is logically possible
that physics conforms to that object
rather than the objects we think it conforms to.
Okay, I admit that.
I think I'm going to just disagree with you
in a way that we can't prove very easily
because Turing is dead,
that he would have sympathized more with my view
that all the different parts of physics,
including the parts of the universe we can't get to
because they're beyond the Hubble distance,
would be simulable by a Turing machine
and wouldn't involve these higher-level things.
But seriously, physicists like, remember Hartle,
Garrach and Hartle wrote a paper
about what would an uncomputable number look like
if it was a physical constant?
And I think that's certainly a legitimate question.
And you're saying that those things,
that one aspect of the mathematician's disphemism
is that they assume that such things don't exist.
Yes, yes, when applied to physics, yes.
And I think David was also invoking
not just beyond the Hubble distance,
but also in a completely different universe.
Yeah, well, that's what string theory gives us
as far as I understand, Andreas,
that there are things where,
I guess it's consistent with quantum field theory
and general relativity,
but things that are just extremely different
from anything that we easily imagine.
Yeah, you don't even need string theory.
I would say the development of theoretical physics
keeps pulling us in that direction.
And it's hard to truncate.
I don't know if it's, you know, right,
but the flavor of theoretical physics,
yeah, even uncomputable things could be there.
I don't think that way.
So I don't know how to answer that,
but I think one of the fascinating things
about cosmology is that
physicists pride ourselves in this culture
of we only talk about real stuff we can touch and measure,
but cosmology really disrupts that.
It's really hard to write down theories
with the tools we have
that allow us to limit ourselves that way.
And I'm actually really intrigued by David's angle,
which seems to be to take that
as a judgment of our ideas about physical laws,
if I understand that, which I find fascinating.
I've come at a lot of these ideas
from the point of view that physics
has nothing to do with infinity,
because you'll only ever collect finite data
and you'll only ever shape
the only stuff you have to work with is finite
in terms of having finite data and so on.
And what I'm hearing, I'm very directly from David
and I think implicitly,
or maybe directly too from Charlie.
Anyway, I'm hearing in both your comments
that the problem of the arrow of time
or the problem of bolts and brains
or however you wanna put it
is looming enough to transcend.
That's forcing us away from that position.
Making us love infinity.
Yeah, and I will say that whatever,
wherever I am in my prejudices and all of that with that,
I think that problem looms so mightily
that I have to respect.
Even though you're doing stuff that I find uncomfortable,
that problem looms so mightily that I respect.
It's very radical to me,
it's very radical what you're trying to do,
but something has to give.
Oscar Wilde said, we're all in the gutter,
but some of us are looking at the stars.
Well, some of us are looking at infinity,
because it solves problems here and now.
But it seems to me like a cheat.
That's, I think that's,
so I think you're also giving up.
So, and I think you're explicitly saying
that you're giving up on the standard ways
we think about doing physics.
And whether it's embracing some beautiful, better thing
or giving up is a little hard for me to tell.
We've embraced the continuum for centuries.
Yeah, just a derivative that we do in classical.
And derivatives, yes.
But it doesn't, but it's for, okay,
but that's only to make our life easier.
And if it were discreet instead, it wouldn't change it.
It wouldn't be a radical thing to put it on a lattice.
We're not here to make our lives easier,
we're here to understand the world.
And that's why these continuums and derivatives
and all that infinite stuff was invented, was conjectured.
And it might be false, but it might not be.
Well, you shouldn't have prejudices about these things.
But our, yes, that's fine.
I like your line.
I find the finiteness of physics.
Physics is finite, except you're saying,
what I'm hearing is, okay, physics might be finite,
but except for the arrow of time problem, forcing us out.
I don't think the continuum forces us to infinity.
We can have a lattice,
we can have all kinds of things that do just fine.
But you're saying this is the one thing
that forces us to think about infinity, which is intriguing.
I'd like to go in the audience
and give the chance for some students to ask questions.
If any one of you have a question.
Hi.
I'm not sure whether I understood why
incompleteness is fundamental for non-equilibrium phenomena
and so forth life.
I think it was a point of David that he made before.
Yeah.
So I'd like maybe more comments about that.
No, thank you.
Cool.
Thanks.
David, would you like to react?
I'm sure Charlie could do this better.
But, but I, I, the connection is that if you have to look
at the contrapositive, if there is a limitation
such as Hilbert imagined,
that you can write out an algorithm
that will be a criterion of truth,
then mathematics has stopped at that point.
And the same would be true of physics.
If, if, if there was a knowable law of physics
that predicted everything,
then that would be the end of physics.
And if there were such a thing as,
and if there were such a thing as life in a universe,
which I think there couldn't be, but if, if there were,
then it would really mean that the design of the most
complicated creature that could exist,
which would be finitely complicated,
would exist baked into the, to the laws of physics
at the big bang.
So, you know, the, the, the universe would not have anything
that would not have any of the kinds of openness,
explain the complexity and the, all the high level structure.
If, if it were not, if, if, if there were infallible truths
available that the other way around,
unless there were fallibility.
So, Charlie, yeah.
Yeah, I think that's right.
That, that is that if, if you didn't have,
it's because
incompleteness is the flip side of universality.
If you had a, if you restricted the,
the laws of nature to, to something in which you couldn't
produce a universal computer,
of course it would be limited by how long it could run before,
but basically something that was behaving like a Turing machine
until some, some part broke.
Then you couldn't get something as complicated as, as, as a,
a, a bacterium.
Thanks.
Are there any other questions from the audience?
Yeah, Vincent, would you like to come?
So, hello, thank you so much for the great discussion.
Maybe I have a question about a bit of a different topic,
namely about artificial intelligence and AGI maybe,
because some of us are interested in this.
So from the Turing church thesis,
we know that our brains are not doing anything magical.
They could be simulated by a Turing machine, right?
So that means, in principle, some,
we could implement something like AGI if you,
if we would know how,
but it could be that the only way, at least in my view,
the only way to implement this is to simulate something
like a human brain on a Turing machine,
not that there's any simple AGI program that does something
like human level intelligence or creativity,
or maybe there is any reason we might get there,
or do you think there is any reason that we should expect
a simple program that implements AGI,
or is, do we have to take the detour
to simulate something like a human brain,
and this then...
Well, the human brain might be simple,
looked at the right way.
I think simple doesn't necessarily mean easy to find.
I think there is a very strong reason to believe
that the explanatory universality property
of the human brain, which are present only humans have,
must be encoded in a very short amount of DNA,
a tiny amount.
People have different numbers for this,
but we seem to be 95% or 99% of our DNA
is the same as chimpanzees,
and of the rest, a lot is junk DNA,
and of the rest, a lot is differences between us
and chimpanzees that aren't connected
with these deep epistemological things.
So maybe it's only a few K of code in DNA terms
that encodes the AGI-ness or the GI-ness of the brain,
but that doesn't mean it's easy to find.
I would guess that it is a short program.
I mean, a few K of program is actually long if you want to write it,
but it's relatively short compared with the kinds of things
that happen in biology.
And I think it'll be very hard to find,
and probably, well, I would expect us to find it
only once we have understood a philosophical theory
of what the function is,
what the creativity, consciousness, qualia, and so on,
what those things are in some precise terms,
precise but high level, I would expect.
And then we can probably quite easily write a program
that has that property.
Then we'll be in various kinds of trouble,
but not any of the kinds of trouble
that people are thinking about now.
I worry that people who know more about it
are scared about it, but people are so good
at being cruel to each other with their intelligence
that I doubt that the machines would do much worse.
And I take this Schopenhauer's principle,
which is what they should call the anthropic principle
pretty seriously, and it may be that we're not likely
to last more than a few or decades before we...
I don't think that human civilization will extinct itself,
it might set us back a few centuries or millennia.
And we just hope for the best, but...
So that's why I don't worry about it so much,
but maybe I should.
Oh, I know, it's also, if you want to be universal,
not in the sense of computational universality,
but in the sense of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, where do we get off thinking
that we have better rights than these machines?
They might actually do a better job,
or they might be our successors,
not in the sense of the ones that conquered us
and enslaved us, but in a way that provided a shortcut
to what may be...
To the bad instincts, or let's say the maladaptive instincts
that humans have, and that it might take a bit
of very unpleasant natural selection to get rid of,
and maybe the artificial intelligence would make a shortcut to...
So you're saying AI rights might be better people?
Yeah, in other words, another way of doing it
would be giving us a transplant of bonobo genes
or something that just makes us more susceptible
to taking it easy and less susceptible to getting angry
at our neighbors because of misinformation
we've heard about them and going on killing them,
which seems to be the tendency people have,
which probably was very adaptive at one stage,
but is not helping us right now.
Thanks.
You can't believe that in the better angels of our nature,
and Steven Pinker and all that stuff,
he says we've been getting better and better.
Look, if civilization...
No, that's tendency,
but there are also strong tendencies in the other direction.
We saw in the 20th century it got pretty bad,
and it could do so again.
It's worse now because the reach of things
is even more global than it was in the 20th century.
So a very repressive world government
would be harder to dislodge.
There's a more fundamental reason why you're right,
namely because of fallibilism.
There can be no upper bound to the size of error we can make.
So although we have the potential
to go exponentially into the future at infinite.
We have the potential to make arbitrarily large errors,
and we may have a dark age and another dark age,
and a dark age lasting a million years,
or we might wipe ourselves out,
and something else might evolve somewhere else in the universe
or somewhere else in the multiverse.
And there can be no guarantee that that won't happen.
There can be no even...
There can be no guarantee that it probably won't happen.
So what we have to do is solve problems as we find them
and create knowledge as we can,
and not rely on supernatural guarantees.
I thought you'd like that point about the finite bound.
Are there any other questions from the audience?
Adita?
I'm changing chairs depending on which side people come.
Hi, so I had a question because of this discussion
we spent about discussing about how undecidability
and the halting problem are, I guess, flip sides of the same problem.
Would you also say that...
Universality.
Sorry, yeah, universality and the halting problem
are the kind of opposite sides of the same problem.
Would you also say that these are opposite sides of induction
and deduction as ways to kind of acquire knowledge,
because we talked about, I guess,
Solmanov induction a little bit in the beginning
and how maybe that is one conceptualization
of how you could derive knowledge from...
Instead of using deduction from a formal set of axioms,
where you would use data instead.
So would you say that the incompatibility of something
like ideal induction is the same as not being able to deduce
because of incompleteness?
Yes, they are both impossible for the same reason
and their impossibility is a very good thing for the same reason.
So in both cases, instead of deriving things,
we have to guess things, we have to conjecture,
and the conjectures are always fallible.
And I'm spouting Popper's philosophy here,
so that's where you have to go for this.
And he got an amazing number of things right
working almost in isolation.
To link to relate to Adita's point,
I think also Solmanov's induction is an idealization,
and to have Solmanov's metric,
one needs to solve the halting problem.
But in concrete applications,
one cannot find Solmanov's prior.
And so what we do, as you know,
upper semi-computed perhaps,
and then come up with guesses,
oh, maybe this phenomenon from which I got these data
has been explained by this program.
Now everything is programs,
but one can come up with this.
That's also a problem,
how we link scientific explanations with programs.
But I think there is a bit of a Popperian flavor
in Solmanov's induction once we realize
that it's uncomputable, so forget it.
It's a beautiful idea.
It does converge to whatever it needs to converge.
But the fact that it's uncomputable,
we can only guess programs.
The thing is, usually, or often, shall I say,
often the problem we're trying to solve isn't in data.
We haven't yet got any data.
Sometimes it's a theoretical problem.
I think how is it possible for Maxwell's equations to be true
and geometry to be what we think it is?
There's no data, no data at all.
So you have the problem first, then the theory, then the data.
And so induction of any kind simply can't exist
in that kind of a reality.
And as I keep saying, it's a very good thing that it can't.
So Solmanov is trying to solve a problem that isn't there.
He's trying to say, how can we make this induction
or this Bayesian inference or whatever make sense?
How can we get the priors right?
Well, the priors aren't right.
Get over it.
Well, my colleague, John Smolen, told me about the story of induction
and about an explorer who comes to a place that's inhabited by anti-inductionists.
And these are people who believe that if something happened once,
it's less likely to happen again.
And they have a miserable life because their buildings fall down
and their crops fail.
And so this explorer says, I understand why everything is not working here.
It's because your principle of anti-induction is wrong.
And they looked at him and they said,
why should we give up this principle?
It's never worked before.
Nice.
Good.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for your answers.
Other questions?
Sam.
I'm interested in what kinds of cosmology.
I mean, we have the cosmology for people like Hitler.
There's Barbas cosmology.
Let's try to get them again.
I'm just curious what interests them at the moment.
Well, I don't know a lot about it, but I've been trying to understand these models.
They call eternal inflation where there isn't a beginning or an end,
but in which there's inflating pockets that appear here and there
with all sorts of different natural laws in them.
And in that, that's a pretty scary place to live.
And it's populated by all kinds of problems, like David mentioned,
that it's hard to get a universe in which you're not extremely
likely to disappear in a microsecond from now.
Other questions from the group?
If they come up later, be free to feel free to raise your hand at some point.
And at this stage, I could also take questions from the, from the online event.
I would have a quick question.
Go ahead, Sophie.
Yes.
I'm wondering when you're talking about other universes that would have maybe
they could solve the whole thing problem and for them, it's pretty easy,
but for us, it's difficult and vice versa for other tasks.
Are you thinking about other branches in the multiverse or something that
would be completely outside of what we are studying now?
The latter.
In the multiverse, there's no, all universes in the quantum multiverse
have the same tame mathematics.
They even have the same computable functions.
They just have different complexity theory, but complexity theory isn't that important anyway.
So, yeah, but, but we have to, we have to consider universes with different laws,
if only to, to examine explanations like the anthropic principle, which purport to
different things in our universe and only, only certain very special kinds of anthropic argument constitute arguments.
They, otherwise they, they simply fall victim to this Boltzmann brain or boundary of the, of the set of possibilities problem.
In his Sharma, when he was, when he told us about this objection, he said that what we should really look for anthropically is for is a case, not not a case where a slight change in a fundamental law would have meant that we're not here,
but where the, but where we are located at the center of the region.
So, if we, if we really define structure constant, rather than saying, you know, if it was 1% different, we wouldn't be here.
Look at the region where we would be here and, and try to find out whether we're near the center.
If we're near the center, that, that is a real anthropic problem.
You know, if you tell this to religious people, they're going to say it's God, and it's very hard to argue them out of it.
But I don't think we will be in the center.
But I think you don't think we're also on the edges, because if we're on the edges, we're out of it right after where we're neither at the center of the edges because that's not where the explanation lies.
The explanation of the actual values doesn't doesn't lie in our existence.
It's a common cause is caused by things like the law of the, of the universality of computation.
I was about to say side effect. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Are there other questions.
We're not at the middle and we're not at the edge exactly how far from the edge are we.
Probably a non computable amount or an intractably computable amount.
David, I'm just curious. This is a small question, but I'm just curious. So your comments about the thought the sort of unpredictability of the future of our civilization and the possibility of our demise.
Is that, is that the same thing as this edge that we've been talking about?
Do you see a difference?
Yeah, yeah.
It's almost the opposite. It's, it's the, it's to do with our fallibility, which is to do with our capacity for infinite growth.
Good.
That's, that's interesting. Yeah.
So it's, it's, it's our hope as well as our possible demise.
Well, you know, I'm not expecting our possible demise. I think, you know, arguing that there will be a dis demise is itself not legitimate. That's a prophecy.
No, no, no, but, but it's in the scope, but, but it's, it's not.
You're saying we can't be sure to avoid it.
Yeah, it's, it's on the future of knowledge is unknowable.
Again, we've got to get over that.
That's, you're saying, unlike other predictions, it's not false survival because if, if, if there is a demise.
I think, I think Gilles Brassard was wrote a book on your computation in which it had a cartoon of a bunch of elderly scientists looking into a steaming test tube.
And one of them is saying, we may have discovered the elixir of immortality, but it will take forever to test it.
Any more questions.
I would have another question maybe for Charles.
And I wonder what's your view of probabilities.
My view of probability.
Yep.
I think it's just, I think it arises from entanglement.
Yes, I think that is the, the problem is, is the feature of a subsystem in a, in a larger system that, that evolves uniterally.
My question would also could also be formulated as do you agree with David in terms of what our probabilities, and I guess the answer is yes.
Not necessarily because many people view probabilities as entanglement because they understand quantum theory as unitary and so entanglement is out there.
But even, even among these people, there's still many disagreements about how we should read the born rule.
So, so maybe the follow up question for Charlie without, without being so specific as does it equate to David's, despite you embrace unitary quantum theory.
Still, how do you view the born rule.
Is it a decision.
Yeah, it's, it's, it's hard. I try not to think about it, but I know.
Do we have an answer on that.
Yes, I think, I think the decision theory approach to probability in quantum mechanics is correct and sufficient.
Whether you whether you call that deriving the born rule. I don't know, I think the born rule is a is not a universal rule obviously because it doesn't apply to quantum theory.
I mean, it only applies to quantum theory at a tiny minority of of in a tiny minority of situations.
In those situations, modeling the, the situation with decision theory.
The decision theory theory approach if I can say very quickly is to take decision classical decision theory and quantum theory strip out all the probability from classical decision theory.
All the probabilistic axioms and so on. And then quantum theory strip out the probabilistic, you know, if you're going to have wave function collapse or something strip out all that stuff, anything that's supposed to be probabilistic, then smush them together.
Consistent quantum theory, namely Everett's, and you get a consistent theory probability, which only applies when people are making decisions.
And the rule that they use assuming that they make measurements accurately and all that stuff in that approximation.
Their rational behavior as determined by decision theory is the same as it would be if they believed in stochastic processes, even those stochastic processes do not happen in nature.
Yeah, that sounds pretty plausible.
I'm not sure I properly understood your explanation, David, because if you say you want to get rid of the born rule and you believe in a unitary quantum mechanics and and Everett's many worlds interpretation.
How do you reconcile the fact that when we do a quantum experiment in the lab, we, you know, we just get to see one result. How do we, how do we interpret the fact that we're in just a specific branch of the multiverse and say not another one.
Why not? We're in all of them. And the fact that we see only one outcome is a prediction of quantum theory. If you if you just write the equation for with the variable for how many outcomes do we see, then you will find that the world after a good measurement, the world will be in an
eigenstate of that with eigenvalue one.
Okay, so what actually happens is that all of the outcomes happen. I mean, generically.
But the question was about probability. What do we then mean that some of them have a high prior probability than others, given that they all happen.
Then you have to bring in another part of the model, which is, suppose we were betting on these outcomes. How would it be rational to bet.
And decision theory without probabilistic axioms and quantum theory without them together, give the answer.
It's magic.
You're shaking your head, but if you read the papers, it's, it's, I think it's unanswerable.
I mean, it's, it's undeniable.
Do you think it's unanswerable or just we haven't found a good explanation for it. Yes.
It's too ambiguous at word. I mean, it's undeniable that this is the explanation.
So, David has amidst his other euphemisms and disphemisms.
And what is, I regard the, the, the most widespread obfuscatory euphemism God, that is, people, people use it to mean their own idea of God, which they're going to try to get you to like and believe in, but they haven't actually said what it is yet.
So, I'm going to use that also, but in a physicist's way.
So, if you imagine a conversation with God, and, and first of all, you say, what time is it. And God says, well, you would say it's it's about here.
It's about 1037 Eastern daylight time. But for me, it's all times. I'm eternal.
And then you'll say, well, you're supposed to be omniscient of will it rain a year from now.
And God says, well, that's like, yes and no.
Well, it rained for me from now. Well, I say, it's like saying what I see is, is something that looks like your hand.
And you're sitting here, and you're saying, which of my fingers is the correct extension of my wrist.
They all are, when it gets to be next year, you'll either be on one where it's raining, which is the one that has my wedding ring, or you'll be one of the other ones where it isn't raining.
And I can see all of them. But, but, and, and you, for you now, they're all equally real. And then in a next year, you will have a kind of a truncated perspective in which you think one of them is real and the others aren't, but they all still are.
I'm not going to think that I know that the other branches exist, even if I can't see them.
Most things in the universe I can't see.
I don't know why that's so, so.
It's like this, what Galileo said, he says, I don't know if he actually said this, but he says that it's a yes, I say that the earth moves and if it moves the way I say it is you shouldn't be able to feel it moving so shut up.
Yeah, pretty much.
Ever said that to do it. Yes.
Yeah, yeah, you didn't use the Galileo example.
Yes, absolutely. Yeah, yeah, that's right. That's right. And is that the moment where David started to say, Okay, I don't know what more to argue against.
Yeah, that's the moment he was convinced. Yeah.
So, so the idea is even the theory says
Yes, you will only experience one outcome.
Yes.
So, even though we seem to be bugged by the fact that no, but the theory says there's going to be many outcomes. No, no, no, it might look like the theory says there's going to be many outcomes.
But if, if each of, if you ask yourself what how many outcomes am I going to see the theory says systematically only one.
So it preserves its consistency in spite of its striking apparent inconsistency.
And are there other questions.
Hey, do you hear me.
Yeah, so, so will you will you say well any of you say that in that sense, in the sense we just discussed now, the principle will be a statement about consciousness of what do you experience.
Or do you think it's beyond like consciousness will be beyond the scope of the statement.
It has nothing to do with it. It's, I mean, obviously, if consciousness is to be described as a physical process which it must be, then it presumably a base quantum theory and so on but it has nothing to do with these issues of
measurement probability and anything like that it's it's just a physical thing.
There's there's no more reason to assume it has a special place in physics, then it would be to assume that squirrels have a special place in physics.
Obviously they describe that physics, but they don't have any relevance to fundamental discussions of physics.
Well, I asked before, because the idea was like, I mean, the, the following if I'm following the discussion is that, like, you have this different potential outcomes of measurement, all of them occur, all of them have their own branches and all of them are there.
But the statement is more like the one do you will experience one of them.
And then it's if it's about, you will experience one of them, you will see one of them is wouldn't be addressing directly the consciousness of, or maybe I'm just like going out.
It's the same question can be asked about a seed of a plant that grows into two trees, the left one and the right one and you ask the seed are you going to be the left one or the right one or or twins you know you are are you going to be Joe or Fred.
You ask the, the fertilized egg. And it says to you, well, in a sense, I'm going to be both of them. In a sense, I'm only going to be one of them.
That is to say, I will not experience being both.
But the experience of being each of them will both happen.
Okay, I see. I understand.
That's a good way of putting it. Yeah.
Well, David and Charlie have been tremendously generous of their time.
It doesn't seems like there's other questions. If somebody has a burning desire and has been repressing his question. This is the last call.
It also applies for the audience.
Great.
Thank you so much, David and Charlie. That was a lot of fun to discuss with you. And it was a very, very fascinating in many regards.
Thank you very much. Very, very interesting conversation.
Thank you. Hi everyone.
Thanks a lot. This was great.
