The lecture is Dr. Frank Summers. Dr. Summers is an astrophysicist at the Space Telescope
Science Institute, or STSCI, in Baltimore, Maryland, where he works in the Office of
Public Outreach. Dr. Summers received his undergraduate degree
Summa Cum Laude in physics from Virginia Tech and his master's and doctoral degrees in
astronomy from the University of California at Berkeley. Before joining the STSCI, Dr.
Summers researched cosmology and galaxy formation at Princeton University and Columbia University.
Dr. Summers' work at the STSCI presents the findings of the Hubble Space Telescope and
developments in general astronomy to the public through a variety of media and educational
programs. Dr. Summers specializes in combining research
data and supercomputer simulation with Hollywood-level animation and rendering techniques to create
accurate and aesthetic scientific visualizations. Dr. Summers directed, co-wrote, and created
the 3D visualizations for the IMAX short film Hubble, Galaxies Across Space and Time, which
won the Large Format Cinema Association's Best Short Film Award in 2004. For the 1996
Academy Award-nominated IMAX film Cosmic Voyage, Dr. Summers provided supercomputer data sets,
assisted the scientific visualization team on a four-minute sequence, and served on the
film's Scientific Advisory Committee. As one of only a few professional astronomers
working in outreach, Dr. Summers has expertise that spans a broad range, from public astronomy
presentation to research astrophysics. Dr. Summers also lectures widely to public audiences,
students, and teachers, training to teach at all educational levels.
Dr. Summers prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures. The course
guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical
notes, and a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful
to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
