Welcome.
Today we begin a journey in rediscovering our solar system.
Now, I say rediscovering because everyone is familiar with the basics.
We learn about the solar system in elementary school.
It's stuff we've known about for hundreds or even thousands of years.
The solar system is our backyard in the universe.
And we've explored it thoroughly with telescopes on the ground and in orbit,
with manned missions to the moon, and satellites crisscrossing the solar system.
We even have an expression for it.
There's nothing new under the sun.
This course will show you just how wrong that maxim is.
So my first goal of the course is to teach you that scientific knowledge is never static.
This has always been true, but recently it's become more prominent.
And I can summon up in just one question.
Why is Pluto no longer a planet?
For 70 years, Pluto was a planet.
And then a few years ago, people started talking about kicking Pluto out of the solar system.
In 2006, we moved to having 12 planets for about a week,
and then Pluto became classified as a dwarf planet.
What's the matter? All of a sudden it's too small?
Well, the truth is a little more straightforward.
Because originally, we thought Pluto was several times larger than Earth,
but we now know it to be smaller than our moon.
In fact, it's smaller than seven moons of the solar system.
Over the years, we've learned that Pluto is unlike any of the other planets.
It's basically a giant ice ball.
It's got a very elliptical elongated orbit.
It's got a tilted orbit.
If you try to put it in with the rocky planets,
or you try to put it in with the gas giant planets,
it ends up being the ugly duckling of the solar system.
Pluto is so small and so far away
that this is one of the best images we can get of it in visible light.
This is not an image from a ground-based telescope.
This is an image from the Hubble Space Telescope.
That's all we get.
That's not what most people expect for a planet.
That brings me to my second goal of this course,
and that's good to get you to recognize
that some of what you think you know about the solar system is actually wrong.
Misconceptions about the universe are rampant,
and for the solar system,
we've got sort of a been-there-done-that hubris that leads to mistakes.
We generalize and assume everything follows the same basic rules.
We oversimplify, and sometimes the cartoon version replaces the complex reality.
We can exaggerate and select facts out in order to make a story for a book or a movie.
Too often, our invented reality replaces the scientific view.
For Pluto, press coverage created a reality distortion field,
because the reason for Pluto's demotion is not the fickle astronomers
who couldn't figure out whether it is a planet or isn't a planet
or is a dwarf planet or whatever that really means,
and it's not really Pluto itself.
The fact is that our knowledge of the solar system has changed.
We have discovered a brand new region of the solar system
that contain over a thousand new objects.
And so my third goal in this course is to change your perspective,
not on the facts of the solar system.
You're going to get a ton of new facts about the solar system,
but more importantly, how you organize and understand those facts.
In education, we call this a mental model.
It's your framework for discussing things and for understanding new things.
If you have errors in it, these misconceptions,
they can impede the development of new learning.
So we want to correct those errors,
but we also want to augment or even entirely replace your mental model.
And we're going to replace it with something I call the 21st century solar system.
This is the modern view of the solar system.
You see, Pluto hasn't been kicked out of the solar system.
Really, the solar system has been reorganized,
and Pluto has a new place within it.
Now, before describing this new organization,
let me just sort of review the previous perspectives
we've had on the solar system throughout history.
The first perspective is be the earth-centered solar system,
what we call the geocentric model of the solar system.
This is associated with Ptolemy,
who wrote the book, The Almagest, in 150 CE.
Now, when we think about the earth-centered solar system,
it sort of gets a bad rap because we talk about it, we focus on the errors,
why it's wrong, we know today that it's not the correct model.
But really, it was quite a success
because it was the model that first explains the motions of the heavens.
The next version would be the sun-centered model of the solar system.
We call this the heliocentric model.
This is associated with Nicholas Copernicus,
who published his book on the revolutions of heavenly spheres in the 16th century.
But then Copernicus starts to get too much credit
because really, the heliocentric model, as presented by Copernicus,
could not provide better predictions of the positions of objects in the sky
than the geocentric model.
What Copernican model really did
is it moved from a mathematical description of the motions on the sky
to a model that represents reality.
The next model is something I like to call the gravitational solar system.
This has its derivation in the laws of motion,
specifically the law of gravity from Isaac Newton.
At this point, our perspective on the solar system changed
and that we could develop a mathematical basis
that there is physics underlying the astronomy
and that we could use that physics to predict motions
and predict how the solar system would behave.
The next view, change in perspective on our solar system,
really came about with the space age
because then we moved from observing the solar system to exploring it.
We had manned missions to the moon.
We have satellite missions across the solar system.
With the space age, we have developed new technology
and new ways of exploring our solar system
to develop a rich and detailed knowledge of the objects within it.
Finally, we get to the modern perspective, the 21st century solar system.
This one is still developing
because we have got observations of a new region,
but we also had discovered other solar systems,
planetary systems around other stars.
So not only are we gaining perspective on the structure of our own solar system,
we are comparing it to solar systems around other stars
and gaining perspective on its structure and its universality.
Now, let's describe this perspective in a little detail.
When I first learned the solar system,
the method of teaching it was what I would really refer to
as a factoid-based solar system.
In our books, we had one chapter on the sun,
one chapter on Mercury, one chapter on Venus,
one chapter on Earth, and so on and so on.
And really, some of the focus was on memorizing a lot of facts.
So if we went through that version of teaching the solar system,
it would be something like this.
This is the sun.
It's a great big ball of hot gas.
It's 100 times larger than Earth,
and there are gigantic magnetic storms on it
that spew fierce radiation at Earth.
Then we go to Mercury.
And Mercury, well, it's cratered like the moon.
It's 450 degrees hot on one side
and minus 200 degrees cold on the other.
Venus.
Venus is Earth's hot-headed twin.
It's totally covered in clouds,
and on surface is so hot that you can melt lead.
Earth. Earth would be our planet.
It's sort of the water planet,
and it has plate tectonics on it
that rework its entire surface.
But most importantly, Earth is the planet with life.
And then to Mars, which is rusty, dusty, and red,
it has no air, no water, and subzero temperatures,
but for some reason, we still want to go there.
Jupiter.
Jupiter is the biggest planet.
It's got this great red spot here that's as large as Earth,
and this is a storm that has lasted for over 350 years.
It's also got four big moons that were seen by Galileo 400 years ago.
Saturn. Saturn is the ringed planet.
It's got about 60 different moons,
and it's got the only moon in the solar system that has an atmosphere.
Uranus. Uranus is just a pale blueish-green planet,
but it rotates on its side,
and that means its poles see 44 years of daylight,
followed by 44 years of night.
Neptune.
Neptune is the blue planet, but it has no water.
It's got methane ice clouds that are 200 degrees below zero.
It's got this great dark spot that was there in the 80s
but somehow was gone in the 90s.
And Pluto?
Well, it's our most distant member,
and although it was closer than Neptune for two decades,
Pluto is smaller than our moon,
and it has a moon about half its size.
It's the coldest place in the solar system, minus 220 degrees.
And then you might get a chapter on the moons
when you learn that Earth has one.
As many giant planets have many, there are about 150 total moons,
and they feature some really weird ones, like Mimas,
which is a moon that looks like the Death Star from Star Wars,
or Iapetus, which is a moon that's entirely black on one side
and entirely white on the other,
or Europa, a moon that has a subsurface ocean,
and perhaps might harbor life in that ocean.
Finally, you might get a chapter on asteroids and comets,
and these would be rocks in space or snowballs in space,
and these are on these elongated elliptical orbits
crossing throughout the solar system, smashing it to things,
and one of them killed the dinosaurs.
So, the way I learned the solar system was focused on memorization,
really just gathering together a whole bunch of facts.
And what I don't like about it is that it highlights the differences between the objects.
You really get little or no feel for the big picture of the solar system.
What's the worst thing about this way of teaching the solar system
is that it's often presented in an image like this.
This is a horrible way to present the solar system.
Just, no, don't go there.
It's just plain wrong.
And the sizes of the planets are sort of done to scale,
but the sun is totally off scale.
The spacing between the planets, totally wrong.
The orbits are all in a plane? Wrong.
There's just characteristic ideas that fundamentally skew your mental model.
The most important one is that the planets are all lined up.
The planets will be lined up in the solar system once every three quadrillion years.
That's 600,000 times the current age of our solar system.
So you can say that the planets have never been aligned in the entire history of the solar system.
Improving on that model of learning the solar system,
we move to comparative planetology.
With the space age exploration, which I remember being highlighted by Viking to Mars
and the Voyager missions to the outer planets,
we learn to go deeper and see more things and understand more ideas about the objects in the solar system.
The basic premise of this is to discuss broad ideas and compare them across the solar system.
It's a comparison and contrast where you highlight the similarities.
An example would be to discuss storms.
Here is a picture of Hurricane Isabel, which arose in 2003.
It's a very big storm on Earth that formed out in the Atlantic and then swept across the east coast of the United States.
Now, this is an impressive image of a storm, but when you compare it to Jupiter and the great red spot,
it can seem rather small, especially when you put the great red spot in context and put the earth in for scale.
The great red spot is a giant storm on Jupiter that has been swirling for 350 years and is as large as our entire planet.
Doing that comparison allows you to see that what we think is huge here on Earth,
ain't so huge out in the solar system.
Now, you can do many other comparisons for craters.
You can look at Berenier Crater in Arizona and compare it to Mari Oriental on the moon
or the great ringed Valhalla crater on Callisto.
You can look at canyons and compare the Grand Canyon on Earth to Valis Marineris on Mars.
Volcanoes, Mount St. Helens versus Mount Olympus on Mars versus Jupiter's moon Io,
where an average of seven volcanoes are erupting at any time.
You can look at weather. You've got these 100-year hurricanes.
You've got methane lakes. You've got sulfuric acid rain.
These comparisons can continue for rings, moons, magnetic fields, and many other ideas.
The messages that comparative planetology sends are that what happens here on Earth happens elsewhere in the solar system.
The solar system is understandable.
We can model processes here and understand them as they occur out there.
So the progression that you go through is that first you have to establish the facts,
then you group these facts into themes, and then these themes can illuminate many different aspects.
However, the true big picture is still a little lacking,
and that's where the 21st century solar system comes in.
Instead of talking about the sun and nine planets, asteroids, and comets,
what we do is we group the solar system into six families.
These are classes of similar objects, objects that have roughly the same size.
Their composition is the same. They're made out of roughly the same type of stuff.
They're orbit sizes, and their orbit shapes, whether they're circular or elliptical.
The inclination of the orbits, whether they're highly tilted or whether they're mostly in the plane.
These are all similar. How many moons they have? Do they have rings? How strong is their magnetic field?
You look at the characteristics of all these objects and then create families out of them.
So let's go through the solar system one more time and use this modern perspective.
Well, there's the sun. The sun is a singular object. It is the only star in the solar system.
It contains 99.9% of the mass of the solar system, and things both literally and figuratively revolve around the sun.
Outside of the sun, in the nearest orbits, we have the rocky planets.
And in this image, I will note that I'm showing to them as they should be seen.
Many times you will see images of these planets that do not show them as they appear with visible light.
These are all done approximately what the human eye would see, especially Venus here.
Venus doesn't look too interesting with visible light, so people often show you a radar image or how it looks in ultraviolet light.
So you can see the rocky planets. They're all made of rock. Their orbits are close into the sun.
They have few to no moons, and they have relatively thin atmospheres.
In the next layer in the solar system is the asteroid belt. These are small to tiny rocks.
They contain mostly rock, but they have some ice.
The orbits are concentrated between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, and their orbits are more elliptical and more tilted orbits.
Then outside of that, we have the giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
These are very large planets, hence we call them the giant planets. They have deep gaseous atmospheres.
All of them have rings, and all of them have moons. Some of them have very many moons, and they all have very large magnetic fields.
Beyond that is a region called the Kuiper Belt. This is the new region of the solar system.
There are over a thousand objects that we have discovered in this region since 1992.
These are small to tiny objects. They're mostly made of ice, with some rock.
Their orbits, like the asteroids, are more elliptical and more tilted than the planet orbits.
What do they look like? Well, here's an artist's illustration of one. It's an object called Quarwar.
No, I'm not making that up. It really is named Quarwar.
It was named by a friend of mine for a goddess of a Native American tribe in Southern California.
It is basically a giant ice ball, and you can see that the artist has drawn some craters on it.
But you've got to wonder, what would happen if this ice ball ventured near the sun?
Well then, it would look like this. It would become a comet.
The ices on its surface would melt a little bit, and it would develop a tail.
And that is what the Kuiper Belt is. It's a reservoir of our short period comets in the solar system.
Well, if there's a reservoir of short period comets, that implies there must be a reservoir of long period comets.
And that is what is shown here in this illustration of the Oort Cloud.
Now, let me note that this illustration is logarithmic. If you look at the axis drawn here, it goes from 1 to 10 to 100 to 1000.
So the distances aren't linear, where the orbits of the planets extend out to about 30 astronomical units,
where one astronomical unit is the distance from Earth to the Sun.
The Kuiper Belt extends out to 50 AU, and the Oort Cloud extends out to about 50,000 AU.
It's about a thousand times more distant than the Kuiper Belt.
Now, we have no observations yet of the Oort Cloud, but we do have a few tantalizing ideas from observations of an object called Sedna,
which seems to exist in the no man's land in between the Kuiper Belt and the Oort Cloud.
So the 21st century solar system can be summarized with a relatively simple diagram.
This is what I call a bullseye diagram of the solar system.
It was just a simplified diagram I created to just show off the basic organizational structure.
But as I've presented it to teachers and to students, I recognize that in its simplicity, it has a lot of power.
Because what it shows, it shows the families of the solar system in embedded shells.
You have the Sun at the center, around that you have the rocky planets, around that you have the asteroid belt,
around that you have the gas giant planets, around that you have the Kuiper Belt,
and finally, on the outer edges, you have the Oort Cloud.
You can see the distribution of the family's objects in the solar system.
And when you look at it, you can see that it has a compositional gradient.
The rocky stuff, the rocky planets in the asteroid belt are on the inside.
The icy stuff, the Kuiper Belt in the Oort Cloud, are on the outside.
In between, you've got the gaseous stuff.
Well, that makes sense, because this gives you some clue to the formation of the solar system,
where you've got this hot sun in the center, and you couldn't have the ices forming close to this hot sun.
They had to be way out on the edge, and the rocks, well, they could be in there.
So this, this is the perspective that changed Pluto.
Because when you look at this 21st century solar system,
Pluto is best understood as a member of a Kuiper Belt.
I presented some of this material to my daughter's kindergarten class.
And at first, they weren't too happy, because it seems that Pluto is every kid's favorite planet.
I don't know, being small, maybe they associate with the smallest planet.
But as I presented it, and as I gave them the ideas,
they came up back to me with a fairy tale.
And the moral of their fairy tale was that Pluto has now found his family.
It was an ugly duckling story where Pluto goes from not fitting in to eventually being a member,
fitting in with the Kuiper Belt.
Now, this is just one of many other new perspectives I want to present to you in this course.
And to do it, we've structured the course in three sections.
What we're going to do is sort of build the knowledge of the solar system from the ground up.
In the first section, we're going to establish the foundations of astronomy.
We'll explore the historical perspectives.
We'll go through the fundamental observations of the sky.
We'll lay down the concepts in physics of gravity, motion, light, and other things.
We'll go through astronomical observing.
The basic idea is to work into creating scientific models of the solar system.
These are all the ideas necessary to develop a scientific picture of how the solar system works.
In the second section, we'll go through the detailed knowledge of the sun, planets, moons, asteroids, and comets,
especially that provided by the space-age solar system.
There's been an exponential growth in our knowledge, and there's some really, really cool ideas that I'm going to love to present to you.
We have literally volumes of new information, and we'll use that modern approach.
We will use comparative planetology to go through lectures on craters, or lectures on weather, or lectures on atmospheres,
and cross-cut the solar system.
In the third section, we will go through the current revolution in our understanding.
We'll explore the outer parts of our solar system, the Kuiper Belt and the Oort Cloud,
and we will also gauge our understanding of planetary systems around other stars.
So the development as we go through this course will be, first, how we understand the universe,
second, how the Earth fits in within our solar system,
and third, how our solar system fits in with other planetary systems.
The philosophical basis for this course is really just curiosity,
because the study of astronomy today, the knowledge gained, has to be its own reward.
When we look at distant planets, stars, nebulae, and galaxies, we find very little of immediate practical value.
The practical aspects of astronomy, be it timekeeping, or the calendars, or navigation,
well, these were all discovered long ago, and we sort of take them for granted today.
We don't observe the sky the way we once did.
It used to be very important to keep track of the sky.
The full moon used to be important.
If you wanted to do something in the evening, well, knowing when the full moon occurred would be very good.
You could do things in the evening during the full moon,
and this is probably the source of stories about werewolves coming out of the full moon, or lunatics,
where luna, the root word, stands for the moon.
We have electric lights now, and so we no longer need to track the phases of the moon,
and these electric lights also greatly diminish our view of the night sky.
As astronomers, we fight something we call light pollution,
and it's really just all the lights of cities going up into the sky and reducing our view of the Magnificence in Heavens.
We have atomic clocks, and they can provide ultra-precise time,
so there's no need to tell time by the sun anymore.
Now, it's true that the observations of the sky still define our system of time,
but it's not something that you and I have to be worried about.
We also have global positioning satellites.
They can give us ultra-precise information on where we are.
We have one in my car. It tells me where my car is to within a few tens of meters.
The sun and the stars have now become obsolete as navigational tools.
But despite all this modern technology, our innate wonder for astronomy still exists.
The view from a dark mountain top is still awe-inspiring.
A few summers ago, I was vacationing in Yosemite National Park,
and I wanted to go out and look at the stars.
My son was the only one who'd come with me late at night,
so we went out to the center of the valley and just looked up.
And wow, what a sight!
You know, for those of us who spend our lives in suburbia to get out to a dark site and really see the sky,
it's just amazing.
And my son, he's getting to be a teenager, and his dad is no longer the coolest guy.
He's been learning about astronomy for me since he was, you know, knee-high to a grasshopper.
So he's heard it and been there and done that, right?
Well, underneath that incredible sky, dad was suddenly cool again.
Astronomer dad was suddenly cool again.
And he had questions, and he wanted to learn, and he wanted to listen.
And there's something humbling, you know, but very uplifting about looking at the sky.
And it always evokes questions.
Whenever people learn that I'm an astronomer and we're out at a dark site looking at the sky,
I get tons of questions.
But that's really where I want to begin this course.
I want you to think about standing there and looking at the night sky
and wondering, gazing at the wonder of the night sky.
Because when you start to wonder about it, that leads you to make observations.
And when you make those observations, you'll eventually find patterns in those observations.
And the patterns in those observations will lead you to create explanations about those.
In that way, you're not only building the mental model,
but you're also understanding the observations upon which it is based.
We'll begin building that mental model in our next lecture.
There, and throughout the course, I'm going to introduce you to a ton of new images
that present incredible new discoveries.
We'll float some really cool new ideas.
But mostly will lead you to new perspectives in how you think about the solar system.
I'm really looking forward to it.
Because it's a wonderful story to hear, but it's also a wonderful story to tell.
We'll see you next time.
