Have you ever played a game when you didn't know what the rules were?
Before you can try to win that game, your first effort is to figure out what the rules
are.
You would try various actions and see what happens.
Hopefully you would find patterns in the responses, and then you would develop a working model
of what the rules of the game were.
But you would never know if the rules were exactly right, or if you had a complete set
of the rules.
You would only know those rules for the situations you had encountered.
Reducing the laws of nature is exactly like playing a game, but in this game, figuring
out the rules is the whole point of the game.
We make observations, we look for patterns, and we discover what we think are the rules.
Our rulebook is called science, but we never get to peek at nature's rulebook, so we don't
know if we've got the correct rules, or even if we've got a complete set of rules.
For the solar system, we observe the motions of the sun, moon, and the planets.
We deduce the patterns that they follow, and we create a model to fit those patterns.
As we've shown in previous lectures, both the Earth-centered model and the Sun-centered
model can fit the data.
Different sets of rules can be found to fit the observations.
However, both models share a common problem.
They assume motion based on circles.
This can be traced back to Aristotle's notion of a perfect heavens, and circles and spheres
as the perfect figures.
When we look at nature, we should actually not assume things in the model, but rather
the nature should be pulled out of the model, it should be derived from the model.
So we need to look for a more general set of rules.
The man who would discover these rules is this man, Johannes Kepler.
He found more general rules than the ones we have so far assumed.
In 1600, he was hired as an assistant to Tico Brahe.
Tico Brahe was at the time the imperial mathematician to the emperor Rudolph II in Prague, and he
was the greatest pre-telescopic observer.
However, Brahe died one year later.
That was very fortunate for Kepler because he succeeded him in the position and he gained
access to Brahe's observations.
He used those observations to search for new patterns in the solar system.
You see, Kepler was a very strong advocate of the heliocentric model.
In 1596, four years before he started working with Tico, he published a book called Mysterium
Cosmographicum, and in it he proposed a different model, a heliocentric model that looks something
like this.
It was based upon the regular solids and spheres.
The spheres represented the orbits of the planets, and the regular solids were the spaces
between them.
And since there were five regular solids, he justified there being six planetary spheres.
In a heliocentric model, Earth, of course, be one of the planets, so we have six planets.
But Kepler came up with a real serious problem when he looked at the heliocentric model.
He found that he could not fit Mars' orbit.
He described it as a war with Mars, and it lasted for about a decade.
As he looked for these patterns in Tico Brahe's data, he just couldn't fit the orbit of Mars.
And Brahe's data was invaluable, because most observers would look at Mars only near its
opposition when it was on the opposite side from the Sun, and when it was going through
retrograde motion.
But Brahe was different than most observers, and he observed Mars and other planets throughout
their entire orbit, and that gave Kepler a much deeper range of results from which to
compare his ideas.
Today, most of what Kepler looked for, and most of what Kepler found, we would consider
numerology.
He had, I guess I would describe it as an overzealous quest for order, but he did find
generalized patterns.
And these are the three empirical laws, Kepler's three laws, of planetary orbits.
Kepler's first law is that the orbits of the planets are ellipses with the Sun at one
focus.
Now an ellipse is just a generalization of a circle.
We all know what a circle looks like.
It's round, right?
Well, it has axes that are the same length.
The length of the x-axis in this diagram is the same as the length of the y-axis, and
it's labeled in this diagram R.
The equation for a circle would be x squared plus y squared equals R squared.
An ellipse is just a generalization of that that allows you to have different lengths for
the x and y-axis.
So this is a diagram of an ellipse, and here A, which is half of the x-axis, called the
semi-major axis, and B is half of the y-axis, called the semi-minor axis, and they are different.
They're allowed to be different, and that leads to the equation of an ellipse being
x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals one.
If A and B were both equal to R, i.e., if we had a circle, you could multiply through
by R squared, and you get the same equation as that for a circle.
A circle has only one special point, the center, and every point on a circle is equidistant
from the center.
For the ellipse, it has two special points.
These are called the focus points, or foci, and you can find them by creating a right
triangle with the y-axis and putting the hypotenuse of length of the semi-major axis,
and you get your focus point one over here on the right and focus point two over here
on the left.
The reason these focus points are special is that the sum of the distances from any point
on the ellipse to both of the foci is constant.
I find that a little hard to imagine in my head, but it's relatively easy to see if we
do a small demonstration.
I have here two push pins and a string tied between them so that the distance along the
string, if I stretch it taut between from one focus along the string to the other focus,
is going to be constant.
If I stretch out the string and draw the figure, I get an ellipse.
That's an easy way to draw an ellipse, and you get a much nicer ellipse than it could
draw a freehand, but you can also see that the sum of the distances is always the same
in this shape.
The last thing about an ellipse is the measure of the elongation of the ellipse.
We call this the eccentricity, and mathematically it's just the ratio of the axes, and if it
is zero, that means that you have a circle, that the two axes are equal.
And if you have one, if A over B stretches to infinity, then you have an infinitely stretched
ellipse, and that's a line.
So an ellipse is basically just a generalization of circle that starts from one extreme being
a circle, going out to the other extreme being a line.
For the planet orbits, the planet has an elliptical orbit with the sun at one focus point.
Here it is in this diagram.
You can see the planet going around on an elliptical orbit.
One focus is not occupied, the sun occupies the other focus.
This means that the average distance to the sun is equal to the semi-major axis.
Now the eccentricities we generally draw when we draw ellipses are much, much, much too large
for the planetary orbits.
I have here a diagram of the interplanetary orbits, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, and
you can see that Venus and Earth look pretty much like circles.
Their orbits look pretty much like circles, and in fact, they have very small eccentricities.
For Mercury, you can see that the sun is definitely not at the center of Mercury's orbit.
It actually has the largest eccentricity, an eccentricity of about 0.2.
But if you look at Mercury, it still just sort of looks like it's a circle, but just
with the sun off center.
You can compare Mars' orbit to Earth's orbit, and you can definitely see that there are
a lot closer on one side and a lot further away on the other side.
Mars has an eccentricity in between that of Earth and that of Mercury, an eccentricity
of about 0.1.
It actually looks like it has a stronger eccentricity in this diagram than Mercury, but trust me
when I tell you that Mercury has a significantly stronger, simply because it's larger and you
have something to compare it against.
So that's Kepler's first law, that the planets travel on ellipses.
The second law is that the orbits of the planet around the sun sweep out equal areas in equal
time.
In previous models, we had gone from circular motion, which looks like this, where you move
through equal areas in equal time, but everything is centered, so you're moving around the same
amount in the same size area.
Everything is all symmetric.
We then moved in a ptolemaic model to equant motion, which changed this relationship, and
the planet had to move slower along one region of its orbit and faster along another region
of the orbit.
But you can see that the segments that it swept out in the same amount of time had varying
different shapes.
For Kepler's second law, the idea is the same that you're going to have the planet move
faster when it's closer and slower when it's further away.
Kepler's second law looks something like this.
When the planet is closer to the sun, it's moving faster and therefore sweeps out a longer
arc, but since it's closer to the sun, it only has a certain amount of area.
As it is farther away from the sun, it moves much slower.
It goes through a much smaller amount of arc, but because it's much, much further away,
it still sweeps out the same amount of area.
It's very similar to the idea of the equant motion.
Matter of fact, if I look at an animation, I can show you that the equant motion and
the Keplerian motion are relatively identical.
So in this animation, let's set the eccentricity for the orbit to 0.6, which is much, much
larger than the planet orbit.
But you can see that the shape of the orbit is distinctly different, and the blue line,
which represents the Keplerian motion, and the green line, which represents equant motion,
go at very different speeds, especially as they get away from the poles.
And you can see how they change and get away and are very strongly different.
If I pause it and set the eccentricity down to something small, which is what the planets
have, let's put it around 0.2, and then I put it into motion.
You can see two things, that the orbit shape is very close between the ellipse and the circle,
and the equant motion is very close to elliptical motion.
This is one reason why the geocentric model worked so well.
The equant motion closely approximated what Kepler would find before the elliptical motion.
As a matter of fact, when I look at this, I wonder, how did Kepler find discrepancies?
I mean, they look so much alike, how could he possibly have found these discrepancies?
It just shows you the detail to which he was calculating and the detail to which Tikobrah
he had observed.
So that's Kepler's second law, equal areas in equals time.
Kepler's third law is that the square of the period of a planet's orbit is equal to
the cube of its semi-major axis.
Let's take a look at the periods of the planet orbits.
In this table, in the first column, the period is measured in years, and it goes from Mercury
at about three months, on up to Saturn at about 30 years.
In the second column, we have the semi-major axis, and that's measured in astronomical
units.
One astronomical unit is the average distance from Earth to the Sun.
It's about 150 million kilometers or 93 million miles.
And you know now, from having looked at ellipses, that that is equal to Earth's semi-major axis.
If we plot these two columns of figures, period versus semi-major axis, we get a graph that
looks like this.
You can see that as the period gets larger, the semi-major axis gets larger.
And if you look over here on the left, it looks almost linear at start, but then, then
now it doesn't stay linear.
There is a relationship between these two, but it doesn't show up when we plot it in
a simple linear plot.
If instead, we plot it on a logarithmic graph, one can see the power-law relationship.
A logarithmic graph, such as this one here, is one where the distances along the graph
are multiplicative, not additive.
In a linear graph, the same distance represents the same amount all the way across the graph.
In a logarithmic graph, the same distance represents a multiplication by the same amount.
So for example, if you look at the plot, you go from 0.1 to 1, which is a factor of 10,
in a certain distance, and in that same distance, you also then go from 1 to 10.
That is also true for any other factor.
Going from 1 to 2 is the same distance as going from 2 to 4.
The point is that in a logarithmic plot, you can see power-law relationships.
If there's a linear relationship in a logarithmic plot, it means it's a power-law, and you can
see there is definitely a line through these points in this plot, and I'll draw it here
for you.
The slope of this line gives the relationship between period and semi-major axis, and the
slope of the line is two-thirds.
So the mathematical version of Kepler's third law is that it's p squared versus a cube.
P squared is equal to semi-major axis cubed.
If we put that into a table, you can see the values of p squared in the first column and
compare them to values of a cubed in the second column, and that the figures match very nicely.
You will note that I did not hide the round-off error, that if you look at Mars, 3.53 versus
3.51, that's just small errors in the numbers that I used.
If I had used fully accurate numbers, that round-off error would go away.
The law also shows that the farther out planets also travel slower than the closer in planets.
Now, you might think that, oh, well, what this really expresses is that the farther
out planets have longer orbits, and so they could be moving at the same speed, but of
course they're going to take longer to traverse their longer orbits.
If the speed were constant, then the period would be proportional to the circumference,
and the circumference is just proportional to the radius of the orbit.
Then you would get p is proportional to A. Instead, you get p is proportional to A to
the 3 1⁄2 power, so that means not only do the outer planets have longer orbits, but
they also have slower speeds.
There's three laws help pave the way for the heliocentric solar system, and not in just
expressing the three laws as some empirical relationships about the planets, but because
the table of planet positions that he created based upon these three laws were better in
their accuracy than the geocentric model.
The planet positions based upon the geocentric model would lose their accuracy over the course
of decades or centuries, and needed to be recalculated.
In 1627, Kepler produced the Rudolphine tables, and they were significantly more accurate
than any previous planetary tables.
To an astronomer, you're saying, ah, at last!
Finally, there's a practical advantage to the heliocentric model.
This is what you're looking for.
While the philosophical arguments are nice, they aren't compelling.
The better predictions are enough to turn the tide in science.
Kepler embraced and improved the heliocentric model, and he actually wrote a three-volume
work called the Epitome of Copernican Astronomy.
He was a strong Copernican at a time when we know from Galileo's efforts it was not
a good time to be a Copernican.
He died in 1630, the same year that Galileo published his dialogues concerning the two
chief world systems.
But he did not incur the ire of the church, probably because Galileo was in Italy and
Kepler was in Northern Europe.
Kepler developed the observational basis for the heliocentric model, but Isaac Newton would
then develop the mathematical basis.
The big insight inside Newton's universal law of gravity is to connect gravity on Earth's
surface to the motion of the moon, the sun, and the planets.
Now there's a myth out there that says that Newton was sitting underneath an apple tree
and an apple falls and bonks him on the head, and he thinks, ah, hey, gravity!
No, that's not really quite how it happened.
Instead, the idea of an apple falling from a tree inspired him to imagine if the moon
were governed by the same force as that apple.
And I have a nice quote here from John Conduit, Newton's assistant at the Royal Mint.
In the year 1666, he retired again from Cambridge to his mother in Lincolnshire.
Whilst he was pensively meandering on a garden, it came into his thought that the power of
gravity, which brought an apple from a tree to the ground, was not limited to a certain
distance from Earth, but that this power must extend much further than was usually thought.
Why not as high as the moon, said he to himself?
And if so, that must influence her motion and perhaps retain her in her orbit, whereupon
he fell a calculating what would be the effect of that supposition.
So the role of the apple was to inspire him to think about gravity in a much more general
way.
Could gravity apply to the heavens as well as applying to Earth?
How do you then go from gravity on Earth to orbits?
Well Newton came up with a thought experiment.
A thought experiment is a kind of experiment that you can do only in your mind.
You can think it through and think through all the ramifications, but you don't actually
have to perform it.
So they're very nice experiments.
So this is an illustration that shows the idea behind Newton's thought experiment.
What if you had a cannon that was really, really powerful on an airless world?
Eventually cannon would shoot the cannonball and it falls to the ground.
But on an airless world and with a really, really strong cannon, it could fall further
and further away and eventually it might fall and miss the Earth.
What would that be then?
Newton reasoned that if it fell and kept missing the Earth, it would go into orbit.
So the idea of an orbit is simply continually falling under gravity, but never hitting ground.
The idea behind this is that gravity is a centripetal force, that you create an orbit
by continually pulling the path toward the center.
Now here is an illustration of this.
Suppose you have a mass, we'll call this blue spot here, the Earth, and then you have an
orange spot here, which we'll consider something like the moon, and it's moving perpendicular
to the radius vector of Earth, and it moves along its orbit, but at the same time, it's
being pulled by gravity towards the Earth.
So while it moves up here, it's pulled in this direction, and then its new position
would be the sum of those two vectors, or here.
It would then be traveling on a new perpendicular path, and it would be traveling in this direction,
but again pulled toward the center of Earth and moved to this direction.
That process would continually repeat, moving along its tangential path, but yet being pulled
back toward the center of the planet.
And that repeats around the orbit, and you can see in this rather rough diagram that
you end up working all the way around creating an orbit.
Now this is a rough diagram because I've used a very long vector here, but gravity acts
in a continuous manner, and so instead of having these 8 or 10 separate points, you
would actually have a continuous orbit, and here we have a circle.
Now we get a circle simply because I didn't want to go through the extra effort to try
and make it into an ellipse.
Circle's easiest thing for me to create, but instead, if you took a more general diagram
and more general motion, you would get an ellipse of this.
So finally, this is what leads to Newton's law of gravity, and the law of gravity is
stated thus.
The force of gravity between two objects is proportional to the masses of the objects
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
I know that saying it in words doesn't quite get it out, so we use mathematics.
And this is the equation, F standing for the force of gravity, G for Newton's gravitational
constant, capital M for the mass of one body, lowercase M for the mass of another body,
and R for the distance between them.
And so the force on the left hand side is proportional to the mass of both objects,
which are in the numerator on the right hand side, and inversely proportional to the square
of the distance between them.
So as you have larger bodies, the force goes up.
As you place them further away, the force goes down.
Newton's gravity work led him to discover his three laws of motion that he published
in his book, The Principia.
And those three laws of motion describe general forces, not just gravity.
The important thing for the solar system is that Kepler's empirical laws can be derived
from Newton's law of gravity.
They are a direct result.
Gravity is an inverse square law, and if you do the mathematics to find out what is the
general orbit shape for any inverse square force, you get an ellipse.
The force is stronger when you are closer to the sun and weaker when your father is
from the sun.
That leads to the observed variations in motion of the planets in their orbits around the
sun.
Furthermore, larger orbits in an inverse square law have longer lengths, and they also have
slower speeds, and that leads to the relationship between period and semirate major axis.
Newton's great achievement is that he created a physics foundation for the astronomical
motions.
As illustrated in this lecture, science is a search for order in the universe, and it's
often a three-step process.
First you have to collect some data, then you're going to search for patterns in the
data, and then you need to explain why such patterns occur.
In the heliocentric model, Kepler is the one who found the patterns, and Newton is the
one who explained why they occur.
The combination of these two efforts by these two great men confirmed the heliocentric model,
and only with their work could we say this heliocentric model is the true model of the
solar system.
And actually, it goes a little bit beyond that, because you're moving from the heliocentric
solar system to what I sort of think of as the gravitational solar system.
You're going beyond just modeling things going on.
You're creating a mathematical theory that describes the motions, and in it you are moving
to a new way of thinking about the solar system.
Mathematics underline the physics that underlies astronomy, and here for the first time astronomy
combines with physics, and we end up with a new science of astrophysics.
Well, that's it for today, and we'll see you next time.
Take care.
Thank you.
