What's the difference between a hypothesis and a theory?
In the public vernacular, not much.
We say, here's my theory of what happened, or oh, that's just a theory.
But in science, the difference is huge.
A hypothesis is an unproven assertion.
It needs to make predictions, and those predictions need to be tested by observations.
And if those observations match over repeated testing, then, and only then, does it get
to become a theory.
So the phrase, oh, it's only a theory, would never be heard in science, because to become
a theory, you must be elevated up to become a theory.
The heliocentric model was not generally accepted until its predictions became better than the
geocentric model.
It was a hypothesis until it proved itself.
Newton's law of gravity, similarly, took time for people to embrace that idea.
We will show you one major example of testing of Newton's law of gravity in this lecture.
In science, we're always looking for new phenomena as a way of testing our old ideas and discovering
new ideas.
We will find that even established theories can be modified.
We're going to discuss this in the context of predicting planets.
There have been many predictions of planets throughout history.
We're going to discuss three examples, each that have a different resolution.
For our first example, we're going to discuss the Titus Bode rule.
In 1766, Johann Titus noted a formula in a footnote in one of his books.
It was a mathematical rule about the spacing of planet orbits, and it approximated the
distances to the known planets pretty well.
In 1772, Johann Bode, a much more influential astronomer, included the rule in his book and
it became widely known.
Titus Bode rule goes like this.
We start with Mercury, and the Titus Bode rule says that the distance to Mercury is 0.4
AU, remembering that an AU stands for an astronomical unit, it's the distance from the Sun to Earth.
The distances to the other planets were found by adding a second term.
For Venus we add 0.3, for Earth we add 0.6, for Mars we add 1.2, and as you can see, the
second term doubles each time.
And so if you take each of the planets as being labeled by the letter N, and you turn
Titus Bode rule into a mathematical formula, the distance would be 0.4 plus 0.3 times 2
to the N minus 2 power.
How well did it work?
Well, the accuracy of the rule for the known planets at the time was 5% or better.
And in this table, I give you the distance as given by the Titus Bode rule in the first
column, and the semi-major axis in the second column.
And you can see that they roughly match.
In the third column, I give you the present error.
And so for Mercury the difference between prediction and what was observed was 3.4%.
For Venus 3.2%, Mars was the largest at around 5.3%, and then Saturn at 4.8%.
Both Earth and Jupiter were predicted almost exactly.
You'll notice, however, that the N equals 5 planet is missing.
Is that an error in the hypothesis?
Is that a prediction of the Titus Bode rule that's wrong?
Johann Bode interpreted this as a challenge, and he began to argue for the existence of
a missing planet.
Fortunately for him, a planet was found, but it was not where Bode expected.
Bode expected the N equal 5 planet to be found between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
Instead, in 1781, William Herschel discovers Uranus.
This is outside the orbit of Saturn.
This is not the N equals 5 planet, instead it's the N equal 8 planet.
The distance for Uranus that was found when its orbit was calculated agreed with the Titus
Bode rule to better than 2%.
This was an unexpected level of support for the rule, and convinced people that the N
equals 5 planet must exist.
So several astronomers, several groups of astronomers, went out and started searching
for the N equals 5 planets.
They actually formed a group called the Celestial Police.
They had to find the missing planet.
In 1801, a planet was found, not by the Celestial Police, but by someone doing a survey, and
this planet was named Ceres.
We know Ceres today as being the largest of the members of the asteroid belt.
But when it was discovered in 1801, it was the missing planet.
And it agreed again with the Titus Bode rule at a 1% level.
Amazing!
Now we have not only the N equals 5 planet, which matches, we have a new N equals 8 planet.
This is really wonderful.
Things got a little bit more complicated when three more N equals 5 planets were soon found.
Pallas was discovered the next year, two years later Juno, and a few years later Vesta.
Pallas agreed with the N equals 5 position to 1%, Juno 5%, and Vesta, well, it was off
by 19%.
But you could argue that they are all part of the same N equals 5 planet, but they had
broken into fragments.
Since they were so small anyway, you could justify that the Titus Bode rule still worked.
You just had the one planet that was broken into four pieces.
Nevertheless, the Titus Bode rule, as it was previously known, now became law.
And this was the level of agreement at that time.
You see Uranus, Ceres, Pallas, and Juno with their Titus Bode rule distances, and the semi-major
axis distances, and here are their percent errors.
And yes, Vesta is big, but as we said, it was allowed because we had four planets in
that area.
This was an empirical law, just like Kepler's laws were empirical.
No one had any good reason why it worked, because if you look at Newton's law of gravity,
it says nothing about the spacing of orbits.
Many explanations were offered, but none of them were lasting, because the rule was
not a physical law.
It turns out that in 1846, Neptune was discovered, and its distance was off from the Titus Bode
rule by 29%.
In 1930, Pluto was discovered, and its distance was off by 95%.
So I can add them to this table, and you can see that although we fit nicely for the
first six discoveries, the next two discoveries have very strong errors.
And in retrospect, you can see that Pluto's distance of 39.5 AU sort of fits with the expected
distance for Neptune of 38 AU, and so Pluto might sort of fit into the n equals nine slot.
To do that, you'd have to ignore Neptune, and Neptune's much too big a planet to ignore.
So the law went back to be a rule.
We think of it today as a very curious mathematical coincidence, and I consider it more like Kepler's
numerology, the stuff that he put into his book, Harmony of the Worlds.
There was no physical justification needed when you're just doing numerology, because
these are wonderful coincidences.
And so we stopped searching for a physical reason as to why the Titus Bode rule works,
or shall we say, almost works.
Our second example of planetary prediction is the prediction of Neptune.
And this derives from a problem with the orbit of Uranus.
After Uranus was discovered in 1781, very soon thereafter we found historical observations
that dated back about a hundred years.
When you've got that long a baseline of observations, you can calculate a relatively accurate orbit.
The problem was that those who tried to fit the orbit had a really hard time fitting both
the old observations and the new observations at the same time with one orbit.
No matter what orbit they tried, Uranus strayed from the predictions.
And they came up with a new orbit and predicted where Uranus would be.
After a few years or a decade, Uranus would no longer be in that position on the sky.
What are we going to do about this?
Does this indicate that there's a problem with Newton's gravity?
This was over a hundred years later after Newton had come up with his theory of gravity,
but people were still willing to question it.
However, computing orbits by hand was really difficult.
So you couldn't actually be totally sure.
When you're doing an orbit by hand, you have to not just take into account the gravity
of the Sun, but you also have to take into account the gravity of Jupiter and Saturn
and sometimes other planets as they might slow or speed a planet in its orbit.
The problem with Uranus became a very high profile challenge and in 1835 came a very
important clue.
Halley's Comet came back in 1835 and reached perihelion one day late.
Now you may think to yourself, wait a minute, one day late Halley's Comet has 76 year orbit.
What is one day in that?
That's one part out of 27,000, but the idea was that since Halley's Comet had such elongated
orbit, it would sample the gravity of the outer solar system and if it sampled the gravity
of an unknown planet, that could perturb its orbit and cause it to come back to perihelion
one day late.
The prediction and the discovery of Neptune is one of the greatest scientific soap operas
I've ever heard.
That's a wonderful story, so please join me in it.
It starts in England where this man, John Couch Adams, made his predictions.
He was a brilliant mathematics student at Cambridge and he took up the challenge of Uranus after
he graduated.
Now this is an extremely difficult challenge because you're not just computing one orbit,
you're actually computing two orbits simultaneously.
So you're getting the perturbations of the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn on one orbit and on
another orbit and then you have to compute the perturbations of each of those orbits
on each other.
Incredibly difficult problem, but Adams tackled it and in 1843 he came up with his first solution.
That just fit the observations of the modern era.
He continued to work on it and try to include the observations from a hundred years ago
and in 1845 he came up with his revised solution.
Now it's very important here that he decided not to publish it.
He didn't want to put it in some rinky-dink little journal or papers according to some
small society.
He wanted to go for the big time and to do that he had to go through the astronomer royal,
George Arie.
In September of that year he tries to meet with Arie, but there were some really bad
timing and a little bit of miscommunication and some strong personalities and it turns
out that they never meet.
He leaves his solution with Arie, but he feels rebuffed and he feels a lot of bad feelings
toward Arie.
So now we turn to George Arie and he picks up his term in the story.
As astronomer royal he is basically one of the head honchos of English astronomy.
He however has a bias against theoretical calculations and he also has a bias against
young researchers.
John Adams was 26 when he produced this solution.
Kind of young man of that age really produced anything valuable?
He didn't give it much credit and he sent off a reply to Adams that you know asked some
trivial questions about it.
But in October he did show the solution to a man named William Dawes.
Dawes thought it was incredible and he sends it to the observer William Lassel.
However Lassel has a sprained ankle and by the time he's recuperated the maid destroys
the letter.
Lassel most insuredly could have seen Neptune at that time based upon Adams' prediction,
but he was unable to because he lost the coordinates to look at before he had recovered from his
sprained ankle.
So England was stymied due to some strong personalities and to a string of bad luck.
Now the story moves across the channel to France and this man, Hover Jean-Joseph Leverrier
takes up the challenge of Uranus.
Originally Leverrier wanted to study chemistry but he moved to astronomy when a job opened
up and in 1845 François Aragault the dean of French astronomers asked Leverrier to work
on the problem of Uranus and when the dean of astronomy in your country asked you to
you do it.
He dropped everything and immediately began work on the problem of Uranus.
In November of that year he had his first paper ready and what that paper did is it
corrected the errors in Uranus's orbit and by June of the next year he had a second paper
ready that had gone through the full calculation and was able to predict the position of the
planet.
For the French astronomers he presented his paper to them and they called it an analytical
triumph.
They thought it was fantastic.
It was wonderful but none of them would go to the telescope and search for the planet.
Leverrier was totally frustrated.
So now we go back to Ari in England.
He receives a copy of Leverrier's paper.
He now knows that Adams and Leverrier's predictions agree to within one degree on the sky.
Finally George Ari asked the Cambridge Observatory to search for the new planet.
The observatory is run by James Chalice and James Chalice has a strong personality and
he's had an antagonistic history with George Ari and so there's a little bit of give and
take between them.
Furthermore Ari asked for a very specific search method.
He wants Chalice to sweep across the sky and he's very long arcs.
He doesn't ask him to go look where Adam's predicted.
He just says do a survey.
There was a cumbersome method but still Chalice observes Neptune four times.
However, again more bad luck, he doesn't analyze the data.
He analyzes data up to the observation but doesn't actually go to the observations that
contain Neptune.
Back to France.
In August Leverrier produced a third paper with an even more refined prediction of the
planet.
Again, no French astronomer would go out and look for the planet.
He gave up on them.
Finally, he had some correspondence with somebody at the Berlin Observatory and he said hey,
maybe they will look for it.
He left his countrymen behind and he sent a letter to Johann Gaul at the Berlin Observatory
and asked him to search for it.
Gaul got permission to use the observatory and on the very first night they looked for
it, he found it.
The second night they confirmed it and they had the discovery.
Neptune was found.
This discovery led to an international controversy because Gaul and Leverrier announced their
result.
Airy in England has to say face.
He has to start dancing around and saying wait, wait, wait, wait, I knew of Adam's result
before Leverrier published his even his first paper.
The French Academy of Science went ballistic.
Why were they only hearing of Adam's claim of prediction after the discovery had already
been made?
Francois Aragault has an especially strong quote.
Mr. Adams has no right to figure in the history of the discovery of the planet Leverrier,
neither by a detailed citation nor by the slightest illusion.
In the eyes of every impartial man, this discovery will remain one of the most magnificent triumphs
of astronomical theory, one of the glories of the academy and one of our country's noblest
titles to the gratitude and admiration of posterity.
Some fighting words from France.
You also had some serious attacks in England.
The Royal Astronomical Society met the next month and they did their best to give Adam
his due, but they could not avoid doing savage attacks on Airy and Chalice.
Why had they let the discovery go to the French?
Then the press got hold of the story and they inflated the story all out of proportion.
As a matter of fact, here is a cartoon in one of the French papers and you can see the
great big giant dunce cap on Adam's head as he is discovering Neptune by looking in
the calculations of Leverrier.
The press overreaction helped the scientists to actually calm down because the scientific
result was absolutely amazing.
This was an analytical triumph.
One astronomer called it the most outstanding conceivable proof of the validity of the law
of universal gravitation.
Mathematics could not only explain the known solar system, it could predict entirely new
features and mathematical calculations became a respectable guide for basing your observations.
As a small footnote to the story, in June of 1847, Adams and Leverrier met for the first
time and rather than being antagonistic, as you might expect from the story, they quickly
became friends and remain so for the rest of their lives.
The third example of planet prediction now deals with a problem in Mercury's orbit.
The perihelion of an orbit, as shown in this diagram, is the point in the orbit that is
closest to the sun.
The opposite point is called the apphelion, as the point where you're the furthest from
the sun.
The perihelion of the orbit can process due to the gravity of other planets.
It can actually rotate around, as shown here.
So the orientation of the orbit slowly shifts over time.
This was known due to Newton's law of gravity.
The problem with Mercury was that the procession was too large.
Newton's gravity predicted a shift of about 532 arc seconds per century, whereas the observed
rate was around 574 arc seconds per century.
The discrepancy was 43 arc seconds per century.
Now that's a tiny amount.
Let's put this in perspective.
A circle contains 360 degrees.
Each degree contains 60 minutes of arc.
Each minute of arc contains 60 seconds of arc.
So we're talking less than one arc minute per century is the discrepancy here.
And after the success in predicting Neptune, it was very hard to doubt Newton's law of
gravity.
So what are you going to do?
After seeing a change in the solar system, you're going to predict that there's a planet
causing it.
None other than Urban Leveret himself predicted a planet interior to Mercury that could cause
this shift in Mercury's orbit.
Actually Leveret found that a swarm of planets, a swarm of about 20 planets interior to Mercury
would be the best fit to causing the shift in Mercury's orbit without causing a shift
in Venus's orbit.
One observer actually claimed to have seen such a planet transit across the face of the
sun and he called it the planet Vulcan.
So yes, the planet Vulcan not only exists in Star Trek, it also exists in your history
book.
Unfortunately, this observation was never confirmed.
Vulcan was never again seen in transit.
And when there were solar eclipses, there are expeditions launched to find it and it
was never observed during solar eclipses.
The only thing that was keeping the planet Vulcan alive was the fact that it had Leveret's
name on the prediction.
So after Leveret died in 1877, the idea faded away.
However, the problem with Mercury's orbit did not.
Next forward to 1916, Einstein's general theory of relativity is published in this year.
And to give you a three word summary of general relativity, mass warps space.
This is the idea that the presence of mass changes the fabric of space time.
In this illustration, the blue grid is supposed to represent the fabric of space time and
the yellow ball is supposed to represent the mass of the sun.
And the mass of the sun warps space so it's no longer flat.
Gravity is no longer a force, but it's reinterpreted as geometry as the curvature of space.
So if you have a flat space, the normal motion through it is a straight line.
But if you have a curved space, the normal motion through it would be an orbit.
The analogy I like to give is sort of think of a water bed.
What if you take a bowling ball and place it in the center of a water bed?
You're going to warp the surface of the water bed.
Without the bowling ball in the water bed, you could roll a BB straight across it and
it would travel in a straight line.
But with the bowling ball in the center of the water bed, as you roll the BB across it,
it will go down into the depression made by the bowling ball and it will have a curved
path through a curved space.
For this diagram, you can see the depression made in the fabric of space time by the mass
of the sun and the planets would be rolling around the interior of that depression in
an orbit.
So as one physicist put it, mass tells space how to curve and curved space tells mass
how to move.
General relativity was able to explain the extra procession of Mercury's orbit because
general relativity extends Newton gravity to handle realms with their very large masses.
Mercury is the only planet close enough to the sun to show these effects.
So the planet Vulcan finally disappeared in 1916 and it disappeared into the equations
of general relativity.
In this lecture, we have gone through three different examples of planet predictions with
three different outcomes.
When we looked at the Tysiaspode rule, it started to look like a law but ended up looking
like a numerical coincidence.
The Neptune prediction started out by a challenge to Newton's law of gravity and ended up with
a triumphant verification of Newton's law of gravity.
The discrepancy in the orbit of Mercury, while possibly indicating new planets, actually
indicated new physics.
This is a challenge in science that we don't know which hypotheses will pan out.
Where do we put our efforts?
There's always a number of really interesting ideas to pursue.
Which ones will turn out to be coincidences and which one will lead you to new discoveries?
We don't know those things.
So if we answer the question that we posed at the beginning.
What is the difference between hypothesis and theory?
The answer is simply years and years of confirming our observations, a lot of hard work.
That's it for today and we'll see you next time.
