In teaching science, we tend to celebrate the discoveries, Galileo spying the moons of
Jupiter, Cassini finding details in the rings of Saturn, or Herschel discovering Uranus.
We have it a habit of focusing on individual achievements, like Tommy's Geocentric Model,
or Copernicus' Helicentric Model, or Newton's Law of Gravity, and in doing this, we can
lose sight of the huge swath of general development in the field.
The field is continually advancing, and these advances provide the foundation for the discoveries.
One famously once said, if I have seen further, it is because I have stood on the shoulders
of giants.
The milestones are the end products of a long chain of evidence and argument.
And astronomy, this is particularly true.
The results can depend on data taken decades or even centuries earlier.
The Varier and Adams made predictions of Neptune, but they could not have been made without
Flamsteed's surveys over 100 years earlier.
Further, as the field has developed, specialization within the field has also developed.
Building telescopes, devising cameras and instruments, making observations, analyzing
the data, interpreting the results as physical theory, these are all subspecialties of astronomy
that are almost fields unto themselves.
Neptune is now required for discovery.
Remember that the Varier and Adams could predict Neptune, but neither one of them had
the skills to go to the telescope and actually do the search themselves.
So the sort of romantic ideal we have in our society of the lone astronomer, a lone on
the mountaintop, in a solo search for truth, well, that hasn't been true for hundreds
of years.
And in this lecture, I want to focus on the data gathering, the wide range of observations
that are necessary and how they enable breakthroughs in astronomy.
To start, let's look at astronomy before telescopes.
This was mostly concerned with positional astronomy or what we call astrometry.
Now our astrometry is basically defined, is initially defined, I should say, by the sun
and the stars.
If we look at the sun, here's a wonderful time-lapse image of the sun and you can see
it goes across the sky once per day.
This defines our day.
The meridian line, which is the line from north to south, is our local noon.
And we define one day from when the sun goes from meridian to the next time it crosses the
meridian.
The sun motion also varies over the year.
This is a wonderful image and it's called an analemma.
It's a picture of the sun taken at the same time every day over a year, well, not every
day, it looks like about 30 different days over the year.
And you can see it forms this very nice shape that it's highest in the sky in the summer
and it's lowest in the sky during the winter.
And that fits because we have longer days in the summer and shorter days in the winter.
But the side to side shape shows you that the solar day is not constant.
It's not always 24 hours, sometimes it's a little bit more, sometimes it's a little
bit less.
24 hours is just the average solar day.
When we look at the stars at night, we take a similar time-lapse image, we can see that
they also show circles on the sky.
But the star motion is slightly different from the sun motion.
The time between meridian crossings for the stars is 23 hours 56 minutes and we call this
a sidereal day and it's the reason why there are different constellations of stars appearing
in the evening at different times of the year.
For example Orion, that is a constellation we in the northern hemisphere know as a winter
constellation.
We speak of the summer triangle.
If I see the great square in Pegasus up in the evening, I know it must be fall.
The stars can serve as a reference frame for the other motions.
If you look at the solar versus the sidereal day, there's a four minute difference and
over a year it adds up to an extra rotation for the stars.
That extra rotation is just due to the Earth's orbit around the sun.
Alternatively you can think of the sun moving through the stars once per year and this is
actually the derivation of how we get 360 degrees in a circle.
The Babylonians noticed that the sun moves about one degree per day.
You can see that it's really 365, 365th of a circle per day, but 360 was a very nice
multiple being a multiple of two, three, four, five, six and so on.
So they use 360 degrees in a circle.
When we look at the sun over the course of a year, it moves across the sky against the
background stars and in this image you can see that the path it takes goes against various
constellations.
These are the constellations we know as the constellations of the zodiac and the path
it traces out across the sky is called the ecliptic.
Now the coordinates on the sky are based on the idea of a celestial sphere.
On Earth we think of lines of latitude and longitude.
These are lines of latitude on Earth, the lines of latitude run around the globe and
they're measured from the equator.
We have the northern latitudes and we have the southern latitudes.
Conversely, these are the lines of longitude on Earth.
The lines of longitude run pole to pole and they are north-south lines so they are meridian
lines.
The zero point is called the prime meridian and it's arbitrarily defined to run through
Greenwich, England.
So the coordinates on Earth are defined like this.
We have the line from the north pole to the south pole going through the Greenwich meridian
as our zero point of longitude and our longitude is measured in an angle with respect to that
and then with respect to the equator we measure our latitude upward.
The same coordinate system is used for the celestial sphere but instead latitude becomes
a measure called declination and longitude becomes a measure called right ascension.
We have on the celestial sphere a northern celestial pole and a southern celestial pole.
The zero point of declination is still the celestial equator and things are measured
north-south from the celestial equator but the zero point of right ascension is where
the equator and the ecliptic intersect and that is the vernal equinox when the sun burns
and passes through the equator going northward in the spring.
So the right ascension is measured with respect to the vernal equinox.
Now the declination is measured in degrees, minutes and seconds but right ascension is
measured in hours, minutes and seconds and to understand that you have to understand
a little bit of observing.
This image here is of the famous observer Tico Brahe.
This is his great mural quadrant and you can see that what you would do with it is that
you would align it along your meridian, the north-south line and you can see the angular
measures along it and you would use it to measure the angle above the horizon of a star
or planet as it crosses the meridian.
This was one of the greatest astronomical instruments before the invention of the telescope
and really basically just a great big protractor.
You would also measure the time of crossing of the meridian and it was easier to measure
the time than any angle with respect to the prime meridian so that time became the convenient
unit for measuring right ascension.
Today however we find it to be an annoyance and we generally take our right ascension
measures and convert them to degrees.
The star positions are the basis for our measurements on the sky and really although
you hear a lot about constellations those really don't matter much to astronomers.
They are just geographical markers on the sky.
With your using the human eye to look at the sky they are familiar reference patterns
but they are not much help in how we do our orientation for professional astronomy.
So to use the stars as a reference system it's an important job to define a catalog
of star positions.
You need to have some known stars against which you can measure other things.
The position of all other stars would be measured relative to those known stars.
A strometry is when you are able to obtain a global solution of star positions.
You have your set of known star positions, you measure those star positions relative
to one another and in fact your known star positions end up being measured relative to
one another.
You can only measure relative star positions, you can't see the entire sky at once and
so the absolute solution across the whole sky must be calculated.
You need to use large surveys and large catalogs.
These are required just to define the coordinate system on the sky.
One thing that we found out when we started creating these catalogs was that the positions
of the stars were changing.
Now you might think this is natural, maybe the stars are actually just moving.
Well yes that's true they are moving but what really was moving was the vernal equinox.
The zero point of our coordinate system was changing and this was due to the procession
of Earth's rotation.
Now if I spin this top here you can see that its axis is wobbling.
It's spinning around but the axis which it's spinning around is wobbling around.
Earth is also spinning on its axis and its axis is also wobbling.
This is the procession of Earth's rotation axis and it causes a change in where the celestial
pole points on the sky.
This diagram shows the circle with which the north pole, the north celestial pole moves
throughout the sky.
Currently it's right near Polaris.
Polaris called the pole star but about 4,000 years ago it was near the star Thuban and
in about oh what 5,000 years from now it will be near the star Alderamin and in almost 10,000
years it will be near the star Vega.
Now when the pole is over near Vega it's going to look kind of stupid to have a star named
Polaris that's going to be several many degrees away from the pole but that's what Earth's
axis does.
Over 26,000 years it rotates around the sky.
This procession means that the coordinates we give a star needs to be tagged with a date
because the coordinates are relative to a defined equinox and the equinox is changing.
For my work I've had to deal with B1950 coordinates or J2000 coordinates and these are the coordinates
relative to the 1950 equinox or the 2000 equinox.
Now I'm about to tell you something that says sort of like what I just said was a lie because
recently we switched out of that coordinate system.
You need to know the idea of procession of the equinoxes because it's true and it happens
but our coordinate system has recently become rationalized.
We switched to something called ICRS, the International Celestial Reference System and
it was defined to match the J2000 equinox but it's going to retain fixed axes in space.
So even though the North Pole will not point to Polaris in a few thousand years the coordinates
of Polaris will not change because the orientation of ICRS is defined by some very distant radio
sources.
There are about 212 defining sources and they're mainly quasars that are way, way, way across
the universe and won't change their position relative to us.
So we're no longer truly using the sun or stars to define our coordinate system even
though historically that's the way they have been defined.
Well that completes a summary of the pre-telescopic concepts.
Now let's turn to how telescopes extend our capabilities.
Telescopes help us see objects that are small, faint and far away and there are two basic
types of telescopes, refractors and reflectors.
The refractors use lenses to collect and focus light.
The classical idea of a telescope would be a spyglass.
You have a spyglass, it has a lens at one end and a lens at the other end and you're
used to seeing people look through it.
Well that's the sort of telescope that Galileo used, only his was about 40 inches long.
It had a lens at one end to collect the light and a lens at the other end to focus the light
and look through it.
The largest refractors are limited by various factors, one being the length of the telescope.
It was hard for Galileo, you could not hold a 40 inch telescope steady, you of course
had to put it on a tripod.
You kind of get even larger ones, you have to have very large mounts.
They're also limited by the size of the lens, how big of a glass piece of glass you could
create.
The optical quality of that lens, can you keep a large piece of glass with a very clear
quality through it and the weight of the glass.
Once you get a piece of glass pretty big, this big, it starts to sag under its own weight.
This image here is an image of the Yerkes 40 inch telescope.
Now it's not 40 inches long, it's actually the lens at the end of it is 40 inches and
it's 62 feet long, it is the largest refracting telescope in the world.
The lens is 40 inches across and weighs a thousand pounds.
To give you a sense of scale, here's a picture of some famous astronomers at the Yerkes
telescope and you can look at it, you can definitely see that a lone astronomer could
not operate this telescope on his own, you definitely need somebody else to help you
run this telescope.
The second type of telescope, reflectors, use mirrors to gather light.
This idea actually originated with Isaac Newton.
He was frustrated with the quality of images you got from a refracting telescope and decided
to try using mirrors to gather the light.
This is a basic diagram of a reflecting telescope and the light comes in the barrel down here,
reflects off the mirror, comes back up to the secondary mirror here and goes out through
the eyepiece.
So this is the primary mirror at the bottom and the secondary mirror up here in the tube.
This allows you to collect light more efficiently because mirrors bounce the light and they
also do not suffer from chromatic aberration, which is one of the main problems that Newton
was trying to solve, that the different wavelengths of light are refracted slightly differently
in a lens, whereas they are handled equally by a reflecting telescope.
The other interesting fact about these telescopes is you'll notice this secondary mirror just
hanging out here in the middle of the tube.
Something has to hold up that secondary mirror and usually you have some struts holding
the secondary mirror.
Those struts are the source of all these diffraction spikes on stars when you see them in telescope
images.
All of these crosses that you see are really diffraction around the struts holding up the
secondary mirror of the telescope.
The largest reflectors are limited basically by the size of the mirror.
You can build a cabinet to hold the telescope as almost as large as you want, depending
upon the machineries you've got, but you're really limited by the size of the mirror you
can make and of course by the optical quality of the mirror, but we're really good at making
very good mirrors.
This image here is the Lord Ross 72 inch telescope.
It's nicknamed the Leviathan.
It's 58 feet long and a 6 foot mirror.
The mirror itself weighs three and a half tons.
It was quite unwieldy, but they devised a novel way of mounting it so that they could
make use for it.
It was not able to point anywhere across the sky, instead these walls were constructed
around it and it mostly pointed north and south and you can get stars about one hour
of right ascension before meridian and one hour of right ascension after the meridian.
The mirror on this telescope was quite large and this is an image of the Palomar 200 inch
mirror, one of the largest mirrors ever made and they were taking this mirror off from the
telescope in order to polish it and you can't really get a sense of scale from here, but
while they are polishing it they took a picture of it and you can see just how large this
mirror is.
Every few years they have to take it down and repolish it, so this is the 200 inch mirror
at Palomar.
The telescope characteristics determine the usefulness of the telescope for scientific
research and there are several that are the most important.
The first is the magnification or the resolving power.
This is your ability to see fine details and it's measured in the smallest angle that
can be resolved.
For comparison, the human eye can resolve details about as fine as one arc minute, remembering
that there are 360 degrees in a circle, 60 arc minutes in a degree and 60 arc seconds
in an arc minute, so the human eye can see about one arc minute and telescopes are generally
measured in arc seconds.
For ground based telescopes, it really doesn't pay to try and build a telescope that can
get better resolution than that because you would be limited by the sky.
When we have twinkle twinkle little star, makes the stars beautiful, but it drives across
astronomers crazy because that scattering of the light blurs the light from distant objects
and we can't really get from the ground much better than about one arc second unless we
use some special techniques.
The second characteristic of a telescope is its light gathering power and this is mainly
just determined by the size of its primary lens or primary mirror.
The more light you gather, the fainter objects you can see and these fainter objects are
generally more distant objects.
The third characteristic would be the quality of the optical path.
You see every time light refracts or reflects, some of the light is scattered and you need
high quality optics to both focus the light cleanly and to retain as much of the light
as possible.
You're building a giant telescope in order to collect those valuable photons from these
very distant objects and you want to make sure the optical path is as clean as you can
get it so you retain as much light as possible for your research.
The craftsmanship in building telescopes has become a very important factor in scientific
discovery.
It has been shown throughout history that access to the best and largest telescopes
has enabled new discoveries.
Galileo improved the idea of a spyglass and was immediately able to see things that no
one else had ever seen.
William Herschel built the finest reflectors of his time and allowed an amateur astronomer
who was not a professional to discover Uranus.
He could see stars that some of the professionals could not see.
The telescope makers have become an important branch of astronomers and contribute greatly
to the research discoveries.
It's also important how you use the telescope.
While individual discoveries are trumpeted, I would argue that science benefits more
from general surveys.
Studies establish a reference set of knowledge against which future observations can be compared
and you don't know the benefits of it while you're doing the survey.
Herschel found Uranus while doing a survey and a search of previous surveys finds more
observations of Uranus and then we identify the problem with Uranus's orbit and that
leads to the discovery of Neptune.
What's further, Neptune's discovery was aided by a recent accurate star map that allowed
them to find, hey, this star is not on the map.
So while the survey work may be unglamorous, it's long, it's painstaking observations and
you may not see immediate benefits, the surveys are very important because the benefits extend
throughout history and often surveys that are done for one purpose end up being used
for different unrelated research.
Now sorting through an entire survey can be somewhat like looking for a needle in a haystack.
Another standard approach that we use is the targeted search.
We'll use a survey to develop a list of candidates and then use follow-up observations on those
candidates.
In fact, many surveys these days are not really for the general good of astronomy, they're
primarily to find candidates for follow-up study.
We can also limit the data that we're looking through by searching one small area of the
sky.
If we look through that one small area thoroughly and we do all our research there, we can get
detailed results.
But of course that means we then have to assume that that area of the sky is a representative
sample of the sky and we have to then extrapolate the results from one region to the whole region
of the sky.
For solar system objects, one search technique that works well is to search the area of the
sky that is opposite the sun.
If the sun is over here, we're going to examine this part over here.
And what we're going to look for is retrograde motion because if there's a solar system object
at opposition outside the earth, it will be going through retrograde motion.
And by looking in that over the course of a year, we sweep through the ecliptic.
Finally, and this is probably the most surprising point that I will make today, telescopes really
don't matter that much anymore.
I know I'm speaking crazy here now, but really matters when we go to a telescope is the instruments
that we put on the telescope that process and analyze the light.
The telescope's primary job is just to gather a lot of light.
And we've got really good telescopes for doing that.
And now what differentiates different observatories is the instruments that we put on them that
enable the deep research.
So let's go through a few examples of the instruments.
The simplest instrument would be a prism.
And here's a picture of a prism where the light comes in one side and it's broken into
its constituent colors on the other side.
This allows us to look at the light of a star or other object and examine each color separately.
And prisms are really just a basic idea of how we disperse light into its component colors.
They're also diffraction gratings and many other methods for looking at the dispersion
of light.
When you disperse the light far enough, you can actually see lines in the spectrum.
In this diagram, this drawing really, the light from a star comes through a prism and
then is dispersed out and you can see within the component colors, there are lines across
it.
These are called spectral lines and these are the absorption of specific elements.
As electrons change levels within the elements, they absorb specific wavelengths of light
and that reveals the chemical composition.
If we look at stars, this is a group of stellar spectra and each of these spectra across here
for the various stars shows you various spectral lines.
Some of the spectral lines are the same.
For example, this hydrogen delta line appears in the top three spectra.
Some of them are different.
What's fascinating is that we can actually study the makeup of stars by their light.
We can study what's in a star even though we can't bring it into the laboratory and
dissect it and take it apart.
What's also interesting is that we can discover new elements.
The element helium was discovered in the spectrum of the sun, helios meaning of course sun.
Another instrument that we use all the time in astronomy is photography.
Photography was a major advance for astronomy because it allowed us to accumulate light.
The human eye, when you look at something, only accumulates light for about a 30th of
a second.
You can tell this is the secret why movies work, because movies are just a sequence of
images playing through a projector and they're played at about 24 frames a second.
When you play the images through fast enough, they look continuous to the human eye.
When we look at a distant object through a telescope with the human eye, we're only
seeing one 30th of a second of that light.
If we want to see fainter details, we need to record that light.
And so as an example, let's take a look at this image sequence.
This is an image of an object, a one minute exposure.
Taking a one minute exposure, it looks like this and it's sort of a blobby thing.
If we expose instead for five minutes, we see a little bit more detail.
For 30 minutes, we see a lot more detail and for 45 minutes, we can recognize it as the
Andromeda galaxy.
You need to use short exposures to expose the bright regions and long exposures to see
the faint regions.
The telescope expanded what the human eye could see in terms of the size domain, how
much light we could gather, and photography expands what we can see in the time domain,
how long we can gather that light.
Many other specialized devices have been employed for astronomy.
One example that I will go through is the blink comparator.
And it allows you to quickly switch between two observations.
This is an image of Clyde Tombaugh using the Zeiss blink comparator at the Lowell Observatory.
The lever that he's holding allows him to switch between one image to another image.
And what Tombaugh did is he would take images of the same part of the sky on separate days
and then pull them into the blink comparator and look for things that moved.
This was in the great search to find Pluto.
These are actually the images that Tombaugh blinked in order to find Pluto.
And this was one image he took on January 23rd, 1930.
And this is an image he took on January 29th, 1930.
And if I go back and forth between them and you look really closely, you can see things
moving there.
Now it's kind of hard to see them because at this resolution they're very small.
But I put red boxes around about 10 objects where I see things moving between the two
images.
And if I blink back and forth, we can say, OK, the 23rd and the 30th, the 23rd and the
30th, the 23rd and the 30th.
And you can see several of those objects moving.
Which one is Pluto?
Well, Pluto is this one here and that one there.
How did he find it?
It's the one undergoing retrograde motion at opposition.
So astronomy has developed many different specialties.
Building and running an observatory requires a dedicated team of people.
The design and fabrication of sensitive instruments demand specialized talent.
Professional astronomers must be careful and patient.
And those who interpret those observations and speculate about their physical basis,
those are the ones we call theorists.
By its nature, astronomy has become a collaborative enterprise.
And it is excellence across all these aspects of astronomy that generally what leads to
scientific advance.
That's it for today.
We'll see you next time.
