October 4th, 1957.
This was the beep heard round the world.
The Soviet Union had launched Sputnik 1, an 84-pound satellite, just a 23-inch sphere,
but it orbited Earth every 98 minutes for 22 days.
The beeping could be heard by amateur radio operators, and it spread the immediate message that the space age had begun.
For astronomy, no other event in history changed our view of the solar system like the ability to explore it.
It is not a coincidence that NASA was founded almost a year to the day after Sputnik 1 launched.
Considering the magnitude of the knowledge explosion that happens during the space age,
it's helpful to explore what we knew at the dawn of the space age,
and take a look at the technological advances that would enable a plethora of new discoveries.
By the mid-1900s, our model of the solar system was well established.
There was the Sun, the nine planets, remember Pluto was still a planet back then,
there are moons, some asteroids, and some comets.
And most folks' idea of the solar system was one of the orbits of the planets around the Sun.
I have an interactive 3D program here that I can use to illustrate this idea.
We start by looking at the orbits of the inner planets, the rocky planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars,
and you can see that they are ellipses, or nearly circular ellipses, around the Sun.
The rocky planets are in close, but if I back away, you can begin to see the outer planets and Pluto.
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, and you can see that Pluto's orbit looks like it crosses Neptune's orbit,
but that's really just a projection effect.
It's a highly inclined orbit, and if I put things edge on, you can see that the four giant planets lie mostly in a plane,
while Pluto lies distinctly out of that plane.
If I wiggle it back and forth just a little, you can see that Pluto's orbit doesn't really cross Neptune's orbit.
It is totally distinct from Neptune's orbit.
Let's go back into the inner planets, and you can see that they too lie in a plane,
so all of the planets basically lie in the same plane as Earth's orbit.
If I go back to the face-on view and turn on time, you can see that Mercury orbits much faster than Venus,
which orbits faster than Earth, which orbits faster than Mars.
This is the Keplerian motion that comes from universal law of gravitation.
As we go out, you can see the same thing is true for Jupiter, and we turn on time a little faster here.
Jupiter moves faster than Saturn, we move faster than Uranus, we move faster than Neptune, and slowest of all is Pluto.
The planets orbit in time scales of a few months for Mercury, up to a few centuries for Pluto.
Now, what that interactive couldn't show you was the size scale of these objects,
and the size scale of the solar system is really vast.
It's almost too vast to be comprehensible, so I like to shrink the solar system down to a manageable size scale in order to understand it.
My favorite comparison is what if the Sun were the size of a basketball?
Standard basketball is 9 inches across.
Well then, what would be the sizes of the planets?
Jupiter would be a sphere about 1 inch in diameter.
Saturn would be about 3 quarters an inch, or 2 centimeters.
Uranus and Neptune are both about a third of an inch across, or a little less than a centimeter.
Earth is very small, and it's only 2 millimeters in size.
Actually, I had to put it inside some pieces of tape, otherwise I would lose it, because it's so small.
That is the true size of our planet compared to a basketball Sun.
It's really only about the size of these little nibs, these tacky nibs to give you a grip on the basketball.
Venus is about the same size as Earth, again, 2 millimeters in size.
Once you get smaller than that, I couldn't find any spheres to fit things.
So, for Mars, I found a large paperclip, and if you hold it up edge on, that's about the size of Mars.
Mars is only 1 millimeter in diameter in this scale model.
Mercury, well that's about the size of a small paperclip, a normal paperclip.
It's less than a millimeter in size.
And finally, Pluto. Pluto is so small that the only thing I could find was a piece of pencil-led half a millimeter in diameter.
That's really small.
So, that's it. That's the scale of the solar system.
You know, a basketball Sun, you've got a 1 inch Jupiter, all the way down to a half millimeter size Pluto.
From this, you can easily see that the Sun contains 99.86% of all the mass in the solar system.
Basically, you can forget all this stuff. This is just flotsam and jetsam.
This is really the whole solar system.
Now, the natural question asked here is, how far away would I have to put these planets in order for them to be at the right distances?
In order to get enough space, I would have to use a football field.
Here is a diagram of this basketball Sun-based solar system laid out on a football field.
If the Sun is on the goal line, then our millimeter-sized Mercury is out at the 21-yard line.
Venus is out at the 39-yard line.
Earth is across midfield at the opponent's 46-yard line, and Mars is all the way 80 yards away on the opponent's 20-yard line.
These tiny millimeter-sized objects are spread out across the length of a football field.
When you go out to the outer solar system, then you're going much further away,
and our 1 inch Jupiter is more than two and a half football fields away.
Three-quarter inch Saturn, five football fields away.
Uranus is a bit less than a kilometer, and Neptune is a little less than a mile.
Pluto, which is only half a millimeter in diameter, is over two kilometers away from this basketball-sized Sun.
So you have to try to imagine that.
For four kilometers across, there is just one basketball, a couple big-sized marbles, a couple small marbles,
some really tiny BBs, and then a bunch of really small things, and even smaller than that.
Then there are the asteroids and comets, which are there just flotsam and jessem.
They don't even add up to a good small moon.
The solar system is really mostly empty space.
It's really kind of amazing that we've actually been able to traverse it.
With space age, we were able to extend across the solar system.
How do we do that?
Well, with a lot of technology.
Technology has really brought about a revolution in our ability to observe and understand the solar system.
Some of this technology allowed us to build telescopes in other wavelengths of light.
You see, we see visible light, but visible light is just a tiny fraction of the full electromagnetic spectrum.
Visible light is depicted here in the middle of the electromagnetic spectrum, and it has a small range in the middle,
but extending on to very long wavelengths, we have radio light, microwave light, and infrared light.
And going to shorter wavelengths, we have ultraviolet light, X-ray light, and gamma ray light.
Light is really just the same phenomenon, whether it's gamma ray light or radio light.
It just has different wavelengths, and that's what this wave is supposed to depict here in the middle of the diagram.
The wavelengths for gamma ray go all the way down to 10 to the minus 13th of a centimeter,
whereas wavelengths for radio light go on up to a kilometer or larger, so it expands a huge range.
And visible light is just about a factor of two, a very small region right in here in the center of that.
When we use telescopes in these other wavelengths, we see a lot more of the universe.
For example, when we look at Venus in visible light, it's rather bland.
It's kind of boring because it's entirely cloud covered, and it really just reflects most of it's light back to space in the visible.
But if you use ultraviolet light, you're able to see through those clouds and actually start to see structure in the atmosphere of Venus.
This image here I know has to be in ultraviolet light because I can see the cloud structure in the atmosphere of Venus.
If we look at the sun in visible light, again, like Venus, it looks a little bit bland.
It's basically a nice smooth sphere, and maybe it has a few dots on it, the sunspots on it.
These don't look terribly impressive.
However, when you look at it in x-ray light, the sun comes alive.
Those sunspots are areas of fierce magnetic storms and are emitting huge amounts of energy in ultraviolet and x-ray light.
By studying all the different wavelengths of light, it gives astronomers a more complete picture of the physical processes taking place in our universe.
Another major technology that has helped astronomy is digital technology, computers.
When we used photographs for astronomy, there were an analog medium.
The emulsions of a photograph respond in a complex way to the amount of light that is absorbed.
Because when a photograph absorbs twice as many photons of light, it's not necessarily going to be twice as bright.
And as astronomers, we need to know how much light had been absorbed from an object in order to understand it.
So we had to measure what we call the response curve of a photographic emulsion.
When we moved to digital images, we bypassed that and were able to get a quantified numerical measure of the light received.
We use something called CCDs. It stands for Charge Coupled Devices.
These are the same things that are in your digital camera.
You might even have a digital camera on your phone these days.
Well, astronomers have been using CCDs for about 20 years.
And they were actually an important secondary market for the makers of CCDs.
So astronomers in a way helped bring about the camera that you may have in your phone today.
And once our data has been recorded digitally, we have it available for computer processing.
And that can bring out details that are impossible to extract from a photograph.
Now, for example, this is an image of a nebula.
And it is done at a low stretch so that we can see the details in the very bright regions in the center of it.
If instead, I computer processed it to bring out the faint details, while the central region will be overblown,
but I could see the details in the outer region, you see how much nebula there really is.
We can then work with it to try and come up with a balanced stretch digitally and come up with an image like this.
We can also take multiple images of it and digitally combine them together
so that we can get a color composite of various wavelengths.
Looking at it in different filters, red, blue and green,
also filters that respond to different hydrogen atoms or calcium atoms or helium atoms.
And you can get a wonderful color picture like this.
Using computers also opens up ideas for using simulations.
We have supercomputers that can process data very quickly
and we can take ideas that we could never observe in nature and simulate them on a computer.
For example, there are two images of a galaxy collision sequence.
In the top image, you see the two galaxies before they've collided.
They're trapped in each other's gravity and they're about to smash through one another.
The bottom image shows the computer simulation after the two galaxies have collided.
This simulation was run on a supercomputer about a decade ago and took about a week's worth of calculation time.
In nature, the process would have taken about a billion years,
but we can simulate it on the computer and study it.
Now, I know this is a course in the solar system and these galaxies aren't part of the solar system,
but trust me when I say we use computer simulation all the time in solar system objects as well,
specifically for calculating orbits and observing the stability of the orbits within the solar system.
Computers are also very useful in working with our telescopes.
A computer-controlled telescope are easier to operate.
They can be larger and they can be more accurate.
Matter of fact, professional astronomers never move a telescope anymore.
For one, there are telescope operators on the mountain.
And number two, even the telescope operators don't move those big telescopes anymore
because they're all controlled by computers.
And sometimes you don't even have to go to the mountain.
Sometimes you can actually control the computer over the internet
and you don't even have to leave your research institution.
As an example of telescopes that are heavily controlled by computers,
let's look at the Twin Keck Telescopes.
Here they are on the summit of Mauna Kea in Hawaii.
The Keck Telescopes are 10-meter reflecting telescopes.
But 10 meters is larger than the largest piece of glass we can make for a mirror.
How do they do that?
Well, the Keck Telescopes are actually a segmented mirror.
In this image, you can see the mirror stretching 10 meters across.
And I've overlaid these hexagons to show you the segments of the mirror.
There are actually 36 hexagonal segments that build up this entire mirror.
Behind each mirror, there are sensors and actuators.
And twice a second, computers line up the edges between those segments.
The edges have to be lined up to a very precise amount
because we have to get down below the wavelength of light.
They are lined up to 4 nanometers twice a second.
Without computers, the Keck Telescope would be impossible.
You can also use computers to link together telescopes.
And this is very common in radio observations.
Here we have a radio telescope array.
And each of these dishes is a radio telescope in itself.
But all of the radio telescopes in this long array are linked together by computers.
And all of their observations are brought into the central computer and correlated together.
And by combining the signals from all of them,
you effectively get one radio dish as large as the entire array.
What's even more impressive is that you can take an array here in the United States,
an array in Europe, an array in Australia, all around the world,
and tie them together.
And you effectively get a radio telescope as large as Earth.
This is being done, and it's called very long baseline interferometry.
They provide radio telescope observations that are the highest resolution that we can get.
As good as that is, it still helps to get off our planet and above our atmosphere.
Because Earth's atmosphere actually blocks most of the light reaching it.
As we can see in this diagram here,
the visible light is transmitted through Earth's atmosphere,
and radio waves mostly get through Earth's atmosphere.
Infrared light can be seen pretty well from mountaintops,
but most of the rest of the radiation doesn't get through our atmosphere.
Most of it absorbed either high in the atmosphere or about halfway down through the atmosphere.
Now, this may sound strange because we use sunblock to protect us from the UV radiation of the sun.
Not that much UV radiation is truly getting through.
If the complete amount of UV radiation was truly getting through,
we'd need some really serious sunblock.
The other thing Earth's atmosphere does is, of course, it distorts the light that does come through.
The observations we make from telescopes on the ground are a little bit blurry
because of the motions within Earth's atmosphere,
and we can really only see resolutions down to about one arc second on most telescopes on the ground.
So getting above Earth's atmosphere will enable us to see wavelengths that we can't see from the ground,
and it will also give us better observations in the wavelengths we can see.
The most famous satellite telescope is the Hubble Space Telescope.
Here it is shown in its orbit above the Earth.
It is about 360 miles above Earth, and if you look on this image, you can see along the Earth's atmosphere.
The atmosphere is only about 60 miles high, so Hubble skims along just above Earth's atmosphere.
We say that it's in low Earth orbit.
I often describe Hubble as having a bird's eye view because it's up high and it has very fine resolution.
Hubble not being limited by Earth's atmosphere has a resolution down as fine as one twentieth of an arc second.
This gives it the finest resolution in visible light of any telescope,
and most of the spectacular nature of the images from Hubble comes from this vantage point in space.
Now, this is low Earth orbit.
In contrast, the Spitzer Space Telescope is much farther away.
Instead of being hundreds of miles from Earth, it is tens of millions of miles from Earth.
It's actually farther from Earth than the Moon.
Spitzer is an infrared telescope, which you may know is associated with heat radiation.
And it is advantageous for Spitzer to be out at that distance so that it gets away from the heat of Earth.
Hubble and Spitzer are just two of NASA's great observatories.
The other two are the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory that observes in gamma rays, that's already completed its mission,
and the Chandra X-ray Observatory that observes in X-rays.
These are a suite of observatories placed in space to do general observing in four major wavelength bands.
But we also sent a fleet of other, more specialized observatories to look at the universe in many, many different wavelengths.
In this chart, we show many of the space missions that have been launched and the wavelength coverage that they've got.
We can see we have several missions out here in gamma rays, many in X-rays, some in UV, visible, or through the infrared microwave,
and we even have some radio telescopes in space.
These missions allow us to see the universe in new ways and in finer detail than we could from the ground.
Finally, beyond just looking at the universe, in the space age, we have gone there.
We have taken the next step and become explorers of our solar system.
We have manned and satellite missions that have gone across the solar system and uncovered details that enrich and have transformed our scientific views.
The most famous of these is, of course, the Apollo missions to the moon.
These Apollo missions transformed the moon into a real place and transformed humanity into adventurers across the universe.
Here's one of the most famous images.
This is Buzz Aldrin and the American flag on the moon, and it evokes sort of patriotic sense that we have conquered,
well, I don't think anyone thinks we've really conquered the moon, but at least we have conquered the way to get to the moon.
As an astronomer, there are two things I notice about this.
Well, three things, actually.
First is that the flag is being held up, all right?
That waving in the flag, that's not real, because the second thing I know about this is there's no atmosphere on the moon.
If you look beyond the horizon, it's pitch dark.
The third thing I notice about it is all these footprints down here.
And if you think about it, there is no atmosphere, there is no rain, there is no erosion on the moon, and those footprints are still there.
Those footprints will be there for billions of years.
Another thing as an astronomer that I like about the Apollo missions to the moon is not necessarily the pictures of the astronauts,
but they're the pictures of the moon itself.
This image of a crater taken from the Apollo orbiter somehow speaks to me.
It really brings up a visceral sense of the moon, and you've got this giant crater and all these small craters around it,
and I immediately start imagining the impact events that must have formed this surface.
To me, the close-up images that we have of the moon and all the other planets from our space missions have taken these places
and put them into my mind and provoked my imagination about what the universe is really like.
They give me, I don't know, texture to the solar system.
But even before we went to the moon, we started visiting other planets.
This image here is a drawing of the first interplanetary probe, Mariner 2.
It was launched August 27, 1962, on a mission to Venus.
It was followed by many other missions.
There were the Venera probes to Venus, which by the way landed on its surface, and then promptly melted,
because the temperatures on Venus are so hot.
There are the Mariner missions to Mercury, the Vikings missions to Mars, Galileo to Jupiter, Cassini to Saturn.
We even have the New Horizons mission going out to Pluto, and it'll get there around 2015.
There are two missions in particular that struck me as I was growing up.
The first one are the Voyager missions to the outer solar system.
Shown here in this diagram are the plots of the Voyager missions.
Voyager 1 went past Jupiter in 79 and Saturn in 80, and then continued on out of the solar system.
Voyager 2 followed shortly thereafter and continued on to visit Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989.
They took some amazing pictures of these planets.
They discovered moons and rings, and they transformed our ideas about the outer solar system.
It really ignited my imagination, and what's really nice about these Voyager missions is that they're still going.
They have exited the inner part of the solar system, and now they're about 100 AU away from the Sun,
and they're on what they call the Voyager interstellar mission.
In a few years, they're going to reach the edge of the solar wind and explore the heliopause.
These two small satellites, launched in the late 1970s, are still going 30 years later.
The other missions that really excited my imagination have been this fleet of Mars missions,
starting with Viking in the 70s and extending on through the several missions we have at Mars today.
We have orbited, we have landed, and we have explored the red planet.
This image here is one of the best images of Mars that we can get from Earth.
It's an image taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, and it's fantastic for an Earth-based image,
but if you really want something cool, well, we've been there.
This is a famous image called Twin Peaks, referring to the two peaks in the background,
and basically it looks like a rock garden on Mars.
It was taken by one of the rovers, and the rovers have moved throughout the landscape
and examined the geology and searched for water.
But more powerful is the infusion of this as a place into my imagination.
We have transformed those tiny spots of light that I've seen through telescopes
and made them into known worlds.
We have begun to explore our neighborhood and space, and it has become part of our thinking.
When historians write the history of the Solar System, they tend to focus on the Copernican Revolution.
It's often cited as, ah, the biggest change in our view of the Solar System,
that we went from the Earth-centered to the Sun-centered.
Ah, as an astronomer I have to disagree.
I think that the space age is the more important epoch.
The space age brought us new ways to observe the Solar System in more wavelengths and with bigger telescopes,
new ways to analyze with better data and faster processing,
and also a new way to explore both with robots and with our own eyes.
We have gone through the breadth of the Solar System.
This image here, very famous image, Earthrise, symbolizes the change in perspective.
When we as humans see our own planet rising and we see it in space as it truly is,
we no longer think of the system as out there.
It has become real, up here.
It has become part of our mental model, and we see our place in the Solar System anew.
The capabilities enabled by the space age have changed our perspective more than anything else in history.
And in the next several lectures, we will explore in detail the range of observations, ideas, and discoveries enabled by the space age.
Until then, have a wonderful day.
