Hi.
In this lecture, we're going to take a tour of the surfaces of the world in the solar
system.
Our focus will be on the rocky planets, but we'll also visit many of the larger moons.
We'll do this in the context of comparative planetology.
And in comparative planetology, we learn about other worlds by comparing their features
to those of Earth.
But we also learn about Earth by exploring the range of possibilities available in the
solar system and where our planet fits in.
Let's just jump right in.
We'll start with mountains.
Mountains are found on several worlds and each formed in a different way.
Here on Earth, if we look at the global map, we can see several very long mountain chains
such as along the west coast of the United States in North America and along the west
coast of South America.
If we look closer at South America, we can see the very long chain of the Andes Mountains
running all along its west coast.
This is a result of plate tectonics, where the oceanic plate of the Pacific has run
into the continental plate of South America.
This is not the highest mountain chain in the world.
The highest mountain chain in the world are the Himalayas.
And they're pictured here north of India.
And this is where two continental plates have collided, the Indian plate moving northward
smashing into the Asiatic plate and lifting up the Himalayas.
The highest mountain in the world is in the Himalayas and it's Mount Everest.
And here is Mount Everest rising high over the Tibetan Plateau and it reaches 28,000
feet high.
Mountains are not only on Earth, but they also exist on other worlds and here is an example
of a mountain on the moon.
Looks somewhat like that picture of Mount Everest.
But this is Mons Hadley Delta and this is the Apollo 15 mission.
And Mons Hadley Delta rises about 15,000 feet above the Lunar Mare where the astronauts
landed.
So mountains on the moon are similar in height to those of Earth.
Matter of fact, there's even a mountain chain.
If we back off a bit, we can see running right across the center of this image, the Apennine
chain of mountains on the moon or the Alps of the moon.
These are probably the mountains that Galileo saw when he first turned his telescope to
the heavens and was able to see that not all of the bodies of the heavens were perfect
spheres.
He could see the mountains on the moon and that violated the principles of Aristotelian
philosophy.
However, if you look even further out to the full moon, you can see that these mountains
are not the result of plate tectonics.
These mountains are actually just part of the rim of a very large crater.
The mountains on the moon are the result of impacts.
On Venus, we also have mountains and this is a topographic view of Venus from its north
pole where blue represents the lowland regions and white represents the high regions.
It's rather easy to pick out the highest region, it's down here, and if we zoom in
on it, it's called Laxmi Planum.
And the white region here is Maxwell-Montz.
Maxwell-Montz is the highest point on Venus, it's the tallest mountain on Venus.
It is also, coincidentally, the only feature on Venus that is named for a man.
It's named after James Clerk Maxwell, the man who derived the equations of electricity
and magnetism.
But every other feature on Venus is named for a woman, as you might expect.
Maxwell-Montz also did not form by plate tectonics, and it's not the result of impact, it's rather
result of compressional tectonics.
Venus is a single plate planet, instead of having multiple plates like Earth, it's one
plate over its entire surface.
But compression within that plate is what probably caused Maxwell-Montz to rise up
so high over the surface.
Next, let's explore volcanoes.
This activity is abundant in the solar system.
And on Earth, the most common form of volcano formation is when an oceanic plate hits another
plate and subducts underneath it.
The pressure created in the subduction zone sends magma to the surface and creates a volcano.
This volcano here is very recognizable, it's Mount St. Helens.
It is caused by the subduction of the Wanda-Fuka plate underneath the North American plate.
This image here shows Mount St. Helens as it was before its 1980 eruption.
And this image shows it after its eruption.
That is the definition of blowing your top.
These volcanic explosions can be incredibly powerful.
There are maybe a few thousand volcanoes across the surface of the globe, and they are generally
located on these plate boundaries.
When we think of volcanoes, we often think of the ring of fire around the Pacific Ocean,
where the Pacific plate meets the continental plates on either side.
Volcanoes are also observed on Venus.
This is Matt Mons, and it's one of about a thousand volcanoes on Venus.
I note that there isn't a ton of volcanic activity on Venus, because 85% of its surface
is covered by volcanic plains.
Venus also features a unique volcanic feature that appears nowhere else on any other planet.
This is Vahet Corona, and an oval-shaped volcanic uplift.
Apparently, there are these volcanic uplifts that take entire regions of Venus' surface
up, and then compress them back down.
And you can see all these fractures that form this oval-shaped region of the corona, and
this corona is about 200 kilometers across.
We get much more volcanic activity on Mars.
Here is one of the most volcanically active regions of Mars, it's the Tharsis uplift.
There are several very large shield volcanoes, three down here, and the largest one up here.
Shield volcanoes are created through very fluid lava that has been spewed out over a
very long period of time.
That's why these volcanoes are as large as they are.
How large, you may ask?
Well, this large one up here is called Olympus Mons, and here's a close-up of it.
Olympus Mons is by far the largest volcano in the solar system.
This volcano, by itself, is about the same size as the state of Arizona.
It's about 600 kilometers across.
In height, it's about 27 kilometers high.
And if I compare it to Mount Everest, the comparison looks like this.
Olympus Mons basically dwarfs Mount Everest.
It really does deserve the name Mount Olympus.
But Mars is not the most exciting place for volcanic activity in the solar system.
That claim goes to a large moon of Jupiter, Io.
This is what Io looks like on its surface.
And all of these pock marks are not, I don't know, they look like pimples or such.
They're actually volcanic regions.
It's literally covered with volcanoes, and they are continually erupting.
When the Galileo probe flew past it in April 2007, the region around the Palae volcano
looked like it did on the left.
And when it came past it again in September 2007, an entirely new volcano had erupted.
This incredible amount of volcanic activity is due to Io's elliptical orbit and Jupiter's
gravity.
As Io comes closer to Jupiter, its surface gets pulled in.
As it goes farther away, it flexes out.
And this flexion in and out of Io's surface creates the heat that causes the volcanic
activity.
Now normally this process should dissipate.
The process of surface flexion should help circularize the orbit.
But Io is in a resonance orbit with the other Galilean moons Europa and Ganymede, and they
keep Io on its orbit and maintain Io's volcanic activity.
One of my favorite images in all of astronomy is this.
Because the plumes of Io's volcanoes stretch so far up above its surface, you can see them
on the limb.
And here's a close-up of it.
It's just amazing to me to think on Earth, to get a plume that high, you would have to
be going, what, three or four hundred kilometers into the air.
And our volcanoes don't do anything like that.
Now this was one of my ultimate favorite images, but then the New Horizons missions went past
Jupiter and it got this sequence of five images of the Tavastar volcano on Io.
And you can see five images that show it erupting and the plume spreading out across Io.
Just an amazing sequence of images.
Next we'll turn to canyons.
Canyons are carved both by water and by geologic forces.
On Earth, the most impressive canyon is in Arizona.
Here is the view of the state of Arizona from space.
And if we look in the upper region, we can see the Grand Canyon.
It is stretches from the upper right along down through the center and wiggles around
and continues off to the left on this image.
The Grand Canyon is about 150 kilometers long and about two kilometers deep.
And it's been carved by the Colorado River over millions of years.
Now Venus has canyons as well and they're called chasma or plural chasmata.
In this image, all of the bright yellow regions across the center and curving over here around
on the right are these chasmata.
They are very deep, very narrow canyons that stretch for hundreds of kilometers.
They are not caused by water erosion.
Instead, they're caused by geologic faulting.
On Mars, we have perhaps the most impressive canyon in the solar system.
This is an image of Valles Marineris.
It is a very extensive canyon system on Mars and it shows both fault scarps and water erosion.
So it has both of the processes that we see on Earth and Venus occurring on Mars.
This canyon is so large that it can be seen when we take a picture of the entire globe.
Here is Mars and here is Valles Marineris.
It is roughly 4,000 miles long.
That is so long that if I compared it to the United States, it would stretch from California to New York.
The canyon is about seven kilometers deep and makes for a spectacular feature.
We have a wonderful movie that can take us on a fantasy trip through Valles Marineris.
This movie is based upon topographical data from the Mars Orbiter.
We begin on the western edge of Valles Marineris and then fly down the main canyon.
The canyon was originally created by earthquake faulting many billions of years ago.
As we come to the central region, it's a region called Melis Chasma.
You can see a lot of sediments there on the right.
I imagine an old ancient lake.
As we pass to the north, we pass over an ancient landslide and into another basin.
Notice the atmospheric effects on the sun.
They're rendered realistically so that it looks what it would look like on Mars.
One thing that is not realistic is the vertical exaggeration.
This is the same enhanced relief that you would find on a globe that has relief on it.
To pass to the northernmost wall of the canyon, you can see large landslides and examples of water
erosion that have widened the valley over time.
This really is a magnificent structure extending for hundreds and hundreds of kilometers across
the face of Mars.
Now they say they do things big in Texas, but considering Olympus Mons and Valles Marineris,
Texas ain't nothing compared to Mars.
Next, let's take a look at riverbeds.
Riverbeds provide existence of flowing liquids on many worlds.
On Earth, rivers provide distinctive and recognizable patterns.
We've already seen one example with the Colorado River in Grand Canyon.
We also see images that look something like this.
These are dendritic channels and are a drainage pattern coming from a river channel.
It's very similar to the same features that we see on Mars where we can see these same
dendritic-like channels and show evidence of water flow on Mars.
Not water flow currently, but water flow in the past.
And Valles Marineris, as you follow it down through to its end, you can see that water
once flowed along it.
There are many other features on Mars that show water flowing in the past, as well as
catastrophic releases, miniature floods on Mars.
But liquid water cannot exist on Mars' surface today.
Its atmosphere is too thin, and there's just simply not enough pressure to hold water in
its liquid form.
One place that's very surprising where we see these same riverbed channels is Saturn's
moon Titan.
These are methane channels on Titan, channels carved by liquid methane.
We have also seen methane lakes on the surface of Titan, although you wouldn't want to go
swimming in these lakes because methane is liquid at a temperature near minus 200 degrees
centigrade.
There are other riverbed-like features that appear on other planets.
Here is one on Venus, and we call it a sinuous channel.
It looks like a river, but it's really been created by a lava flow.
There is another one called the Hadley Reel on the moon.
The Hadley Reel was observed by the Apollo 15 astronauts.
In matter of fact, if you follow the Reel to the north, right about here around the
bend of the Apollo 15 landing site was up in here.
And this mountain right here is Mon's Hadley Delta that we showed you before.
The astronauts took the rover out to explore the Hadley Reel, and you can see what it looks
like from the ground.
Basically what it is is a collapsed lava tube that once flowed across the moon.
The next topic to take a look at are geysers.
They can spew a variety of substances.
On Earth, the most famous geyser is this one, Old Faithful in Yellowstone National Park.
It erupts for a few minutes on average every hour and a half, and it is one of about 300
geysers in Yellowstone Park.
Matter of fact, nearly half of all the geysers in the world are in Yellowstone Park.
Geysers are geologic features that release heated water from beneath the surface.
Ground water makes its way down through the rocks of the crust, reaches the magma underneath
it, heats up, and is periodically released.
These are rare features that exist only in very specific spots on our planet.
But we also see geyser-like features elsewhere in the solar system.
This is Neptune's largest moon Triton, and on the upper half of this image you see what
they call the catalope terrain.
Triton is extremely cold, it's out at the edge of the solar system, and its surface
is covered with ice.
In the bottom half, you can see streaks of black, let me zoom in on these, these streaks
of black look like they're all streaming away from the South Pole of Triton.
Triton does have a very, very thin atmosphere, and what we have determined these black streaks
are, are methane fountains, liquid methane spewing up from the interior of Triton, and
being blown back by very, very thin winds moving from Triton's South Pole away.
These methane fountains rise nearly 8 kilometers into the air before being streamed back, and
are carried back by the thermal currents.
There is another moon that has even more impressive fountains.
This is Saturn's moon Enceladus, now Enceladus is a rather small icy moon, not a particularly
important moon, except for these fountains.
It orbits about twice the distance from Saturn as the main rings of Saturn, so the rings
end about here, and Enceladus is way out here.
The important surface feature of Enceladus are these cracks in the south, they call them
the tiger stripes, they're very deep crevices into the surface of Enceladus, and for some
reason they seem to be heated.
We're not exactly sure why they're heated, but they do seem to have excess heat associated
with these tiger stripes.
That extra heat appears to power some ice fountains.
Here is an image of Enceladus that is backlit, and down the bottom here you can see just
these wispy fountains coming off the bottom part of Enceladus.
Perhaps these tiger stripes are heated by tidal heating like Io, but we're really not
sure.
The interesting thing is this may indicate the presence of liquid water just below the
surface of Enceladus, again we're not sure.
The one thing we are sure of is that these fountains contribute to and may even be the
main source of the faint E-ring of Saturn.
Saturn has some very bright main rings, but it also has some very faint rings on the outer
part of it, and Enceladus may be the main source of one of its outermost rings.
Next thing to look at, polar ice caps.
These exist on both Earth and Mars, and they grow and shrink with the seasons.
Now Earth has ice covered poles, simply because they receive less sunlight.
It's colder at the poles.
Earth also has a 23.5 degree tilt.
So in some months the poles get no sunlight, and in some months they get continuous sunlight.
It makes sense that the ice caps would shrink in the summer and grow in the winter.
This is what the northern ice cap on Earth looks like in March of 1998.
The ice cap is largest right after northern winter, and here is what it looks like in
September 1998.
It is smallest right after northern summer.
Quite a change between largest and smallest.
The same thing occurs on Mars.
In this Hubble image of Mars, you can see that Mars also has polar caps, but these polar
caps instead of being water ice are mostly carbon dioxide ice.
Mars's atmosphere is 97% carbon dioxide, and as we said, you can't have liquid water
on the surface.
Mars similarly has a tilt of 25 degrees.
So very much the same type of tilt that Earth has.
So you would expect to see seasonal changes in its ice cap, and we do see them.
Here is Mars over the course of many months.
In the Martian winter, you can see it has a very large polar ice cap, and as it progresses
towards the Martian summer, the polar ice cap shrinks.
But this shrinking is not melting as it is on Earth.
On Earth, the polar ice caps are melting into the polar ocean.
Here is a process called sublimation.
The carbon dioxide ice in the polar caps of Mars are going from ice directly into gas,
and that gas is joining the Martian atmosphere.
It's actually kind of interesting because we see the polar cap shrink on one pole of
Mars, the ice goes into the atmosphere, and actually freezes back out at the other pole
of Mars.
We're going to finish off this planetary comparison with somewhat of a non-comparison,
because Earth does have one unique feature.
And if you just look at it, you see it stares you straight in the face.
It is the oceans.
Oceans cover nearly 70% of Earth's surface.
The important idea about the oceans is that water is a necessary ingredient for life as
we know it.
When we look for life in the universe, we are looking essentially for the presence of
water.
Life as we know it requires carbon chemistry, water, and a source of energy.
Well, carbon chemistry and a source of energy are relatively abundant throughout the solar
system, but water is the main ingredient we're looking for.
Now it's kind of interesting to note that only recently have we found another planet
in the solar system, another world in the solar system that has liquid on its surface,
and that is Titan, and it has the methane lakes.
So while Earth has been unique for having water on its surface, it is no longer unique
for having a liquid on its surface.
Let's take a look at a global overview of the rocky planets.
Take a look at their overall surfaces and compare them.
Each of the rocky planets shows a dichotomy that has rougher upland regions and smoother
lowland planes.
Earth and Venus are very similar.
We look at this diagram.
We see Venus on top and Earth down bottom.
They are dominated by the blue color.
That represents volcanic planes.
Venus has had many epics of volcanic resurfacing, and its surface is almost entirely covered
by volcanic planes.
Earth has been dominated by plate tectonics, and you can see the dichotomy between the
ocean bottoms, which are volcanic planes, and the continental plates.
You also see on Earth and Venus the pink regions that represent mountains.
Venus has rather strange shaped mountains compared to Earth because we are used to long
mountain chains that you do not see on Venus.
Venus' mountains would occur because of compressional tectonics, not because of plate tectonics.
You also see a unique feature on Venus of these orange, these very small orange circles.
Those are the coronet that we mentioned earlier.
On Earth, the colors that you don't see on Venus are green and tan.
The green represent deposits on top of the continental plates, and the tan represents
cratered regions.
Although we have a lot of erosion on Earth, we still have a few regions that have significantly
more craters, and this of course occurs on the continental plates.
When you look at Mars and the moon, you see volcanic planes, the blue volcanic planes
that we saw on Venus and Earth.
It's very small on the moon, but really dominant in the northern half of Mars.
The dominant feature on both of these planets is the tan that represent the cratered regions,
as well as the yellow which represent the heavily cratered regions.
On moon, we also see red regions that represent the ejecta.
The moon is a geologically inactive body, and almost all of the surface features you see
here are due to the heavy bombardment era and the cratering that has occurred since then.
On Mars, we see a very strong dichotomy between the volcanic planes in the north and the heavily
cratered regions in the south.
We don't know why this strong dichotomy exists, and it's something that the planetary scientists
are studying.
It is natural to marvel at the diversity of surface features across the solar system.
We have looked at mountains, volcanoes, canyons, riverbeds, geysers, ice caps, and oceans.
And in looking at them, we have seen that the seven wonders of the solar system far outpace
the seven natural wonders here on Earth.
But I think one learns more by identifying the similarities rather than looking at the
differences, because when you look at similar features, you recognize that similar forces
are at work.
Similar geologic and hydrologic forces are at work across the solar system.
Now if you think back to what we just discussed on the moon and Mars, and something that doesn't
really appear that strongly on Earth, we skipped something.
What was it?
Well, the moon and Mars are covered with craters.
It doesn't appear so strongly on Earth, but it's a very important effect, surface feature,
across the solar system.
And they are so important and so prevalent that they get their own lecture.
And we'll discuss them next time.
See you then.
