The process of science is a relatively calm endeavor.
It involves much quiet thinking and contemplation.
Personally, I do some of my best work in the early morning,
when the world around is still, and I can focus intently on the ideas at hand.
Sometimes, by the time my wife and kids get up,
the most productive part of my day is already over.
I know one astronomer who will not get cable TV.
It's not because he doesn't like television, it's actually because he thinks he will like it,
and he doesn't want to have it there as a distraction.
So that he can focus on doing his science.
It's also true that the results of science rarely have immediate consequences.
Most astronomical objects we observe will change very little on timescales of millions
or even billions of years, much less on human timescales.
It's not very likely that you'll hear somebody say,
we have an emergency, quick, call an astrophysicist.
That's not something I really expect to hear in my lifetime.
But there is one topic where Hollywood has latched onto science,
where discoveries can be of immediate and wide importance,
and where astronomy is considered exciting enough for an action movie.
That is the topic of asteroid impact on Earth.
Nothing like the threat of death, destruction, and devastation to garner a little attention.
Hollywood, as usual, gets the science details mostly wrong,
or they enhance them to make a good story.
And I can't really blame them because their job is to sell you entertainment.
But as a scientist, I would like to sort of correct
the misperceptions that Hollywood has propagated.
And in this lecture, I'd like to review the real story.
I'd like to show you the effects of impacts across the solar system
and discuss the scientific view of the threat posed by asteroids and comets.
Impact craters are the most abundant surface feature across the solar system.
On Earth, we've identified hundreds of impact craters.
Here is one.
It is Barringer Crater in Northwest Arizona.
It's about 1.2 kilometers across and 170 meters deep.
If we look from the rim of the crater, what do you see?
It's a great big hole in the ground.
However, this was the first structure shown to be of impact origin,
and it's also the best preserved impact structure in the world.
It was caused by the impact of a nickel-iron meteorite about 50,000 years ago.
The impactor is estimated to be about 50 meters across.
Now, we have no real evidence of the actual size of the impactor.
That just comes from a rule of thumb.
The crater is about 20 times larger than the impacting object.
We can't tell you what the impacting object looked like
because not much remains of it.
Most of it was vaporized upon impact.
When they first discovered Barringer Crater,
there were about 30 tons of scattered remains on the planes around it.
Sounds like a lot, but it's really tiny compared to the 300,000 tons
that were originally contained in the impactor.
The crater was originally thought to be a volcanic origin,
and its impact origin was not suggested until 1906.
It took another five decades for the impact origin to be proven,
and that was proven not because of the crater itself,
but because they found shocked quartz crystals.
These are quartz crystals that heated up to a really high temperature
and indicated a very high energy event,
and you can't get those from volcanoes.
You can only get them from impacts.
The impact process creates the standard bowl shape of a crater,
and here is a diagram of this impact process.
The speed of the impact is going to be comparable
to the speed of Earth's orbit around the Sun,
and the Earth is moving at about 30 kilometers per second
in its orbit around the Sun,
so another object that we strike
is going to be moving at approximately that same relative speed.
This is about 100,000 kilometers per hour.
The energy released when it strikes the surface
is going to be several megatons.
That's equivalent to the explosion of a nuclear bomb.
The shock wave will press down and out through the surface,
and will carve out the bowl shape.
The material that is then pushed will spray out the sides
and become ejecta that will land on the region around it.
The rebound from the shock wave can come back,
and for the larger impacts,
it can actually form a central peak in the center of the crater.
The steep sides of the bowl will often collapse over time.
If we look at Beringer Crater from satellite photos,
it looks like this,
and you can definitely see the nice circular feature.
But only the recent impacts can be easily recognizable.
These are impacts within the last 100,000 years.
The erosion due to wind, rain,
snow, other forces makes the older ones hard to spot.
Here is one in the outback of Australia.
Now, the outback is old terrain,
so it's a good place to search for very old things.
This is the Gosses Bluff Impact Crater,
and it's dated about 142 million years ago.
The crater itself is about 20 kilometers across,
and that central ring is easily visible.
But you can see that over time,
the outer circular features are more subtle.
If you look carefully,
you can see that there are circular features
around those central circular features.
And even older impact structures
can really become part of the landscape.
Here is a impact crater called Manukawaagin Lake in Canada,
and it is this lake feature here, the circular lake.
This was formed about 214 million years ago,
and the original crater was probably about 100 kilometers across.
It has since collapsed to be about 70 kilometers across.
Within the central island,
there is a peak called Mount Babel,
and we believe this to be the central peak of the impact crater.
Now, the lake makes this crater much easier to recognize.
It may not have been so easily recognized
before the crater was flooded
in order to create a hydroelectric project.
Some other craters are impossible to recognize from the ground.
This image here is one of a crater called Kibira.
Now, there was this mystery of what they called Libyan Desert Glass,
where these wonderful, beautiful glass beads,
but they were of unknown origin.
Now, somebody who knew something about impacts
saw them and suggested to a geologist
who was working in the area that,
oh, is there an impact structure around here?
And the geologist said, no, no, no, there's no impact structure.
But that thought didn't leave him,
and he went searching through satellite photographs
until he found this crater.
It is 31 kilometers across,
and he believes that it was impossible
to recognize from the ground because it was just so large.
So he named it Kibira, which means large in Arabic.
It is the largest crater in the Sahara,
and it's estimated to be tens of millions of years old.
You can see that where the impactor hits
makes whether or not it's more easily or less easily recognizable.
You can also note that since Earth's surface
is covered two-thirds with water,
most of the impact structures on Earth are not going to be visible.
Now, beyond the erosional processes,
the impacts on Earth are also limited by its atmosphere.
Only objects larger than a few tens of meters
can actually survive passage through the atmosphere,
and those that do can lose half or more of their mass.
The 50-meter impactor that hit a Beringer crater
was probably a significantly larger asteroid when in space.
Now, craters are a significant feature
on all solid surfaces across the solar system.
On Venus, they're especially well-preserved.
Here is a picture of three impact craters on Venus,
and Venus has similar numbers of craters as Earth,
but as I said, they are better preserved
because there is very little erosion.
Venus has a very thick atmosphere,
but at its surface, the winds actually blow very gently.
There's not much to erode away these craters.
Matter of fact, the most important erosion process on Venus
is lava flows, and those seem to happen infrequently.
We also see impact craters on Mars,
and here is a very beautiful one on Mars.
It's the standard impact structure.
It's called Victoria Crater, and it's about 800 meters across,
but this one shows a very unusual feature.
If we zoom in to the northern rim,
we see these strange markings along it.
Very linear features.
Are these evidence of Martians?
No, unless the Martians happen to be made in the United States.
These are the tracks of the Opportunity Rover exploring
the rim of Victoria Crater as seen
by the orbiting satellite around Mars.
Here is a view of Victoria Crater from the ground
from the Opportunity Rover.
Mars also features some very large craters.
This one is called Hellas Basin,
and it's one of the largest impact structures known.
It's about 2,300 kilometers across,
and it's sort of a little hard to see in a visible light image.
You can see, oh yes, there's this sort of roundish feature here,
but if I show you a Mars topographic map,
it stands out very strongly as this giant blue region down here.
It is about nine kilometers deep,
and at 2,300 kilometers across,
the volume of this crater is about 200 million times larger
than the volume of Berenger Crater.
You can see other large impact craters on Mars.
There's one here just to the left of center.
And there is a region up here just above the Hellas Basin
that looks like that could also have been caused by a large impact crater.
But what's most striking when you look at this topographic map of Mars
is how the top of it is incredibly smooth.
These are smooth lowland volcanic plains,
and the bottom of it is incredibly cratered,
the heavily cratered highlands.
This is a little bit of a puzzle to me,
and it sort of has bothered me every time I see it.
If you want lots and lots of cratering,
you go take a look at Mercury and the Moon.
On Mercury, there's a very famous large impact structure
called Chloris Basin.
It's kind of hard to see in this image
because it straddles the terminator,
and you can see, if you can sort of see a circular feature,
let me draw a circle over it to guide your eye.
This is about 1,300 kilometers across,
and it's about one-quarter the size of the entire planet.
The giant impact structure,
one-quarter the size of Mercury's diameter.
Mercury is heavily cratered across its entire surface.
Here is an image of a crater field,
and you can see just craters upon craters upon craters.
And most people, when they see Mercury,
actually think it's the Moon,
because the Moon's surface looks very similar.
So, for comparison, here is a crater field on the Moon.
And, again, you see craters upon craters upon craters.
The interesting thing that you see on the Moon
is that the interiors of some of the craters seem smoother
than they seem on Mercury.
There have been more lava flows on the surface of the Moon
than there have been on the surface of Mercury.
What this tells you is that there's a long history
of impacts recorded on the surface of the Moon.
And we'll get back to that in a few minutes.
Looking at the Moon globally, we can look at its near side,
and we can see many large impacts.
These large, smooth gray areas are very large impacts
that have filled in with lava.
These are the lunar seas that they call maria.
They, of course, aren't seas.
They're just lava flows that have filled in.
In contrast, when we look at the far side of the Moon,
we see only a couple large impacts
that have lava flows filled in.
So there is a dichotomy between the side of the Moon
we always see and the side of the Moon
that we didn't get to see until the Apollo era,
until the space age, we had never seen the backside of the Moon.
So why is this true?
Well, there are two reasons.
One is that the near side of the Moon,
the crust is a little bit thinner.
If you actually measure the thickness of the crust,
near side versus far side,
the crust is a little bit thinner,
so large impacts can punch through
the crust easier on the near side.
The other reason has to do with the fact
that the Moon is tidally locked to Earth.
The Moon always shows the same faced Earth.
And objects passing by Earth can be gravitationally focused
toward the near side of the Moon.
So we would send more impactors towards the near side of the Moon
and because they swing past Earth,
they would get a gravitational boost
and they would arrive at faster speeds.
Both of these would lead to more large impacts
on the near side of the Moon.
Now, the Moon has one other interesting feature
that I'd like to point out to you.
It's called Mare Oriental
and it's one of the classic large impactors
but it's very hard for us to see here from Earth
because it's basically on the eastern edge of the Moon.
Here it is in the Clementine data
and you can see it's a large ringed impact structure
about 900 kilometers across.
The impact sent ripples across the lunar surface
and created these several rings here.
This reminds me of another large impactor
on Jupiter's Moon, Callisto.
Here is probably the most impressive ringed impact structure
in the Solar System.
It's called Valhalla on Callisto.
Callisto is Jupiter's outermost of the four Galilean moons.
It has a very icy surface.
Now, the bright spot in the center
is about 600 kilometers across
but you can see ring fractures
that have spread out to about 1500 kilometers
in radius.
That's about 3,000 kilometers across
for the effects of this impact structure
on this small Moon.
Even small bodies of the Solar System show craters.
This is an asteroid named Gasbra.
The asteroid itself is only 20 kilometers across,
much smaller than some of the impact structures I've shown you.
However, it itself is still poignant
by even smaller craters.
So even the impactors have suffered impacts
before they do their job of creating a crater.
Now, let's take a look at that historical record
of cratering in the Solar System.
The place to go, the place to look is at the Moon.
The Moon provides a rich history of cratering
where we can age date the craters
simply because the younger craters
will be on top of the older craters.
And so you can then piece that together
to assemble the number of craters over time.
The results show that there has been
a steady component to the cratering rate
as you go back in time.
Back to about 3.5 billion years ago,
there has been a continual cratering
not really much change in the rate.
Before that time, there's an exponential increase
in the number of craters we see in the Moon.
This indicates the period of the late heavy bombardment.
This was about 3.5 billion years ago
that there was an intense cratering period
in our Solar System.
The Moon formed about 4.5 billion years ago.
So for about a billion years,
the Solar System was sweeping up its debris
and there was incredible amounts of impacts
slamming all the bodies of the Solar System.
Basically Earth, Moon, Venus,
all the major bodies should have been continuously pounded
until the late heavy bombardment came to an end.
Now the steady cratering shows another thing.
It shows that there must be population renewal.
The objects that are hitting us today
have to be renewed, otherwise they would die out.
If there was only a small population hitting
after a while, they'd be gone.
So we have to renew that population.
That's an important thing that we'll come to
in a later lecture.
Well, that's the long-term history.
What about recent history in terms of cratering?
Well, in 1908, on June 30th,
there was a massive explosion
over the skies of the remote part of Siberia.
Booms were heard by many.
A shock came from the sky.
Booms were heard by many.
A shock wave knocked people down.
And earthquakes were registered at many seismic stations.
In 1927, they made a scientific expedition to the area
and found this.
That 19 years later,
there were still felled trees from that explosion.
From the pattern of trees and from other evidence,
they deduced that a roughly 50-meter-sized impactor
exploded about 8 kilometers above Earth's surface.
There is no obvious impact crater,
although some scientists recently have suggested
a certain lake nearby the epicenter of the explosion
to be where what was left of the impactor landed.
It hasn't been proven yet.
But this is the largest recent impact event on Earth.
And it was about a thousand times more powerful
than the bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined.
Such a small impactor would be very difficult to find and track,
so it could come without warning,
and it could destroy a city.
This is the kind of event that inspires Hollywood.
There, of course, have been other events.
And in 1994, we were lucky enough to witness an impact event
on Jupiter.
This is a montage.
It's not a single image.
It's a montage of an image of Jupiter
and an image of Schumacher-Levy-9.
Schumacher-Levy-9 was captured by Jupiter's gravity
and broke up while in orbit.
Now, we did not discover SL-9 until after it had broken up.
And once we discovered it,
we were able to predict that it would collide with Jupiter
16 months later.
Now, think about this. What's going to happen?
We've got two kilometer-sized fragments of a comet,
and then we've got Jupiter's massive atmosphere.
Is there something that's going to be exciting?
Is it going to be a huge impact?
Well, honestly, at the time, we were looking at this,
and we weren't really sure whether it was going to be an event
or a non-event.
That didn't stop us.
We turned every telescope possible to watch it.
And with the Hubble Space Telescope,
we were able to see this.
The center, you can see the disc of Jupiter,
and along the lower portion of Jupiter,
you see some brown spots.
These brown spots are the impact sites
where SL-9's fragments slammed into Jupiter.
It's much more visible on the right-hand side
where you see Jupiter in the ultraviolet.
And here you can see the giant holes in Jupiter's cloud tops
that were created by the impacts.
For scale, here is Earth to the correct size.
These impact events scarred Jupiter,
but they dissipated over the course of a few months.
It was really the same thing as happened in Tunguska.
They had giant explosions in Jupiter's atmosphere
that caused these big scars.
Eventually, the clouds reformed and Jupiter went on,
as if nothing had happened.
It was really exciting at the time.
I've got to tell you, one of the few times in astronomy
it was like, ah, events happening in real time.
The final historical event I'd like to discuss
is one where sometimes where you have evidence of an impact,
but you don't know where the crater is.
Now, tectites are a strong clue of an impact.
There are beads of mineral glass that were once molten
and had to solidify in mid-air.
The glass was hot enough as it was flying through the air,
it then solidified.
For example, there's a tectite field across North America,
and it was recently traced to a crater in the Chesapeake Bay.
Tectites had also been found on the island of Haiti,
and we assumed that the crater was somewhere underwater.
We were half right.
Here is a relief map of the Yucatan Peninsula,
and if you look closely, you can see somewhat of a circular feature.
Let me, again, guide your eye,
and you can see that there's a circle here.
Half of the crater is underwater.
It becomes much easier to see if instead we look at a gravity map.
This is how we first discovered this crater.
This was not done by research scientists.
It was actually done by folks working for petroleum companies.
They were looking for oil off the Yucatan Peninsula,
and they found this impact structure.
And nowadays, with computer processing,
we can actually create a 3D map.
Here is a 3D map of what we call the Chicksalub impact crater,
and you get a multi-ringed impact structure
about 200 kilometers across.
This is nearly three times the diameter of Lake Manicouagan.
This is a truly huge impact event,
and it has been age-dated to 65 million years ago,
the time of the Cretaceous tertiary extinction.
This was the time of the end of the age of the dinosaurs.
The question was, could this impact have been the downfall of the dinosaurs?
The key piece of evidence in that argument
is a layer of iridium found in the KT boundary layer.
Basically, as the sediments are deposited,
when you look through the sediments at the KT boundary layer,
from the Cretaceous to the tertiary,
they find a thin layer of iridium.
This has been found at over 80 sites worldwide.
Now, iridium is extremely rare on Earth,
but it is common in iron meteorites.
The excess was calculated to be what would correspond to about a 10 kilometer asteroid,
and a 10 kilometer asteroid would make a 200 kilometer crater.
So it appears that while the dinosaurs ruled the planet for 165 million years,
their doom may have come sudden and swift with an impact event.
I must note, however, that the volcanologists out there will disagree.
They point to the Deccan Traps lava fields near Mumbai in India as the source of the extinction.
These lava fields cover hundreds of kilometers,
and they are also age-dated to the time of the KT extinction.
They would argue that the carbon dioxide and the sulfur dioxide released in these volcanic eruptions
changed the climate and caused the extinction.
Now, I'm not going to get involved in this,
because I'm not expert enough to evaluate the details of one argument versus another.
I will say that as an astronomer, I'm naturally biased toward impacts.
I can certainly see that perhaps there were multiple factors contributing to this worldwide mass extinction.
Furthermore, my astronomer friends have told me that impacts appear associated with other extinctions.
They find metal enrichments that occur in the strata associated with extinctions at 11, 35, 65, of course,
and 91 million years ago of importance,
that there are three layers of impact melt associated with a 35 million year ago extinction.
So, based on that combination of evidence,
it does appear that the effects of asteroid and comet impacts on Earth can be global.
But wait, you shouldn't just accept that. You've got to think about that.
We have a 10 kilometer-sized impactor.
We have a 13,000 kilometer-sized planet.
I mean, how is that going to create a global effect?
I mean, it's like a pinprick.
How? Well, here's how.
The energy released in such a large impact is equivalent to 100 million nuclear bombs.
The crater is about 20 times the size of the impacting object.
Now, this spreads stuff out over hundreds of kilometers and maybe a relatively localized effect.
But the ejecta thrown out from within that crater will rain down over wide regions.
That'll cover thousands of kilometers with hundreds of millions of tons of material.
The blast wave created will incinerate the nearby landscape.
Plus, the fireball as it's streaking through the atmosphere will interact with the nitrogen in the air
and the sulfur in the ground and create widespread acid rain.
As the impact hits the ground, you create an earthquake.
To estimate at the KT impact, the earthquake could have been as large as magnitude 11 or 12.
The largest earthquake ever recorded is nine and a half, and the earthquake scale is logarithmic.
So the earthquake could have been at 100 times more powerful than the largest ever recorded.
Furthermore, if it's struck in a shallow sea, as we believe it might have, it would kick up a tsunami.
Tsunamis kicked up by impact of this magnitude would be kilometer in height and would be able to sweep across continents.
Furthermore, when you hit in the ocean, you kick up a huge amount of water into the atmosphere.
That water is an incredible greenhouse effect.
We don't talk about carbon dioxide, but water is an even better greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide,
and that can provide a temporary greenhouse warming of 10 degrees Celsius or 18 degrees Fahrenheit.
Furthermore, there would be fires. The blast wave would ignite some fires,
but also the ejecta would be streaking through the atmosphere, would be heated to incredible temperatures,
and it would become red hot. When it lands, it would instantly ignite the vegetation around it.
Then there would be dust clouds. First of all, kicked up by the impact and the smoke from the fires.
Through the global circulation, that would spread all around the globe and block out the sun.
So what really happened at the KT impact was that you disrupted the food chain
because there's evidence that the flowering plants disappeared for thousands of years.
If the plants die, then the plant eaters die. If the herbivores die, then the carnivores die,
and that leads to mass extinctions. So these are the horsemen of the Asteroidal Apocalypse.
Craters, ejecta, blast waves, earthquakes, tsunamis, fires, dust clouds,
and their combined effect is how a 10-kilometer-sized body can have global consequences on a 13,000-kilometer-sized planet.
Now, naturally, your next question is going to be, when will this happen again?
And future impacts are really only a matter of time. We have impacts every day.
They're called meteors, and they streak through the atmosphere and burn up.
A Tunguska-level event should occur every few hundred years.
An impact large enough to wipe out a whole city should occur every 10,000 years.
If we want to think even bigger, the country-wide or a regional destruction event,
that would happen roughly every million years.
But the impacts with global consequences are not so common.
They should occur once every 100 million years.
The last one was about 65 million years ago, but the occurrence of the next one is probabilistic.
It could be 50 years from now, or it could be 50 million years from now.
We do know that currently there are no large asteroids coming close to our planet.
And given funding, we can monitor the large objects easily.
I was surprised when I checked the Near Earth Asteroid website,
and the technology has developed faster than I expected,
and some of the objects we're tracking are as small as a few meters across.
Now, of course, these require continuous monitoring, as the asteroid's orbits tend to shift a bit.
But we may be able to see the next Tunguska-level event before it hits us.
And with advanced warning, we might be able to send a spaceship up and sort of nudge it out of its orbit,
and so that it would move into a harmless orbit.
We might be able to prevent the next major asteroid hit.
So I guess the moral from this is that the astronomers and NASA need your support.
After all, the dinosaurs seem to have died out because they didn't have a space program to prevent it.
Alright, next time we'll take a look at the planetary interiors, and we'll see you then. Take care.
