Today, let's talk about the weather.
Now, often when people talk about the weather, it's sort of just filler conversation.
When you talk to somebody, you say, how's the family?
Hey, did you catch the game last night?
Oh, is it hot enough for you?
So weather sort of acts as this universal touchstone, this common bond between people.
Mark Twain is often quoted as saying that everybody talks about the weather, but nobody
does anything about it.
Unfortunately, that's a misquote.
Mark Twain never said that.
It's actually from Charles Dudley Warner.
But it indicates that most of the time, when people are talking about the weather, they're
really complaining about it.
It's too hot.
It's too cold.
There's too much rain.
There's not enough rain.
And when the weather is good, it's sort of taken for granted.
Now, I lived in the San Francisco Bay Area, and it was generally pleasant all year round.
I guess the worst thing was the afternoon fog in July when the fog rolls into San Francisco.
It could go from very balmy day to a chilly day very fast.
You learn that you always carry a sweater in July.
This leads to another Mark Twain misquote.
He's quoted often as saying that the coldest winter I ever spent was a summer in San Francisco.
And actually, again, he never said that.
It's actually been attributed to H. L. Menken and Will Rogers.
But when I looked up, I couldn't actually find out who really said it.
See, California, the nice weather is sort of taken for granted.
When you think of going outdoors to do something, if you don't do it today, we can do it tomorrow.
It'll be nice tomorrow.
And I think that's really the source of the laid back California attitude.
When we got rainstorms and there was thunder and lightning, it was like, ooh, we're having
weather.
This was a strong contrast to my East Coast upbringing, because it would be hazy, hot
and humid in the summer.
And then we'd have blizzards and 12-foot snowdrifts in New England in the winter.
So when I was growing up, you learned to make hay while the sun shines.
Well, I usually enjoy a change in the weather.
I like to see the variety in nature.
And really, we have nothing to complain about.
When we look at it from a solar system perspective, this is nothing, because things really can
get much worse.
In this lecture, we're going to examine the worst weather known to science.
Let's start with temperatures.
On Earth, the temperature is proportional to the amount of sunlight.
There's more sunlight at the equator, so you expect higher temperatures.
There's less sunlight at the poles, so you expect lower temperatures.
The seasons on Earth, from summer to winter, are caused by the tilt of Earth's rotation
axis.
Earth is tilted 23 and a half degrees relative to the plane of its orbit.
And that tilt rotation axis stays fixed in space.
This is why you see these globes, generally, tilted at 23 and a half degrees.
So if this is Earth and this is the sun over here, when it's tilted toward the sun, the
northern hemisphere is getting more light, and the northern hemisphere is in summer.
When halfway around its orbit, when it's over here and it's tilted away from the sun, the
southern hemisphere is getting more light, so the southern hemisphere is in summer.
I do this simply to make a major point that it is not the distance from the sun that determines
whether it's summer or winter.
The Earth is actually closest to the sun, a point called perihelion, in January.
And it's furthest from the sun, a point we call apheleon, in July.
And so for the northern hemisphere, it's closest in winter and it's furthest in the summer.
Of course, that's just reversed for the southern hemisphere, where it actually is closest in
summer and furthest in winter.
The variation in the distance is only about 2%, and the energy received will go as the
square of the distance from the sun, so the variation in energy is about 7% from perihelion
to apheleon.
Now this is significant and it adds to a modulation of the seasons, but it's not really the cause.
Furthermore, as we talked about for Mercury, there is a procession of the perihelion of
Earth's orbit.
This whole orbit precesses around at 11.5 arc seconds per year, at a very slow rate,
but the whole orbit will actually make a rotation around the sun in 113,000 years.
So 56,000 years ago, during chromagnon times, things were reversed, and perihelion was then
in July, and apheleon would have been in January.
Knowing the tilt is the true explanation for the seasons, you expect the hottest temperatures
near the equator and the coldest temperatures at the poles.
I find it very interesting that one of the hottest places on the planet is 36 degrees
north latitude.
It's this place, Death Valley.
This is Badwater, the lowest point in Death Valley, and it's 282 feet below sea level.
It's the lowest point in the western hemisphere.
They recorded a record temperature there of about 134 degrees Fahrenheit, or 57 degrees
Celsius.
So that shows you it's not just your latitude that determines your temperature, it's also
the elevation within the atmosphere.
Remember in a previous lecture, we talked about how the atmosphere heats up as you're
going down through the troposphere.
Now this Death Valley is a national park, and in all national parks you see it's fun
to watch the animal behavior.
There's particularly crazy animal behavior in Death Valley, and it looks something like
this.
This is a marathon runner in Death Valley.
They actually hold not just a marathon, but an ultra marathon starting in Death Valley.
You run 135 miles starting at Badwater, across Death Valley, and then up a mountain.
So you're starting at 282 feet below sea level, you're finishing at 8,000 feet.
The record time for this ultra marathon was broken, they broke 24 hours.
Crazy animal behavior in some extreme heat.
But it's not the hottest heat in the world.
The world record is of course in the Sahara Desert, and it was recorded in Libya at 136
degrees, or about 58 degrees centigrade.
Now this is the official record, recorded at a measuring station.
The true extreme on earth is probably a little bit hotter.
And I also note that this is the air temperature measured about 5 feet above the ground.
The surface temperature, if you go all the way down to the ground, that has been measured
to be up to about 150 degrees.
The coldest temperatures on the planet, you would expect to be at the poles, and you would
be right.
The world record was recorded at Vostok in Antarctica of minus 129 degrees Fahrenheit,
or minus 89 degrees Celsius.
And there we see some more strange animal behavior.
This is a colony of emperor penguins.
They spend the winter on the Antarctic ice.
They travel about 100 kilometers inland from the sea to be somewhat sheltered by these
ice cliffs.
Even so, even if they're a little bit sheltered from the wind, during that long winter, and
about a month when they don't have any sunshine, the penguins must huddle together for warmth.
And here's a picture of the penguins huddled together.
And the penguins actually have to change their position, because if you stay on the outside
of the huddle, you'll freeze to death, and so they rotate inward and outward in order
to survive.
So this is the extremes we encounter here on Earth.
The hottest is about 60 degrees Celsius, the coldest is about minus 90 degrees Celsius,
and life can survive there, but really just barely.
If you look at it from a solar system perspective, and you really think about it from that perspective,
if you look at these guys and you say, what a bloody bunch of whips, I mean if you want
cold, you want cold.
Let's go out and look at things.
Let's take Mars, okay?
Here's a picture of Mars.
Mankind has been fascinated with Mars.
We really want to learn as much as we can about it.
We aspire to go there, and some people want to colonize the planet.
I'm not sure why.
Yes, it's about the same tilt as Earth.
It's got about 25 degree tilt.
Yes, it rotates in about the same amount of time, around 23 hours or so.
But there the similarities end.
If you overlook the idea that it has almost no atmosphere, okay, the pressure of its atmosphere
is less than 1% that of Earth.
And we overlook the idea that there's no liquid water on the surface, because the water sublimes
directly from ice into water vapor, just the temperatures are a huge challenge.
It has a very thin atmosphere and is unable to retain the heat.
It's also farther from the sun, so it only gets about one-third the energy per square
meter as the Earth does.
Fortunately, we sent an advanced scouting party.
Here is a self-portrait of one of that scouting parties.
It is the Spirit Rover.
And I note that this is a real picture.
Most of the images that you see of the rovers on Mars are actually computer graphics drawings.
This is a real picture from its camera looking down on top of it, and that's why they assembled
many pictures together to get this panoramic viewpoint and the self-portrait of the Mars
rover.
But they've been able to provide temperature monitoring for us, and we have a temperature
graph from the Mars rovers.
Now if we look at the maximum, okay, you can see that there are seasonal variations.
Mars has summer and winter just like Earth does, and it can reach, you know, a high near
about 25 degrees Celsius, about 80 degrees Fahrenheit in summer.
And in the winter, its highs are near freezing.
Well, that's somewhat temperate.
The daytime temperatures are sort of temperate.
It's what we're used to.
I will note, however, that it's very low pressure atmosphere, so you really won't feel any of
that warmth.
But then take a look at the lows down here in the bottom, the lows at night.
Because of that very thin atmosphere, the heat is radiated away very efficiently to
space, and so the daytime heat is gone, and the lows around minus 75 centigrade all year
round.
The penguins were there, they'd have to huddle every single night just to retain their warmth.
So this whole idea of Mars colonization really doesn't make much sense to me, because it's
got no air, no water, no heat.
This is a real fixer-upper of a planet.
Still, it's better than Mercury.
Now Mercury is closest to the Sun, so you expect it to be hot, and you'd be right.
It has about 7 times more energy per square meter than Earth receives.
The Sunward side is, coincidentally, nearly 7 times higher in temperature than Earth is.
It's about 400 degrees centigrade.
But Mercury is also cold, because Mercury has no atmosphere, it can't retain any of
its heat, and it rotates very slowly, it takes about 2 months to complete a rotation.
So in the 30 days that it rotates in darkness, it can effectively radiate all that heat away.
And the nighttime temperature is minus 180 degrees centigrade.
This is the greatest range of temperatures in the solar system, from a daytime high of
400 degrees to a nighttime low of minus 180 degrees.
That's incredible.
And while that's a record for the range of temperatures, it's not a record holder for
either the hottest or the coldest.
Venus is our record holder for the hottest, because it has a very thick atmosphere.
And this atmosphere is 96% carbon dioxide.
In that carbon dioxide atmosphere, acting as a blanket, we have the greenhouse effect,
and on Venus it has become a runaway greenhouse effect, so the surface temperature is around
475 degrees centigrade.
That's 900 degrees Fahrenheit.
And because the cloud cover is constant, and the greenhouse effect is global, that's
the temperature you get at the equator, and at the poles, and everywhere on the planet.
Matter of fact, the daytime temperature, the nighttime temperature all over the planet
is basically constant around 475 degrees centigrade.
And note, this is about double the broil setting on your oven.
On the other end of the spectrum, and on the other end of the solar system, we have
this object, Pluto.
Now Pluto is going to be a representative of the icy worlds of the outer solar system.
When you're way, way, way, way out away from the sun, you get very little solar energy.
And at Pluto's orbit, you get about one one thousandths the energy that Earth receives.
And there's no atmosphere to retain any heat, so the temperatures reach a record low of
over 200 degrees below zero centigrade.
So now we've got the high and low temperatures.
What about the precipitation forecast?
Rain on Earth is our hydrologic cycle that's dominated by the oceans.
We have evaporation, condensation, and precipitation.
Evaporation is simply that the air near the surface contains water vapor.
The heated air then rises into the atmosphere.
As it gets higher up and cools down, the water vapor condenses into clouds.
Water droplets in the clouds condense around dust particles, and when they get large enough,
the water droplets fall out as rain or snow, precipitation.
There is, of course, a variation on this that we see in Earth's atmosphere, a variation
of acid rain.
And this happens when you have sulfur dioxide in the rain.
Instead of the water droplets condensing around dust particles, they condense around
the sulfur dioxide particles, and when you mix water with sulfur dioxide, you end up
with sulfuric acid.
So you have a concentrate of sulfuric acid in water, and we see that basically associated
with power plants.
So here is a map of the major sources of sulfur dioxide in the United States.
Basically these are coal burning power plants, predominantly located here in the Midwest.
And remember, at mid-latitudes, the winds blow from west to east.
So the sulfur dioxide that's released into the atmosphere in the Midwest is then going
to blow towards the east.
This image here shows you the pH level of lakes in the United States.
This is sort of the acidity, where the green is basic and the red is acidity.
And what you can strongly see here is this red region over the northeastern United States,
where the sulfur dioxide has mixed with the water vapor in the atmosphere, blown eastward,
dropped down as acid rain.
Now, this is bad and changes the pH balance of the lakes and kills off fish, and we can
complain about it a lot, but it's actually much worse in Europe, because if we look at
the world map, they have severe problems in Western Europe and Scandinavia.
It's estimated that over 14,000 lakes in Sweden are affected by this problem.
Now sulfur emissions have been identified as being a major pollutant, and they are on
the decline, but this problem will not go away soon.
Still, it's bad on Earth, but it's even worse elsewhere, and it's even worse on Venus.
In Venus, there's enough sulfur dioxide in the air that the main constituent of the clouds
is drops of sulfuric acid.
Here's the profile of Venus' atmosphere, and at about 50 kilometers, you see there's
a layer of sulfuric acid clouds.
Below that, it is constantly raining sulfuric acid, and that descends for about 10 kilometers
or so, but Venus' surface is so hot that it evaporates before it reaches the surface.
So the weather report that we can give for Venus is always going to be the same.
Today, it will be 900 degrees, it will be constantly cloudy, and you have a 100% chance
of sulfuric acid rain.
The only place that has even perhaps stranger precipitation would be Saturn's large moon
Titan.
This is the only moon that has an atmosphere, and its atmosphere is 98% nitrogen and about
2% methane.
It also has a higher atmospheric pressure than Earth, about one and a half times the
atmospheric pressure at sea level on Earth.
Now before the Huygens probe landed on Titan, we thought there was a pretty good chance of
finding oceans on Titan, because we could see images that looked somewhat like this.
This is better than we could see before the Huygens probe, but you can see these dark
bands around the center of Titan, and we thought these dark regions could be oceans, but when
Cassini got to Saturn, Cassini looked to try and see the specular reflections, the
glint of sunlight off the oceans, and was unable to observe it.
So we started to think, maybe not, but when Huygens landed, it did find that the surface
was frozen.
However, it saw river channels, so presumably there was some flowing methane on the surface.
Later Cassini observations had suggested that we were seeing lakes, but in the northern
part not at the mid-latitudes.
And these are these darker regions up here at the top of this picture that might possibly
be lakes.
And when Cassini passed later, it used its radar imager to do some close-ups of it, and
it found an image that looked like this.
This looks remarkably like characteristic features of lakes on Earth.
The dark areas are smooth to radar, which is highly indicative that they might be lakes.
Matter of fact, they released this image comparing one suspected lake on Titan in size to Lake
Superior on Earth.
The arguments for these being lakes are even more supported when you look at the atmosphere
of Titan, and you can see methane clouds.
This is an infrared image of the North Pole of Titan above where those lakes are suspected
to be, and you can see the methane clouds encircling the North Pole.
The implication here is that you have a hydrologic cycle on Titan that is based on methane.
It's similar to the water cycle on Earth that you would evaporate, condense out methane
clouds, and then precipitate back out methane.
And it's also interesting that the moisture probably doesn't come directly all from the
North Pole, but actually from the equator, and gets transported up to the North Pole.
One reason why they might think the equator is so dry is that the moisture all gets transported
up to the North Pole.
But this whole hydrologic cycle is totally different from Earth because it operates at
a temperature of about minus 180 degrees centigrade.
Methane freezes out just below that, so it has to operate in these incredibly cold temperatures.
This gives you some really serious cold rain.
And I've got to say, that's my least favorite weather, so I won't be visiting Titan anytime
soon for vacation.
Now let's move on to storms.
On Earth, storms have associated seasons.
We say that April showers bring May flowers.
We have summer thunderstorms, and the Atlantic hurricane season goes from late summer through
early fall.
And our storms can go grow pretty large.
Here is an image of Hurricane Isabel, which came up the East Coast in 2003.
And you can see from this image, it stretches all the way from South Carolina on up to,
you know, well up into Maine.
This is about 1500 kilometers across.
This is, you know, the size of a decent sized country on our planet, okay?
And this lasts for a while.
It passed through in about a week.
Actually, it hit our house, and we were without power for three or four days.
And again, this is nothing when you look at the solar system.
So let's compare it to Jupiter.
Jupiter shows a large number of storms all the time.
There are many of these oval shapes on Jupiter.
Each of them is a hurricane-like storm on Jupiter.
Now note these sort of three white ovals down here.
Those are going to be important a little later.
We'll talk about them in a minute.
The one we really want to talk about is the largest one, which is the Great Red Spot
of Jupiter.
Here is an image from Hubble, or actually several images from Hubble, looking at the
Great Red Spot over about a decade of time.
You can see that as it was observed over the years, the Great Red Spot has stayed relatively
constant.
Yeah, it changes its shape.
It gets a little bit more elongated, a little bit fatter, you know, small changes to its
structure.
But overall, it's a relatively constant feature.
And the Great Red Spot may have been seen as early as 1665.
If so, about 350 years this storm has lasted.
Now certainly, we're not sure it's actually been around for 350 years, but we have continuous
observations for at least 200 years.
So this is an incredibly long-lasting storm.
What's the secret to its longevity?
Well, that's shown in this animation here.
And this is taken from the Cassini spacecraft, and it's showing Jupiter over the course of
about one orbit, about 10 or 12 hours.
And you can see the winds, zonal winds are blowing this way, and they're blowing that
way.
And if you look at the Great Red Spot, you can see that one wind, the wind above it,
is going westward, and the band below it is going eastward, and the Great Red Spot is
rolling in between this.
This is feeding into the Great Red Spot and continuing its rotation.
You can also notice in the band moving westward that there are some small ovals that may be
feeding into the Great Red Spot, being eaten up by the Red Spot and adding to its power.
The next image I'm going to show you is one of my favorite in all of astronomy.
This is a close-up of the Great Red Spot from Voyager 2.
And here you can see all the details, all the cool hydrodynamic features.
I know I'm a geek because the Raleigh-Taylor instabilities here excite me.
I just love all the turbulence that you see.
There's a sort of dynamicism to this image that just speaks to me.
But it can speak even louder if you can do this sort of comparison.
Here at the correct relative size is Earth compared to the Great Red Spot.
The Great Red Spot is a hurricane as large as our entire planet that has been lasting
for centuries.
This just dwarfs anything we have here on our planet.
And recently, you remember those three white ovals I pointed out to you before?
They have merged to form a new red spot.
This is the first time in history we've ever seen the formation of a red spot because we
actually didn't get to see the Great Red Spot form.
Here is an image from Hubble where you can see the Great Red Spot over here on the right.
And in the center, you can see the little red spot.
This is what those three small ovals merged to form.
We're very interested in this because, as I said, we've never seen a red spot form.
So we don't really know how long it will last.
Now if you look at its latitude, you say, oh, well, it might be passing by the Great
Red Spot.
Maybe it will merge.
That's not really expected.
Actually, it's passed by it several times now and they haven't done anything.
We're really watching to see what happens next.
Let's move on to Saturn.
In contrast to Jupiter's stormy appearance, Saturn can appear somewhat bland.
Here it is viewed with visible light from Earth.
This is an image from Hubble.
And there's not much to it, but this one is actually quite special because in 1994, there
was a major storm on Saturn.
This is a very rare event.
It's this wedge shaped brights feature just above the rings here.
These major storms occur only once, only a few times per century, approximately every
30 years.
And they appear to be correlated with the summer in the northern hemisphere of Saturn.
Remember, Saturn has a 29 and a half year orbit.
But what's interesting is that 15 years earlier, there are no storms correlated with the summer
in the southern hemisphere.
That's a mystery we're still yet unraveling.
Now when you stretch these visible light images, you can actually see some small storms.
Here's another Hubble image where if you look in the southern hemisphere, you see these
small little ovals, somewhat similar to what we saw on Jupiter, although a little bit smaller.
So it appears that minor storms are abundant on Saturn.
And if you take close-ups and look in the infrared from Cassini, this is an infrared
image, and here you can see at least three major of these small ovals occurring on Saturn.
And these show you that underneath it all, when you look carefully, Saturn shows about
the same storm patterns as Jupiter does.
Let's take a look at Neptune.
This is the classic image of Neptune.
It was taken by Voyager 2, and it features a very prominent storm, the Great Dark Spot.
It looks a lot like the Great Red Spot, and again, it's about the size of Earth.
But it's rather dynamic, because over the course of Voyager 2's visit, it changed significantly.
This is a four-and-a-half-day sequence showing the varied appearance of the Great Dark Spot.
You can see it gets elongated and stretched out to the left, and then elongated and stretched
out to the right, and it was also noticed that it's drifting towards the equator, moving
at about 15 degrees per year.
It was then predicted that it would actually cross the equator several years after Voyager
passed.
There was one other storm on Neptune when Voyager passed by, and it's shown here in
this image, it's called the Little Dark Spot, down here.
So when Hubble was put into orbit, it was with great anticipation that we looked at
Neptune trying to see, oh, is the Great Dark Spot still there?
What about the Little Dark Spot?
Is it like the Great Red Spot?
Neither of them was long lived.
They had both dissipated five years later, in 1994, when Hubble looked for it.
Now we have found a few more northern dark spots, some dark spots in the northern hemisphere
of Neptune, but the ones that we saw in 1989 are no longer there.
Unfortunately, we lack the detail that Voyager had when it flew by, so we know that Neptune
has a dynamic atmosphere, but we won't be able to study it in as great detail until
we get another satellite mission to fly past.
What we can see from Earth is that Neptune shows strong seasons.
Neptune's orbit takes 165 years to go around the Sun.
That means each season lasts for 40 years, and Neptune has about a 29 degree tilt, so
it should show seasons somewhat like Earth, although the energy it's receiving is really,
really small from the Sun, so is it really going to show seasons?
Well, apparently so.
Here are three images from Hubble from 1996, 1998, and 2002.
And what you see is a stormy reaction, a very slow reaction to the seasons, because the
seasons on Neptune last for decades.
And what you're seeing here is the development of storms in Neptune's southern hemisphere,
basically springtime on Neptune.
Finally, we're going to turn to one other type of storm, dust storms.
Now, a few years ago, I saw a movie in which the hero is racing away from a giant dust
storm.
This is the movie here, and I do computer graphics as part of my astronomy, and I just
looked at that and I said, oh, fantastic, really good computer graphics.
And you know that Hollywood exaggerates for a story, it's just huge, gigantic dust storm.
But then when I started looking into this, I found images like this.
That is a real dust storm on Earth, and the dust storm, just like in the movie, is about
a hundred feet high, boom.
There goes the neighborhood.
I mean, I don't like getting sand in the house after I go to the beach, imagine cleaning
up after a dust storm like this.
But the dust storms can be even bigger.
When the dust storms occur off the Sahara, they can actually sweep huge swaths of dust
out into the Atlantic Ocean.
Here is one that covers thousands of kilometers of ocean, and it lifts the dust several kilometers
up into the atmosphere.
There it can get carried around the planet through global circulation, and so dust storms
in the Sahara can cause air pollution alerts in the Caribbean.
A really good example of this was the June 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo.
This was the second largest volcanic eruption of last century, and it had global effects
on the atmosphere, because so much ash was spewed up into the atmosphere, it was carried
globally.
Here are some observations of our planet before and after Pinatubo.
In the April and May of 1991, before the eruption, you can see how clear the atmosphere was.
And then directly after the eruption, there's an immediate effect, whereas this band of material
encircling the globe around the equator.
In the lower left here, three months later, the material had diffused in latitude and now
covered most of the planet.
The final image shows that three years later, or two and a half to three years later, the
effects were still lingering.
So dust raised high in the atmosphere, local dust storms can have global effects.
This is even more true when you look at Mars, because Mars has a very thin atmosphere.
It allows the dust to be kicked up relatively easily, and dust storms are common.
Here are two images of Mars, one in June 2001, one in September 2001.
And in June, if you look carefully in the lower right of that image, there's a storm
in the Hellas Basin, that giant impact basin.
There's a dust storm starting there, and they tell me there's also a dust storm around the
North Pole, although it doesn't seem obvious to me that there is a dust storm.
By September, dust storm had spread planet wide.
You can see there's a global haze across the planet.
This is the biggest storm that we've seen on Mars in decades, and it lasted about three
months.
Matter of fact, in July 2007, the Mars rovers, that spirit shot that I showed you before,
they had to survive a month long dust storm.
And during that dust storm, there was not only decreased sunlight because the dust was
blocking sunlight coming through the atmosphere, but also the dust was covering the solar panels
and we're really worried whether we'd lose the rovers to a dust storm.
So they went into a low power hibernation mode in order to survive.
And fortunately, they were able to come out of it and resume operations.
So from an interplanetary perspective, Earth's most extreme weather is really rather tame.
The extremes of the temperatures in the solar system, they are well beyond what humans could
withstand.
And we really can't complain about rain because water is mild compared to showers of sulfuric
acid or even methane.
And our fiercest hurricanes, well, they might only qualify as a brief minor storm on Jupiter.
And these dust storms on Mars, well, they show us what going global is really all about.
So the next time you're tempted to complain about the weather, take the larger view.
Take the perspective of the solar system and see how good we really have it.
It's probably not a coincidence that Earth's weather is the most hospitable to life.
In our next lecture, we'll take a look at even larger storms, not storms on any planet,
but giant magnetic storms on the sun.
We'll see you then.
