The sun appears as a relatively constant feature in our lives.
It rises and sets.
It lights our world.
Its energy makes life possible.
It's kind of easy to take it for granted.
It's a stable feature of nature.
Indeed, the major changes in our sun will happen over billion year time scales.
Our sun was born about 4.6 billion years ago, and it should live for about 12 billion years.
Now when I say live in terms of a star, that means how long it's undergoing nuclear fusion
in its core.
You will probably see 10 billion years as a round number stated for the lifetime of
the sun in many places, but detailed calculations predict that it should live for about 12.4
billion years.
When the sun first formed, it was a little fainter and a little smaller.
But as it converts hydrogen to helium in its core, it takes four protons and turns into
one helium nucleus, and that gives a decrease in number density.
But corresponding has a little bit of decrease in pressure, so the sun contracts and heats
up a little.
Over billions of years, it becomes hotter in the core, and therefore hotter on its surface,
and more energy is thus given off.
The sun is now about 40% brighter than when it was born, and it's also expanded a little
to be about 6% larger.
The surface temperature of the sun has increased by about 300 degrees centigrade.
After about 11 billion years, the sun will run out of hydrogen in its core.
It will contract further, it will heat up, and fuse helium.
While the core of the sun is 15 million degrees today, when it tries to do helium fusion,
it will have to heat up to 100 million degrees.
Its incredible change in heat will cause it to swell to 100 times its current size.
Mercury will be engulfed and will be inside the sun, and perhaps Venus as well.
This period, the red giant phase of the sun, will last for a few hundred million years.
Toward the end, the sun will be 2,000 times brighter than it is today.
The icy moons of the giant planets will melt.
But life on Earth won't change, simply because there won't be any life on Earth.
Earth will already be a cinder.
You see, over the next 3 billion years, as the sun grows hotter, the Earth will slowly
lose its polar ice caps, and then its oceans will evaporate, and even its atmosphere will
eventually be lost to space.
Well before the sun dies, Earth will be inhospitable for life.
Fortunately, we have 3 billion years to prepare.
There are other changes on the sun that happen on human time scales, and they can have effects
on life on Earth as well, although not quite as dramatic.
The easiest changes on the sun to track are sunspots.
Here's an image of a sunspot to remind you what they look like.
Sunspots are regions of intense magnetic fields.
The field lines are concentrated in the dark core of the sunspot.
They appear dark because they're actually cooler than the surrounding photosphere.
They're about a thousand degrees below the temperature of the photosphere.
That still means they're about 4,000, maybe 4,500 degrees.
That's still really hot and really bright.
They just appear dark by contrast.
If we look at the full view of the sun, you can see it has a distribution of sunspots.
And the sunspots usually come in pairs.
These are one of North magnetic polarity and one of South magnetic polarity, and so the
field lines go from one sunspot to the other polarity sunspot.
Now in this image, I'll show you the magnetic field measures.
Now this image is the exact same day as that previous image with visible light.
So when we look in the magnetic field image, white is South polarity and black is North
polarity, you can see this strong grouping into pairs.
The magnetic field exits from one sunspot and reenters the sun at the other.
Now simply counting the number of sunspots will reveal a basic pattern in the sun.
This image is the number of sunspots over time.
It shows you a record of counts for over two centuries.
As basic pattern, strongly obvious here, is that the number rises and falls every 11 years.
Sometimes there are hundreds of sunspots, sometimes there are few or even no sunspots.
The peak height, the number whether it's, you know, can be about 50 and can be about 200.
It varies and there's no real long-term trend in terms of how high the peak height is over time.
There is a trend in looking at where the sunspots occur on the surface of the sun, their latitude.
This is the plot over time over about the last 100 years or so of the location on the sun,
the latitude versus time.
And you can see that with each sunspot cycle, it starts out at higher latitudes and then
they slowly migrate towards the equator and then they disappear altogether and then they
reappear at higher latitudes.
We call this the butterfly diagram because if you look at the pattern sideways, it looks
like a series of butterflies.
But one doesn't have to observe for an entire 11 years to see changes on the sun.
Here is a movie of the magnetic field on the sun over the course of about a month.
You can note that the sunspots constantly are changing in their structure.
You will also notice a tendency for the sunspot groups to align diagonally with one axis pointed
away from the center and the other one pointed towards the center.
In this final frame of the movie, you can see this white grouping here pointing towards
the equator and this black grouping here pointing towards the equator.
The natural explanation for the alignment is, well, if you watch it long enough, you find
that the equator is rotating faster than the poles and this produces this diagonal alignment.
You find that the equator is rotating in about 26 days whereas as the sun rotates in about
34 days at the pole.
This is what we call differential rotation and since the sun's surface is broken by
this magnetic field, imagine the magnetic field and the rotation around the center is
going faster, it's going slower around the poles and the magnetic field is going to become
all wrapped up after a while.
This is what carries the sunspots towards the equator over its 11 year cycle.
Further, if we combine this with another observation that the polarity of the sun reverses at every
minimum, then we get the full picture of the sun's basic cycle.
Basically it's a magnetic cycle.
It starts out in a normal magnetic field, after 11 years of differential rotation the
magnetic field has become all wrapped up, it disappears, it reformulates itself in a
reverse polarity and then the whole cycle repeats.
So if you consider the reversal, the full solar cycle lasts for about 22 years.
But the polarity isn't that important, so we usually think of the solar cycle as really
only lasting 11 years, but technically it is 22 years.
What produces the magnetic field, well it's thought to be produced by an interior dynamo.
Dynamo requires three things, rotation, conduction, and convection.
First of all we know the sun is rotating, second of all it's made of charged plasma,
so definitely got a lot of conduction going on, and third, the outer third of the sun
is undergoing convection.
The material in the convective zone is going from the top of the radiative zone up to the
surface of the sun to release heat.
So it has all three things necessary for dynamo.
Let's take a look at interior structure.
Here is the interior structure as deduced from Helios seismology, we can deduce the
interior motions.
Now the surface of the sphere in this diagram shows the zonal banding, this is the motions
on the outer part of the sun, and this is the banding that you see on the giant planets.
In the equator you see these yellow bands, these are like the trade winds, and these
are traveling faster than the bands above and below it.
The boundaries between these zones are where we expect sunspots to form.
On the right hand side of the diagram in the cutaway, these streamlines show circulation
in the interior.
It looks very much like Hadley's cell circulation in Venus's atmosphere, or in Earth's atmosphere.
The material is transported from the equator down to the pole near the surface and then
transported back from the pole to the equator deep in the interior of the sun.
The cutaway also shows that differential rotation extends through the convective zone.
You can see the red on the cutaway shows that it is rotating faster at the equator and it
changes to blue at the poles, it's rotating slower at the pole.
When you think about this, that it's got this Hadley's cell type circulation, and it's
got this differential rotation, that converging chevron pattern that we saw on the atmosphere
of Venus is happening in the interior of the sun.
You will note that the radiative zone is entirely red in the interior, and it's believed that
this undergoes uniform rotation.
The dynamo is believed to be generated right at the boundary between the convective zone
and the radiative zone.
So that turbulent boundary where you've got the differential rotation going on out here
and the uniform rotation going on in here, that is where they believe the dynamo is generated.
We're still studying the details of why and how it flips its polarity every 11 years.
The effects of this magnetic field, however, are rampant throughout the sun's atmosphere,
and the activity is best seen in high energy wavelength.
Let me give you some examples.
Here is the sun seen with visible light.
It's at 5500 degrees.
This is the emission from the photosphere, and there are several very large sunspot groups.
As a matter of fact, this one just below center is one of the largest sunspot groups ever
seen.
If instead a visible light, we look in ultraviolet light, here is the sun in the near ultraviolet.
This is emission from helium atoms at about 60,000 degrees.
Emission from the chromosphere, and you can see that the energy is clearly concentrated
in the sunspots.
The action on the sun is associated with those sunspots.
If we go further into the ultraviolet, this is emission from iron atoms at about 2 million
degrees.
Now we're seeing emission from the solar corona.
And the energy here is coming from the sun, associated with the sunspot regions again,
but it's from the magnetic field lines.
If you look closely, you can see sort of loopy structures.
These are the magnetic field lines emanating from the sunspots, and the energy is located
inside those magnetic field lines.
Finally, one last example is looking at the sun in X-ray.
And this is a wonderful image, because this is observations from the Yoko satellite from
1991 through 1999.
It goes from the peak of one solar cycle down through a minimum, and up to the rise of the
next cycle.
And it's easily apparent in this image to see that there's a lot of solar activity in
1991.
As you go through the minimum, there's almost no activity on the surface of the sun.
And then as you come back to 1999, you've got, again, lots of activity on the sun.
This is the changing face of the sun during its cycle.
Now let's take a look at the storms on the sun.
The sun's high energy features include active regions, solar flares, and coronal mass ejections.
The active regions are associated with sunspots.
Here is an image of a coronal loop.
This is plasma at about two million degrees, and it's traveling along the magnetic field
lines, as we saw in previous images.
But what you can see in this image is that it's intensely heated at the base of the
coronal loop.
The plasma is heated, it travels up the loop, it cools down, and then it comes crashing
down onto the sun on the other side.
The loops can be half a million kilometers high.
The sunspot groups are located in the photosphere, but as they provide the energy up into the
corona, they're called active regions.
At the tops of these coronal loops, this is where we see solar flares occur.
Now here is a misconception that we need to correct.
Sometimes you will see an image like this, and they will point to this feature in the
upper right hand corner, and call that a solar flare.
This is not a solar flare.
This is an extended prominence.
Now it looks like what we think of as a flare.
When you think of a flare by the side of the road, it's energy shooting off, right?
This is not what it is in the sun.
A flare in the sun is an intense energy burst, not an actual prominence of material shooting
away from the sun.
There are eruptive prominences, but they're relatively tame compared to solar flares.
As a matter of fact, this image here is a 60,000 degree plasma, not the million degree
plasma that we'll see in a solar flare.
The flares are just an intense release of magnetic energy.
Now within an active region, you have the magnetic field lines, and the plasma ions
are traversing across it, and they're creating pressure on these magnetic field lines.
When the pressure becomes too great on these magnetic field lines, they short circuit.
The field lines reorient themselves, and the pressure energy is released explosively.
I have a small little demo to give you the idea.
Now this is nothing like magnetic field lines, but this is a loop of wire that wants to resist
attempts to twist it, and as I twist it, it wants to come back in its normal position.
But if I start twisting hard enough, whoops, if I twist hard enough, I can collapse it
down to a new orientation.
The wire re-orients itself, and it goes to a smaller, lower energy state.
This is just an analogy to what happens in a solar flare.
In a solar flare, but it's the same idea in that the energy is released when the magnetic
field lines re-orient themselves and drop to a lower energy state, and all the pressure
that was built up to re-orient them is then released explosively.
This is an image of what a solar flare looks like.
It's not that impressive, because it's really just that bright spot right here on the surface
of the sun.
It's not that impressive in how it looks, but it's really quite impressive in its energy.
These are just gigantic explosions.
It's a burst of radio waves at the top of the loops, and then the ions of the plasma
that's in these loops gets accelerated and slams down into the chromosphere at millions
of kilometers per hour.
That releases a flood of X-rays.
So that's how we see solar flares, really, is the burst in radio waves and also a burst
in X-rays.
The energy that is released in a solar flare just goes beyond our imagination.
It's about the equivalent of two billion nuclear bombs, and that just goes beyond what I myself
can realistically comprehend.
The other major eruption on the sun are called coronal mass ejections.
This is an image of a coronal mass ejection.
Actually, it's a composite image.
The outer portion is from a coronograph.
Now, in order to see the corona of the sun, you actually have to block out the light of
the sun.
So this circular feature in the center here is a disk blocking up the light of the sun
so that we can see the corona.
In the center of this disk, they've added the UV image of the sun just to show you the
scale of the sun.
In a coronal mass ejection, unlike a solar flare where there's just major, mostly energy
released, here you're actually spewing mass into space.
There are billions of tons of hot plasma that are sent streaming across interplanetary space.
All this material is just pushed out away from the sun.
This is the event that most people think of when they're thinking of a solar storm.
I have a wonderful movie here of a series of coronal mass ejections, some large and some
small.
This takes place over the course of about 20 days.
Now, if you watch closely, you can see several, there we go, coronal mass ejections, and there
are some small ones that come across.
Sometimes it bursts quite large, and sometimes they're just subtle bursts.
There.
The bright object passing in the background is actually the planet Jupiter.
And here's a sequence of several really big ones.
This is not a particularly active time on the sun.
This is just a normal one month period in the life of the sun.
The sun is continually emitting coronal mass ejections.
You also see in there the steady stream of emission from the sun, and that's the solar
wind that we'll talk about in just a minute.
We can make connections between these phenomena because we have a fleet of satellites monitoring
the sun at all times.
Here is an image of several different satellite observations.
In the upper left, we have an image with visible light.
And we can see the sunspot group in the photosphere.
In the upper right, we see the ultraviolet image where a solar flare was observed three
hours later after the visible image was taken.
In the lower left, 13 hours later, we can see the coronal mass ejection associated with
that solar flare.
And four hours after that, the coronal mass ejection from a wider angle view continues
to expand.
So we go from sunspot group to solar flare to coronal mass ejection, energy moving from
different scales from the photosphere to the chromosphere to the corona, and then spreading
out across interplanetary space.
In a few hours or a few days later, that coronal mass ejection will arrive at Earth's orbit.
And when that happens, we get a storm of particles.
This is a series of storms that are called the Halloween storms.
What you want to watch for is on October 28th at 11.42 a.m., a coronal mass ejection was
sent out towards Earth.
Three hours later, it starts arriving at the satellite, and it will be obvious when that
flood of particles reaches the satellite.
Again, you can see a few coronal mass ejections here.
Then you see a very strong one oriented straight towards Earth, and there you see the particles
as they arrive at the detector of the satellite, basically overwhelming the satellite and creating
this incredible noise on the satellite.
Another one thereafter, and a few more coronal mass ejections until the sun resumes its normal
phase.
So the sun-observing satellites take a lot of radiation hits, and this shows you the
danger of solar storms for astronauts.
This fleet of sun-observing satellites allows us to monitor the sun and will give us advanced
warning.
Some of the plasma can really be highly accelerated to almost the speed of light, and we can literally
have only 15 or 20 minutes warning the astronauts to get into the safe part of the space station,
for example.
The other thing that you see in the movies is the solar wind.
This is the steady streaming flow flowing away from the sun, and the explanation for
it is basically simple.
As we go from the photosphere to the chromosphere to the corona, the gas heats up to several
million degrees, and when you heat something, you increase its pressure.
What is there for that pressure to push on outside the sun?
Nothing.
So the thermal pressure causes this million-degree plasma to stream out away from the sun.
That's what creates the solar wind.
The speed of the solar wind is about 450 kilometers per second at the equator.
This is one and a half million kilometers per hour, or approximately a million miles
per hour.
Now, I know you've probably said, oh, we were going a million miles an hour.
Well, the solar wind truly is moving at a million miles per hour.
Still, Earth is 93 million miles away, so it'll take about 93 hours for it to reach
Earth, and that's about four days.
The crazy thing about the solar wind is that we've had the Ulysses satellite go over the
top of the sun, and we've found that the solar wind is faster at its poles.
The north and south poles, it's moving at 800 kilometers per second, and we're really
not sure why it's faster at the poles.
The other thing about the solar wind is that as it travels farther from the sun, its speed
is roughly constant throughout the planetary region.
There's really nothing to make it slow down, so there's no reason for it to change speed,
so it starts off at about 450 kilometers per second, and it continues that way all through
the region of the planet.
But you'll note that as it's going out, it's covering a larger and larger area, so the
density drops as the square of the distance from the sun.
It also carries the sun's magnetic field with it, and you combine that with the sun's rotation
as it's streaming away and the sun is rotating.
What you get is a spiral magnetic field threading through the ecliptic plane of the solar system.
So these are the solar outbursts, and when they reach Earth, they don't just slam into
the planet, they interact with Earth's magnetic field.
An Earth's magnetic field, we call the magnetosphere.
Now the magnetic field is generated by the dynamo in Earth's core.
Earth has a molten iron outer core, and when that rotates and has conduction in it, it
creates a dipole field with a north and south pole, just like a barn magnet.
Now currently, it's interesting to note that the north magnetic pole is actually located
near the south geographic pole, but this changes every few hundred thousand years.
We can measure this by looking at the mid-ocean ridges.
The magma from the interior of the Earth comes up at the mid-ocean ridges and spreads out
and creates new crust.
When the magma cools, the rocks that it creates retain the magnetic field from the time of
cooling.
So by examining the rocks at the mid-ocean ridges, we can see the history of the magnetic
field on Earth.
We find that the polarity has reversed every few hundred thousand years.
The magnetosphere is the region of the influence in space of Earth's magnetic field.
This is a drawing of the magnetosphere, and it's really not shaped like a sphere.
If there were no solar wind, it might be shaped like a sphere, but the solar wind presses
on it on the sunward side, and the magnetic pressure from the sun pushes off and creates
a bow shock.
This region of the bow shock is called the magnetopause, and it's located about 70,000
kilometers above Earth's surface.
On the anti-sumward side, the magnetic pressure of the sun draws out Earth's magnetic field
into a tail.
We call it the magnetotail, and it stretches out Earth's field to a very, very long.
It's many, many times larger than Earth's diameter, heading out on the anti-sumward
side.
Now it's very good that we have a magnetic field, because it acts as a shield against
all this radiation, the particles of the solar wind.
Most of it is blocked, but some plasma leaks through, and when it does, it creates beautiful
interactions called the aurora.
Here is an image of the aurora as seen from Earth, and this is where the solar wind particles
leak through the magnetic field.
They flow along the magnetic field lines to the poles, and they strike high in the atmosphere
and release their energy.
They're releasing their energy in the air of the atmosphere called the thermosphere.
In this image, you will notice that there's very streaky.
This is the charged particles streaking down through the atmosphere as they release their
energy.
The colors are due to the emission from the atoms in Earth's atmosphere, mostly excited
oxygen atoms.
The ions strike the oxygen atoms, excite them, and they give off characteristic lines like
the green shown in this image.
We can also see the aurora from space.
This is an image from the space shuttle, and here you can actually see the vertical structure
of the aurora.
It's sort of like this curtain of glowing light dancing atop the atmosphere.
Coronal mass ejections can lead to exceptional displays of the aurora, and this is created
by something called magnetic substorm, which is really caused by a reconnection event in
the magnetotail.
Here is a movie of such an event.
So the plasma from the sun's wind from a coronal mass ejection hits Earth's magnetic
field, bends it back, the ions load up the magnetic field, the magnetic field then starts
to collapse, has a reconnection event, and then the ions are free to flow back into the
poles where it creates the incredible aurora.
Notice that the aurora is generally a ring around the poles, around the North Pole and
around the South Pole.
Now not all particles strike Earth's atmosphere.
Not all the particles that leak into the magnetic field get all down and become part of these
auroral displays.
There are two major regions, called the Van Allen belts, where the particles have relatively
stable orbits.
There's an inner belt that's a few thousand kilometers above Earth's surface, and then
there's an outer belt that's tens of thousands of kilometers above Earth's surface.
All together, when you put this together, space can be a really dangerous place because
the inner Van Allen belt is sort of a limitation for low Earth orbit.
This is where the space shuttle, the space station, and the Hubble Space Telescope are
orbiting.
You can't go too high in low Earth orbit, otherwise you start running into the radiation
of the inner Van Allen belt.
On the outer part, the communication satellites are in what we call geosynchronous orbit,
so that they stay over the same place on Earth at all times.
That location is about 40,000 kilometers above the surface.
They have to deal with the outer Van Allen belt, and also when solar storms push on the
magnetopause, the magnetopause can actually come inside geosynchronous orbit, and these
communication satellites can be exposed to the full brunt of the solar wind.
This is how a solar storm can knock out your cell phone.
But it leads to an intriguing thought.
What happens when Earth's magnetic field reverses?
We see from the historical record that the polarity has changed.
Does that leave us unprotected to solar radiation?
The atmosphere would still absorb many of the particles, but the number reaching the
ground would greatly increase.
This may be perhaps the only time when one could see aurora at the equator.
Now we do see aurora on the outer planets.
Here for example, is an image of Jupiter, and overlaid on top of it is an ultraviolet
image that shows the aurora on the poles of Jupiter.
We also see aurora on the poles of Saturn.
This is a composite of three images with the visible and the ultraviolet images overlaid,
and you can see the changes in Saturn's aurora over the course of four days.
This is rather stronger changes than we expected.
We didn't expect there to be very much happening at Jupiter-Saturn Uranus and Neptune, because
the solar wind density is correspondingly lower at these outer planets.
It is 1.25th the density at Jupiter, and 1.100th the density at Saturn, what it is at Earth.
So the outer planets do interact with the solar wind, but not so much.
Where does it all end?
The outer boundary of the Sun's emissions is called the heliopause.
This is the point where the pressure of the solar wind pushing out equals the pressure
of the interstellar medium pushing in, the material between the stars.
It's estimated to be about 100 to 150 astronomical units away from the Sun, and it would be in
the direction of the Sun's motion as it orbits around the center of the Milky Way Galaxy.
This image shows a diagram of the heliopause, as well as the trajectories of the Voyager
satellites.
You can see the inner part of the outer boundary is called the termination shock, and this
is where the solar wind slows down.
It goes from going supersonic to being subsonic, from 450 km per second to about 100 km per
second.
Outside of that, we have the heliopause where the pressure is balanced, and outside of that
we have the bow shock, where the interstellar medium dominates.
We also show the trajectories of the Voyager satellites, and Voyager 1 passed through the
termination shock in 2004, and Voyager 2 passed through it in 2006.
However, they passed through it at different distances from the Sun, showing the termination
shock distance varies, perhaps in accordance with the emissions of the Sun.
Both of them will pass through the heliopause in the next couple of decades.
Hopefully, their instruments will be sensitive enough to measure its passage through the
heliopause, and then they will travel beyond.
This is what they call the Voyager interstellar missions.
The Voyager satellites, which have explored throughout our solar system, now become interstellar
travelers wandering through our Milky Way.
In our next lectures, we will explore some strange worlds much closer to home, the many
moons of the solar system, as well as the rings of the giant planets.
We'll see you then.
