Today's topic is the lunatic fringe of the solar system.
Now I use the word lunatic in the astronomical sense.
The Latin root luna means moon, and an old definition of lunacy is an insanity that increases
and decreases with the phase of the moon.
Now I don't know of any scientific evidence that says the moon can drive you crazy, but
there is a well-known optical illusion.
Have you ever seen a full moon on the horizon and said, wow, that's a huge full moon?
And then later you see it high in the sky and you go, well, it doesn't seem quite as
big.
That's actually an optical illusion.
And there's much psychological debate about why the moon appears larger when it's on the
horizon than it does when it's high in the sky.
I really don't know why it occurs.
Maybe it sort of seems closer because it's over the treetops, but I do know that even
professional astronomers like me experience it.
When I see a low moon, it really does look bigger.
Even though I know mathematically, it's still the same size.
Here is an image of the full moon in the sky, and I find it rather powerful.
You know, sometimes I just find myself staring at the moon, and I really don't know why.
I just, you know, am pondering something, and I can't really tell why I'm staring,
but it's just drawing me there.
As a word for it, we call it being moon struck, and it's easy to see how the moon was very
important in earlier cultures because it provides light in the evening.
If you want, without electric lights, if you wanted to work in the evenings, it helped
to have a full moon, and that, of course, is the source of the harvest moon.
You could gather crops well into the evening and into the night when the full moon was
up in September.
And the phases, the phases of the moon, or the moon goes through its phases in 29 and
a half days.
That, of course, led to the definition of our month.
Now in folklore, that leads to the idea of a blue moon.
And what we talk about as the blue moon is the second full moon in a month, because the
month is just slightly longer than the phases of the moon.
There's a possibility of having one full moon in the beginning and one full moon at the
end.
And that's the idea of a blue moon, and this occurs once in a blue moon, every two and
a half years.
Now that's not the original folklore meaning of a blue moon, that's sort of the common
accepted definition today.
But even today, the moon is a powerful symbol in our culture.
We find the moon in the sky to be comforting familiarity.
There's romance in moonlight, and it evokes dreams of faraway places.
The moon is very important for astronomy, because it fuels our imagination of the universe.
I mean, the space race would not have been the same had we not had the moon available
as a destination.
However, I think that moons in general are not really given their due in the solar system.
Everyone memorizes the eight planets, used to be nine planets, but now it's eight planets.
Everyone memorizes those.
But how many of you have memorized the seven large moons of the solar system?
See the moons are seen as secondary, and what I'd like to do in this lecture is take
a look at these moons as worlds unto themselves.
We'll start with those seven large moons, and our moon is one of them.
Here is a comparison of Earth and the moon.
The moon is about one fourth the size of Earth.
Earth is around 13,000 kilometers, the moon is around 3,500 kilometers in diameter.
Now you may see images like this out there.
This is an image of Earth and moon taken from space.
Actually, it's a really cool image.
This is the first image of the Earth and moon taken from the planet Mars.
This is from the orbiter going around Mars, looking back at the Earth and moon.
Now when you see this image, you think that the Earth and moon are pretty close together,
but they're not.
Actually, the real distance between Earth and moon looks more like this.
And the way I memorize it is that the Earth, as shown here in this image, is about 30 Earth
diameters away from the moon.
That's about 380,000 kilometers.
It looks really far in this image, but we have traversed that gap.
This image of the moon shows that this is the only place in the solar system that humans
have visited besides our planet.
It is our closest neighbor in space.
It is also the furthest distance we have traveled into space in person.
Now when we looked at the moon, when we study the moon, well, we find out the basics about
it.
We already have discovered that in this course, that its surface is dominated by craters, and
from those craters we understand the history of impacts throughout the solar system.
And when you look at the full moon here, you can see that there are some dark regions.
These are the mares, which we originally believed to be lunar seas, but we now know them to
be lava-filled planes.
And you can see a lot of them have circular boundaries around them indicating that they
are lava-filled planes due to very large impacts, impacts that punch through the crust
of the moon, and the lava then flows up and fills the circular basin.
Now compared to the other large moons of the solar system, our moon is actually quite
respectable.
Here is an image of the seven large moons.
They are in decreasing order of size, Ganymede, Titan, Callisto, Io, Armon, Europa, and Triton.
Now Ganymede, Callisto, Io, and Europa are the four Galilean moons that Galileo saw in
1610.
Titan is the large moon of Saturn, and Triton is the large moon of Neptune.
Now I note for Triton in this image, it's not a full disc shot.
There are some full disc shots of Triton, but they don't really show much detail.
This is just one where part of Triton is in shadow.
These large moons are comparable to the rocky planets.
Matter of fact, Ganymede and Titan are even larger than Mercury, and all of these are
larger than Pluto.
So I consider these to be the major moons, and these would be the ones that you would
really want to know about if you were studying the solar system just a little bit.
You can tell because we've discussed many of these in previous lectures.
We talked about the volcanoes on Io, we talked about the ice rafts on Europa, we talked
about the methane geysers on Triton, and there's only a little bit more I would want to add
in this lecture.
What I would like to talk about is Ganymede, the largest one.
I haven't really covered Ganymede before.
Ganymede is ice covered, and you can see on it these bright sort of spots on it.
These are impact spots where the impact has broken up the ice and extruded fresh snow on
top of the ice.
There's also a very strong contrast between the lighter regions of Ganymede and the dark
regions.
The dark regions are heavily cratered and much more ancient terrain than the lighter regions.
The lighter regions have been reprocessed.
The color in the dark regions come from some rock material.
Basically, if some of the ice diffuses away, then what is left is more rocky material and
it has a darker appearance.
Now the boundary between these shows the details of the light regions.
Here is the boundary, and on the left hand side of this image is a dark region of Ganymede,
and on the right hand side is a light region.
These light regions show long parallel grooves.
This indicates the surface of Ganymede has extended and flexed.
Basically, this is ice tectonics, the sort that we saw on Venus, where Venus stretched
and flexed, but this is happening on the ice moon of Ganymede.
There is also some evidence of what we call cryovulcanism.
These are icy flows from the interior, where the ice underneath wells up and spreads out,
and sort of like vulcanism, but in this case the lava would be a slush.
So the ice that we see here on Ganymede and these icy features is a key to understanding
a lot of the moons, because most of the outer solar system is ice, and most of the moons
are out in the outer solar system.
Another moon out there is Callisto.
Callisto is ice covered like Ganymede, and it has that very dark surface, so you would
expect it to be an older surface, like the dark regions of Ganymede, and you would be
right.
It has an abundance of craters, you can see numerous of these white spots all over it.
So when Galileo went to visit Callisto, we expected to see lots and lots of small craters,
sort of like we see on our moon.
They did not find them.
There is some erosion process on Callisto that is erasing the small craters.
It's possibly due to the sublimation of the ice.
The ice sublimates and diffuses away from the moon, and the surface then is a little
more porous and is able to collapse and erase these small craters.
The sublimation would, as on Ganymede, expose the dark material and give Callisto its darker
appearance.
There are only a few signs of ice geologic activity on Callisto, similar to what we see
on Ganymede.
The third moon, large moon I'd like to talk about today, is Titan.
Now we've talked about this before, it's the only moon with an atmosphere, but what makes
it really special is it's the only other moon besides our moon that we have landed
on.
And here we have a movie of the Huygens probe released from the Cassini satellite landing
on Titan.
Now the movie starts with a little bit of computer graphics to orient you, but this is all real
data moving on.
And the movie takes about four and a half hours before landing to when it lands on the
surface.
You can see we quickly pass through the smog layer of Titan, and then slowly be able to
see the terrain underneath.
As we get through the clouds, we can see the dark regions that we originally thought to
be methane oceans on Titan, but we now know are just ice.
As the Huygens probe descends, you can begin to see the terrain, the icy terrain, it's
just hills and plains on Titan.
And slowly we come down to a descent, and as we hit the ground, we're going to switch
to the side view.
You can see the icy rocks, these are basically ice balls, you can see the parachute shadow
passing across, and in the lower right hand corner, there is a lamp spot.
Now the surface of Titan looks here to be kind of bright, but this is basically just
due to the very long exposure they're taking and the lamp that they have there to light
it up.
One scientist who was looking at this described it as trying to take pictures of an asphalt
parking lot at dusk.
So this is what the surface of Titan looks like, and it's sort of historic, you know,
this is the second moon of the solar system we have landed on.
Well, those are the major moons, but these moons are vastly outnumbered by the smaller
moons.
If there are seven large moons, there are about 160 smaller moons.
There are about nine, what I would call medium sized moons, I guess I would say the large
moons are several thousand kilometers, they're sort of, you know, rocky planet sized.
Then there are about 10 medium sized moons, greater than about a thousand kilometers,
then there are about 20 small moons, greater than about a hundred kilometers, and then
about 50 tiny moons, only about 10 kilometers to 100 kilometers.
And that leaves about, oh, 70 moons that are even smaller than that, that are just a few
kilometers or even less across.
So let's take a look at some of these moons to see examples of the features.
Here is image of the second largest moon of Saturn, it's called Rhea, and it's a medium
sized moon, it's about 1500 kilometers across.
You can see in the upper right of Rhea, there's a very large impact basin called Tirawa.
This is 360 kilometers across.
Such large impacts, they seem to be common among Saturn's moons.
Another one of them is found on the moon Tethys.
This is also a medium sized moon, and it features a very prominent crater called Odysseus.
This is a multi-ringed impact basin, and the rings arise both from the impact and from
the shock waves that ripple through the surface.
So this is a little bit larger than just the sort of crater that you would see from a single
impact, because the shock waves have rippled through and broken up the surface for a much
larger region.
Now when we think of the classic Saturn moon with a large crater, it would have to be this
one, Mimus.
Now Mimus is a small moon, only about 400 kilometers in diameter, and Herschel Crater,
as it is called, is one third of that.
This crater was first seen by Voyager 1 in 1980, and this was during the original Star
Wars trilogy, so we commonly refer to this as the Death Star moon, because it resembles
the Death Star in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Now however, this is no longer the moon I think of with a giant impact crater, because
Cassini has observed another moon that has even more of giant impacts.
So the moon I think of most now is this moon, Iapetus.
Iapetus is a medium sized moon, about 1400 kilometers in diameter, and if you look on
the left side, you can see one hemisphere with a very large impact basin, and if you
look on the right side, you can see several other impact basins on it.
There are at least nine large impact basins on Iapetus.
It's really had a turbulent history, and as is evident from this image, we also think
of Iapetus as the black and white moon.
This shows you both hemispheres, and one hemisphere is basically as bright as snow, and the other
hemisphere is as dark as coal.
Why?
Well, the best hypothesis is that it's due to accretion of materials while it orbits.
Like our moon, Iapetus is in a tidal lock around its planet, which means it always shows
the same face to Saturn.
The dark hemisphere of Iapetus is always the leading hemisphere as it's orbiting around
Saturn, so you could see how the leading hemisphere could sweep up material, and perhaps this
material is ejected from outer moons, and is infalling, spiraling in towards Saturn,
and Iapetus is just sort of swinging around and sweeping it up.
Let's move on to some moons of Uranus, and see what they have to show us.
When we look at the moons of Uranus, we actually see lots of icy geologic features.
This image is of Uranus' largest moon, Titania.
It is about 1,600 kilometers in diameter, and if you look along the right-hand side,
you can see some very long canyons.
The longest canyon that has been measured on Titania is almost as long as the planet
is wide.
It's about 1,500 kilometers long.
These canyons are thought to indicate expansion and contraction of the surface, and the fracturing
of that icy surface to create these long canyons.
You can see even more of that on another moon of Uranus, Aerial.
Aerial is another medium-sized moon.
It's a little smaller, about 1,200 kilometers in diameter, and you can see an extensive
canyon system.
You can see these canyons running north and south and east and west and all over the place,
and these ones, unlike the ones on Titania, appear to be extensively filled in with these
cryovolcanic flows.
So while you have the fracturing on Aerial, you also have the cryovolcanism, which appears
to be filling in these canyons.
The fracturing is taken to even greater lengths when we look at Uranus' moon, Miranda.
Miranda is a small moon of Uranus, and if you look at it, it's got a very jumbled terrain,
and you have to look a little closer, and you can see sort of like a chevron shape in
the upper right.
It's sort of like a puzzle piece here, and if you look down here, there are very strong
contrasts between some smooth regions and some jumbled regions and some striped regions,
and it looks really like a whole bunch of puzzle pieces put together wrong.
That's actually what we originally thought when we saw Miranda after Voyager.
It was initially suggested that the moon had been hit by a giant impact, smashed it to
pieces, and eventually reassembled itself, and so that Miranda was just a moon that
had been broken apart and reassembled.
We no longer think that.
We now think it's just very extensive ice tectonic activity that is stretching and flexing
and twisting the moon and producing these amazing shapes that we see here.
Moving down in scale, we then move to the tiny moons of the solar system, and as we
go smaller and smaller, the shapes are no longer spherical.
Gravity is not massive enough to make these objects spherical, and they start to resemble
things that we think of more as asteroids.
Here is a moon Janus.
It is about 200 kilometers across, and that's just not big enough for it to be spherical,
and you can see it has a sort of, I don't know, trapezoidal type shape.
Here's another Hyperion that's a moon of Saturn.
It has a very oblong shape, but what really is strange about Hyperion is that it almost
has sort of a sponge-like appearance.
If you look at all these craters across the side and running across the middle, it looks
like the craters have really punched through, and that's really what has happened.
We believe Hyperion is a very low density moon, and that when the meteorite hits and
smashes, it actually smashes deep in and creates this sponge-like appearance on the surface
of Hyperion.
Now you'll notice that we haven't mentioned any moons of Jupiter yet, and that's because
Jupiter doesn't have any medium or even small moons.
Its largest moon is actually this one here in the center of this image, Amalthea.
So after the large Galilean satellites, where it's got four very large moons, the next
largest one is about 250 kilometers across, and that's Amalthea.
And it is not large enough to be spherical.
Matter of fact, these are the four inner moons of Jupiter.
These are once interior to the four large moons.
They are Thede, Amalthea, Adrastea, and Metis.
And as you can see, they're just, you know, flotsam and jetsam.
These are the small moons that probably are captured asteroids.
Finally, let me note that even asteroids themselves can have moons.
This image here is of an asteroid named Ida, and it was very surprising when Galileo passed
by Ida on its way to Jupiter to find that Ida had a little moon, Dactyl.
Ida is only about 56 kilometers across, a very small asteroid.
You wouldn't think it would have enough gravity to hold a moon, but Dactyl is only about one
and a half kilometers across.
And the orbit radius of Dactyl around Ida is around 100 kilometers.
So it's really a small little moon orbiting around it.
And as an astronomer, I have to look at this and wonder, how does it really stay in orbit?
Because the gravitational field of Ida is really oblong and really oblate, so it's kind
of interesting to wonder whether or not that orbit is really any sort of stable orbit.
It's got to be processing and wobbling and going all over the place.
Would be quite interesting, actually, if we could ever follow it.
So those are the physical characteristics of the moon, what they look like, how big they
are, but in terms of classifying the moons, it's actually a little more useful to look
at their orbits.
And when we classify them by their orbits, we come up with two classes, regular and
irregular satellites.
This is an image of the inner moons of Jupiter.
And they are the four Galilean moons, and the four moons I just showed you.
You can see that they all lie in a plane, and their orbits are roughly circular.
It sort of resembles a mini solar system around Jupiter.
And really that's how we describe the four Galilean moons of Jupiter, but here you can
see that it also includes four other moons.
These are what we call regular moons.
If instead we back out and see all the rest of the moons of Jupiter, you look right in
close, you can see the orbit of Callisto, that's that circular feature in the center,
and all the other moons, the other 50s or so, so odd moons of Jupiter have no such organization.
The orbits are all over the place at many inclinations.
They have ellipticities, you know, they're not really circular.
This would be what we call the irregular moons.
And all of the giant planets have both regular and irregular moons.
The regular moons will have generally circular orbits, they'll generally be near the equatorial
plane of the planet, so they orbit around it as it rotates.
And the irregular moons will have a variety of orbits, they'll be tilted, they'll be
elongated.
And they'll even be going backwards around the planet compared to how the moon rotates,
and they'll generally be found in the outer parts of the moon's systems.
The regular moons are considered to have formed along with the planet.
You can imagine if the planet's rotating, that you could form a nice disk around it,
and those moons could form in there.
The irregular moons are those that have thought to have been gravitationally captured, such
as these outer moons of Jupiter, which would be the small moons that can be captured in
any type of orbit.
Another example of irregular moons would be Mars moons.
And this is an image of Mars's moons Phobos and Deimos compared to the asteroid Gaspera.
Each of these objects is between 10 and 20 kilometers across.
And you can look, and just by comparison, and there's really not much doubt that Mars's
moons are really captured asteroids.
The most surprising of all of the irregular moons would be Triton.
Here is a diagram of Neptune's orbits, and you can see the regular moons in the interior
out to the moon Proteus, and then you see Triton on the outside.
And you can tell, all right, it's somewhat inclined, about 23 degrees compared to the
regular moons.
That really doesn't make it hugely different, does it?
No.
What really makes it different is that it's in retrograde rotation.
So Triton is actually orbiting in the opposite direction compared to all the other moons.
All the other moons are orbiting this way, Triton is orbiting this way.
This makes it amazing because this is a large moon of the solar system, and it must be a
captured object.
Triton could not have formed in the place where he is found today.
Now Triton is similar in many characteristics to Pluto.
So what we believe is that Triton did not originate at Neptune, rather originated out
in the Kuiper Belt, where Pluto and the other Kuiper Belt objects are.
Now, speaking of Pluto, recently we've discovered Pluto to have three moons.
Here is an image of Pluto and its three moons.
The moon that we've known about for a couple decades is Charon, and the two new moons
are Nyx and Hydra.
The surprising thing was, first of all, that it had two other moons, and second, that all
of the moons orbit in the same plane.
Here is a diagram of the Pluto system orbits, and you can see that Charon, Nyx, and Hydra
all share the same plane.
This suggests a common origin for these moons, that they all somehow form together.
Now, another thing this diagram also shows is that Charon is not really a moon.
Charon is massive enough that the center of mass between Pluto and Charon is not inside
the figure of Pluto, it's actually outside of Pluto.
You can see in the diagram this point, the center of mass is called the Berry Center,
and you can see that Pluto actually orbits around the Berry Center.
So instead of Charon orbiting Pluto, like we think of as a normal moon, Charon orbits
the Berry Center, and Pluto orbits the Berry Center too.
So they're moving around like this, okay?
This is what we would call a double system.
So Pluto and Charon really form a double system at the center, and then they have two moons
orbiting around that double system on the outside.
So Pluto system is really quite a complex and interesting little system.
We're going to end this lecture with what is perhaps the biggest anomaly anywhere in
the solar system, and it's really what we see every night.
It is our moon, and the anomaly about our moon is that it is so large compared to the
size of its planet.
I told you before that the moon is about one quarter the size of Earth.
Well, if you take Ganymede, that's about what?
Well, Jupiter's 10 times larger than Earth, so it's about one 40th the size of Jupiter,
okay?
Compared to its planet, even Ganymede is 10 times smaller in comparison than moon is
to Earth.
Now, you might think that would be enough to make Earth and moon into a double planet.
Well, it's not quite.
Because here's a diagram, totally not to scale, and the center of mass of Earth is definitely
not at the center of Earth.
The center of mass of the Earth-moon system is definitely not the center of Earth.
It's actually about three quarters of the way out Earth's radius.
So the moon orbits around Earth.
Earth is actually wobbling around that center of mass, but it doesn't actually orbit it.
And really for most people, the definition between a double system and a moon is that
the center of mass is outside the figure of both objects.
So just for now, it's not called a double planet.
But the big question is how did Earth get such a large moon?
The only other rocky planet moons are those captured asteroids around Mars, and the only
other large moons are around the giant planets.
And Earth doesn't have Neptune's mass, so it can't capture a large moon like Neptune
captured Triton.
The best hypothesis of how Earth got its large moon is a giant impact.
Early on in the Solar System, about 10, 20, 30 million years after the Earth formed, a
Mars-sized body smashed into Earth.
The material from that collision was spewed into the space around Earth, and that coalesced
to form our moon.
I know that sounds crazy, but we actually have computer simulations these days that can
check whether these crazy ideas work, and they actually do show it's reasonable.
Now here is a movie that shows the impact.
It goes relatively quickly.
What you want to look for is that we're going to take a Mars-sized body, smash it into Earth,
and the material is then strewn out into a disk surrounding Earth.
You can see the material getting sprayed out, some of the material gets eaten up, some of
the material of the Earth gets thrown out, and the result at the end of the simulation
is a disk of material containing both the impactor and the crustal material of Earth
thrown out into a disk.
Now we have a second simulation that picks up where that first simulation left off, and
in this second simulation we start with a disk of material that's about 2 to 4 times
the mass of the moon, and as that material orbits around the Earth, gravity naturally
creates these spiral patterns, and gravity gathers the materials into these spiral patterns,
these spiral patterns exert torque on things, and then the clumps develop.
Now in order for a big clump to develop, the spiral patterns have to sort of move the
material out to the outer regions, out to beyond what we call the Roche limit, so this
is where larger things can collapse without being tightly stretched apart by the gravity
of Earth, and as these big clumps develop out there, the spiral patterns then torque
the material and send it out beyond the Roche limit, where it can then accrete onto this
larger body.
So developing in the simulation you can see that it's developing a very large body way
out at the outer part of the disk.
The material flows outward, accretes onto the big body, some material flows inward and
collapses back onto Earth.
Eventually, after all this accretion, you form a protomoon, and the crazy thing about
this is that the simulations show it takes about 30 days to form the moon.
After they impact about another month, and you have the basics of your moon.
Now when we say it's formed, we really don't mean that it's got its full structure and
everything, you know it's condensed and collapsed and cooled, but really that just most of the
matter that will make up the moon has accreted onto it.
Now this giant impact hypothesis explains several things about the moon.
It explains why the moon is low density.
Earth has a density of 5.5 grams per cubic centimeter.
The moon about a little over 3, it's much lower density.
The moon couldn't have formed out of the same material that the Earth formed, otherwise
it would have closed to the same density.
It explains why the composition of the moon would be similar to Earth's upper mantle because
a good portion of the moon would actually be made out of stuff that was originally part
of the outer part of our Earth.
It also explains why the moon's orbit is not in Earth's plane of rotation, as you would
expect for a regular moon, or in the plane of the ecliptic, as you would expect for a
captured moon.
Giant impact hypothesis allows the orbit to vary and fit the observed orbit of the moon.
Now I say this is the leading idea for the formation of the moon, but it's not quite
proven.
However, I can say I know of no other idea for the formation of the moon that does nearly
as well as this one does.
So in the end, it seems that our moon, with all its impact on our culture and its sociology,
on our science and our technology, it was just the result of some solar system pinball
dynamics.
It's a chance smashup that happened billions of years ago.
But this was quite a happy accident because it also had a biological impact as well.
The moon has played a significant role in the development of life on Earth.
We'll discuss that more in the last lecture of this course.
In our next lecture, however, we'll discuss the other major orbiting bodies around the
planets.
These would be the ring systems around the giant planets.
We'll see you then.
