In this lecture, we are going to discuss how to look for planets around other stars.
Now this is a quite difficult observation because stars are really, really, really far
away and they're also very small in comparison to their distance.
This is an image of the largest nearby galaxy called the Andromeda galaxy.
Now it is two and a half million light years away.
However, it's also a hundred thousand light years across.
And that is large enough that even at two and a half million light years, it's stretched
out about three degrees across our sky.
That's about six and a half times the apparent diameter of the full moon.
Stars that are even just a few light years away appear only as a point of light in our sky.
So seeing the details of most stars requires resolution well beyond today's optical telescopes.
We can only image stars in a few special cases.
This 1995 image from Hubble was the first direct image of a star other than the sun.
And it was only possible because the star's atmosphere extends one thousand times farther
than our own sun's atmosphere.
If Betelgeuse were in place of the sun, then Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, and Jupiter would
all be orbiting inside its atmosphere.
So generally, we can only see stars if they are very, very, very big and or very near.
If it is that hard to see a star, then seeing planets around it is going to be more difficult
because planets are smaller, so they'll require even a higher resolution to see, and they
are fainter so that the light can be buried within the glare of the star.
I find it therefore amazing that we do have some direct detections of planets.
This is an infrared image of a star 2M1207A.
Well actually, it's not really a star.
It's a brown dwarf, sort of an almost star, bigger than a planet but smaller than a full
grown star.
The brown dwarf has 25 times the mass of Jupiter.
And if you look in the lower left, you see this tiny little spot here.
This is a Jupiter mass planet of five Jupiter masses.
Now this is only visible because first of all, the brown dwarf is faint.
Second of all, the planet to star contrast is generally better in the infrared, but most
importantly is because it's at a very wide separation.
This five Jupiter mass planet is at 55 astronomical units.
That's out beyond the Kuiper Belt.
But this is the first direct image of a planet around another almost star.
However, it's not really the type of planetary system that we want to see.
Many planets in our solar system would be lost within the glare of even a brown dwarf.
Now there are a couple other direct images and they're all of similar character.
Planets out at very large distances from small objects.
So direct imaging won't become a general technique without significant advances in our telescopes.
Instead, we can examine a star and look for indirect evidence of planets.
Now, do you remember that the center of the Earth-Moon system was not at the center of the Earth?
That as the Moon orbits around Earth, Earth wobbles around the center of mass of the system?
The same thing is true for stars and planets.
The center of our solar system is not at the center of our Sun.
The Sun also wobbles while the planets orbit, mainly Jupiter.
Jupiter's mass pulls the Sun and causes it to wobble just a little bit.
Now for an extra solar planet, if the planet is large enough and orbiting close enough to its star,
then its star will wobble.
And if that wobble is large enough, we could see it in the motion of the star.
We call this astrometry, and here is a diagram of it, that normally we see stars move across the sky.
This is called their proper motion.
But if we measure a position of the star over the years and we see that proper motion instead of moving straight,
it starts to wiggle up and down, that would be evidence of a planet.
And the point is that it must be a periodic motion.
It doesn't have to be an absolutely perfect sine curve, but it does need to be a periodic motion,
because that's how planets would orbit around the stars.
So success in astrometry requires that you have a nearby star, so that the motion will be observable,
and the larger the planet you've got, well then the larger the motion,
and the closer the planet orbits into that star, excuse me, then the larger the motion.
So again, this is not really a general technique.
There have been a couple astrometric planet results, and some astronomers think they're quite solid,
although some of them think they're not quite 100% proven.
I'll give you one example in the next lecture.
So if you can't easily see the star's position changes, all that's left to examine is the light from the star.
Now, how would a planet affect the star's light?
The simplest idea would be an eclipse, or more properly called a transit.
Here is a time-lapse image of Venus transiting the sun.
You can see all of these small dark disks across the bottom of the sun
are the planet Venus getting between us and the view of the sun.
A tiny portion of the sun's light is blocked by Venus at this time.
Now imagine the same thing for an extra solar planet passing in front of its star.
Here is a movie to illustrate it.
The graph at the bottom of the light curve is the brightness of the star versus time.
So as the planet passes in front of the star, the light from the star drops down,
and while it's in front of the star, it remains constant,
and then when it goes away from being in front of the star, the brightness goes back to normal.
And if we have sense of enough detectors for a bright enough nearby star,
we can measure that change in the light.
We've found the change in light would be on order 1 or 2% at most.
And that way we can determine how big an object is blocking the light
and figure out how big a planet is transiting in front of that star.
The key again here is that it must be periodic, that it happens over and over again,
seeing multiple times will convince you that it's a planet causing the transit.
The problem here is that this is a chance alignment.
How many times are we going to get a planet just passing in front of the star from our point of view?
A lot of the time it's going to be passing around it.
So in order to find these transits, we need to search many, many stars.
So that's just what we do.
Here is an image from the Sweeps project.
This is the Sagittarius Window Eclipsing Extrasolar Planet Search.
And what they did is they looked in this field and there are about 150,000 stars in this field.
And about half of them would be useful to search for transiting planets.
They collected 520 images over a week and put together the light curves of all these stars.
From all of those observations and all of those light curves,
they found 16 candidates that might be hot Jupiters.
Because remember they only observed for a week.
And so these planets had to orbit around very quickly.
16 out of 100,000.
And they're only just candidates.
So you need longer term monitoring or spectroscopy.
You can need more than just a week's worth of observations to really know that they are true.
So this is a very low efficiency technique.
However, it would not be that hard with computers to monitor tens or hundreds of millions of stars.
This would be similar to the automated searches that we do for Kuiper Belt objects.
There are projects already in progress that should net thousands of planets using this transiting technique.
Transits so far have only discovered a small percentage of the extrasolar planets.
But they will become more important in the near future.
Now, while most transits decrease the light of a star,
in some cases it can actually increase the light of the star.
This is called microlensing and it comes from general relativity.
Remember, there's a three word summary for general relativity.
Mass warps space.
Here's an illustration of it.
The mass represented by the yellow ball in this image is warping the fabric of space represented by the grid in this image.
The presence of matter changes the structure of space and light waves passing through that space.
When they pass through curved space, they change direction.
Light curves through warped space and in particular it curves inward around the mass.
In this way, gravity can act like a lens and focus the light.
Here is a diagram of microlensing and on the left hand side we have a star just about to pass in front of another star.
The light of that background star is normal.
In the center part, as the foreground star passes directly in front of the background star,
for a brief time the light of the background star is amplified, it's brightened by this gravitational lens.
And then when it passes away, the light of the background star returns to normal.
This is gravitational microlensing and the shape of the light curve, the brightening of that background star allows us to recognize these events.
Now, what happens if the foreground star has a planet around it?
Then you can get two bumps in the light curve.
This is a light curve from the microlensing event Ogil BLG-071.
It represents about two months of observations and if you look at the top of the light curve, you see a double peak.
This indicates that there were two lensing objects and the varying heights of those two peaks and the timing between those two peaks shows that the second object is a planet.
It could of course be a double star, right?
But the way you analyze this, it comes up and it has to be a planet.
However, even more so than with planets transiting their own star, when you're trying to get a star transiting in front of another star, it requires a near exact alignment.
So again, you have to use a needle in a haystack approach.
You have to study hundreds of thousands of stars in order to find just a few events.
And there's a problem with this for planetary studies because the lensing only occurs once.
So there's no chance for follow-up and you can't verify it independently.
So it's while these microlensing planets do exist, it's somewhat unsatisfactory for detailed study.
So far, I've discussed some low probability planet finding techniques.
And if these were the only techniques, we would not have found many planets in the galaxy.
The dominant technique for finding planets depends upon the idea of Doppler shift.
Now you're all familiar with the idea of Doppler shift.
It's the reason why a race car has a higher pitch sound when it's approaching and a lower pitch sound when it's going away.
It sounds niiiiiuuuu, right?
This is just a change in wavelength due to motion.
So if a wave emitter is stationary, the waves will go out in circles around it.
And as more waves go out, they will continue to create circles.
And you'll end up with sort of a bullseye pattern of these circles, of these waves being emitted around the emitter.
And the important point is that these wavelengths are seen to be the same in all directions.
Now however, if the wave emitter is moving, the first wave is emitted as before, but it moves a bit before it emits the second wave.
The first wave is still centered on the old position, and the second wave is now offset.
It's centered on the new position.
The third wave will be offset from both the second and the first, and so on, and so on.
The result is that the wavelength you observe is not uniform in all directions.
You will have shorter wavelengths in front of the direction of motion of the emitter and longer wavelengths behind it.
Thus, the change in wavelength you observe for an object can tell you about the motion of that object.
And a star that is wobbling due to a planet has wobbling around a little bit of motion will show Doppler shift that we can observe.
The first extrasolar planets discovered were not around a normal star, but they were around a stellar remnant, something called a pulsar.
Now, when a high mass star dies, it explodes as a supernova.
It basically blows its guts across space.
It's really quite pretty.
This is the supernova remnant called the crab nebula, and most of the star is blown into interstellar space.
However, the core collapses to a neutron star, and a neutron star is very, very dense.
How dense?
Well, at the Hayden Planetarium, we came up with this.
To achieve the density of a neutron star, you simply cram a herd of 50 million elephants into a fimble.
That's dense.
The pulsar also has a very high magnetic field, as shown in this diagram.
These green loops are meant to represent the magnetic field, and generally it will emit radio waves along the poles of the magnetic field.
Further, the conservation of angular momentum makes these things spin really, really, really fast, up to thousands of times per second.
And so if the pole sweeps through our line of sight, we'll see regular bursts of radio emission.
And that's what we call the pulsar, these regular pulses of radio emission.
And these pulsars are exotic objects.
They're the dense remnant of a supernova explosion, and they have these extremely precise radio pulses.
So any motion of the pulsar will show up as Doppler shift in those pulses.
The signals of planets, and even objects as small as asteroids, would be relatively easy to find.
But why would one expect planets around a pulsar?
Well, we found not one, but three planets around the pulsar, 1257 plus 12.
And these were the first extrasolar planets ever discovered.
It threw astronomers quite a curveball, because if planets existed before the supernova, they would not have survived the supernova to be there afterwards.
And there are some possible ways these planets could have formed, but it's certainly not the standard scenario.
And these are certainly not the planets we were hoping to find.
I'm still not sure what to make of them, but let the record show they are there, and they were the first to be found.
Shortly afterwards, Doppler spectroscopy found planets closer to our expectations, although still not really what we wanted.
Now, remember that white light can be spread out by a prism.
Here's a diagram. Actually, it's a picture of white light being spread out by a prism into the rainbow of colors, and this rainbow of colors is called a spectrum.
Now, if you look really, really, really close at the sun spectrum, you see this, and this is the sun spectrum taken out into multiple lines, and then going down the page with each of the lines.
And you can see all of these dark regions.
These are spectral lines. These indicate the elements in the sun's atmosphere, and these elements absorb specific wavelengths, so they tell us the composition of the sun's atmosphere.
Similar spectral lines to these are found in the spectra of all stars, and if the star is moving, these wavelength markers in the spectrum will show Doppler shifts.
So if the star is wobbling due to a planet, these spectral lines will wobble back and forth. There will be periodic Doppler shifts, and finding those is what we call Doppler spectroscopy.
The problem is that these shifts are incredibly tiny. They're way too small to see reliably for any one line.
So the solution is to use many, many lines and statistics in order to see the pattern.
The big idea that got this ball rolling on this technique was that you put a cell of iodine in the light path, and iodine has many spectral lines, and those spectral lines are then imprinted on top of the star's spectra.
These iodine lines serve as reference lines, and you can measure the motion of the star's lines relative to these iodine lines, and using a lot of statistics, you can measure extremely small shifts.
The result is basically a graph. It's the velocity shift of these lines over time.
Here is one for the star HD9407 that shows no planet, and you can see that the velocity, well, basically is a scatter around a mean, and we've subtracted out the mean, so the mean here is zero, and you can see it just, it's up and down a little bit, but there's no particular pattern to it.
Here is one of the first extrasolar planets discovered, 51 Pegasi, and this has a very strong signal. The velocity of the star shifts significantly. It varies between plus 50 meters per second to minus 50 meters per second.
The question is, is this periodic? So after some analysis, you can find a nice oscillating fit, and the fit shown here is for a half Jupiter mass planet in a 4.2 day orbit.
Now, these plots versus time like this, I've never find them fully convincing. I mean, it seems like if you put in enough oscillations, you can sort of fit any scatter to the data.
So if you fold the data into what we call a periodogram, you can then plot the velocity versus the phase of the oscillation, and here you get a much more convincing fit. This is more satisfying to say, I, yes, I can really see the planet moving around the star.
So the period of the fit is the period of the planet's orbit. And if we remember Kepler's third law, the period also tells you the semi-major axis, because the period is proportional to the semi-major axis.
The amplitude of the curve, the amount it goes up and down, is a combination of both the planet mass and the semi-major axis, how massive it is and how close it is to the star. But since you already know the semi-major axis, you can get the mass of the star.
The shape of the curve indicates the orbit eccentricity. Here the result is a nice sine curve, and it indicates a nearly circular orbit.
However, that's not always true. This star, 16-signy B, also shows a planet, but one in a rather elliptical orbit. This is definitely not a sine curve, but it is definitely periodic.
Now if you remember Kepler's second law, a planet moves fast when it's near the star and much slower farther away. That speed change produces this asymmetric curve, that you have a very long period and then a very quick change to the other side and then a very long and very quick.
And note that the mass that we predict for these planets is only a minimum value. The reason is that we only see the Doppler motion that's toward or away from us. We cannot see any motion that's up or down in the plane of the sky.
So if the orbit is face-on, if the planet is orbiting around it face-on to our point of view, all the star wobble would be up and down and we would see nothing.
If instead the orbit is edge-on like this, then all of the wobble of the star would be in the plane that we're looking at, would be toward and away, and the mass that we would get would be correct.
But as the orbit inclined, we're going to see less and less of the wobble of the star reflected in its motion, and so we'll deduce less and less mass.
So the mass is really the mass times the sine of the inclination angle, and that is a lower limit for the true mass.
If you want to estimate the mass, you can take the m-sine I value and multiply it by about 1.3, and that gets you a good estimate.
Another complication when looking at extrasolar planets is the possibility of multiple planets.
The signal for this star, HD 12661, shows oscillations, but the oscillations also oscillate.
You can decompose the signal, and one planet is the dominant component, and the remainder shows another planet.
So given the variations of the masses of the planets, the orbit sizes, the orbit shapes, and the numbers of planets, it is a significant work to fit a very complex system.
Now Doppler spectroscopy has found more planets than any other method.
The initial results were revolutionary, not just in finding planets, but also in the types of planets that were found.
So let's take a look at some of those planets, and we're going to establish a frame of reference based upon our solar system.
This is Mercury's orbit around our Sun, and I'm going to draw a gray circle on it and use that as a scale, because we have found a number of planets with Mercury-sized orbits.
Remember, the smaller the planet orbit, the stronger the signal is for Doppler spectroscopy.
So here are some examples.
This is the planet around the star Gliese 86A, and its orbit, as you can see, is about one-third the semi-major axis of Mercury, whereas its mass is about four times that of Jupiter.
Here is 51 Peg, the one I showed you with Doppler plot before, and the planet here is half the mass of Jupiter, but it's at one-one-hundredth the distance from its star, as Jupiter is from our Sun.
And they can be really, really close in.
This is Ogil TR-56, and it has a bit more than the mass of Jupiter, but it's at a distance of less than four million kilometers from its star.
The category of objects that I'm showing you here has been called hot Jupiters, because these are giant planets in really close to the star, and we see lots of them.
Now, how many depends upon your definition of how massive they need to be and how close they need to be to the star, but I would estimate about 25% of the extrasolar planets found so far are hot Jupiters, and we certainly didn't expect to see those.
Their orbits, as because they're in close, have generally become circularized by the tides of the star, but not always.
Here's a star HD-3651, and the planet around it has 20% of the mass of Jupiter, though its orbit is much more elongated than Pluto's orbit.
Now, as a reminder, the eccentricity of an ellipse. If it's zero, it's a circle. If it's one, it's a line.
Pluto's eccentricity is at 0.25. The eccentricity for this planet is at 0.63, over twice as large.
Now, you can get really eccentric extrasolar planet orbits. This is one for the Parko star 45982, and its eccentricity is 0.93.
In our solar system, the only things with eccentricities that large are comets and asteroids.
Here, we've got a planet with three over about three and a half Jupiter masses, and these eccentricities are not just found for hot Jupiters.
Here is a system HD-39091, and the planet in this system covers a wide swath of the planetary system.
Now, the gray circle here in close to the star still represents Mercury, but I've added a red circle for the orbit of Mars and an orange circle for the orbit of Jupiter.
The perihelion of this planet is around Earth's orbit, and the aphelion, the most distant point, is around Jupiter's orbit.
Furthermore, this planet weighs 10 Jupiter masses. Its gravity would dominate the entire inner region of its planetary system.
These elliptical orbits for giant planets run counter to what our solar system shows, and they are not the exception, but they are rather common.
And matter of fact, both of these initial results, the hot Jupiters and the elliptical orbits, are rather peculiar when you compare them to our own solar system.
Now, we tend to focus on the weirdos that we find, but not every extra solar planet is strange.
This is the star Pollux, which is the second brightest star in the constellation Gemini, and the planet around it has a mass of three Jupiter masses, and it has an almost circular orbit.
Matter of fact, the eccentricity of this planet is smaller than the eccentricity of Jupiter's orbit.
This is a reasonable fit to what we expected.
However, for extra solar planets, what we find strange may really be normal.
And to see what's normal and what's strange, we need to look at the whole population of extra solar planets, not just these individual examples I've presented here.
We'll explore that in the next lecture, when we discuss the characteristics of all the extra solar planets and the implications for how our solar system fits into the galactic view of planetary systems.
Join me next time. So long.
