In the previous lecture, we started the discussion of extrasolar planets.
We discussed the techniques for finding planets around other stars, and I also gave you some
examples.
We found that there were hot Jupiters, these giant planets with orbits that are smaller
than the orbit of Mercury.
We also discovered that they had many elliptical orbits, planets that were in orbit stretched
out that they looked like comet orbits in our solar system.
In this lecture, we're going to discuss the characteristics of the planetary systems we've
so far discovered.
And there's so much to discuss, we're just going to jump right in.
Now to establish a broader overview of the whole population, we're going to begin with
some statistics.
Here is a plot of the number of planets versus their semi-major axis.
And so these are the distances from the Sun.
And over here on the left hand side of the plot, you can see that there are many planets
in close.
These are mainly your hot Jupiters.
And these were the unexpected ones.
As you look further away from the stars, you see more planets, and it starts to rise up
around 1 AU, the distance of Earth from our Sun.
This was what we expected, because as you go further out in the nebula, you are expecting
to see Jupiter-sized orbits.
You're expecting to see Jupiter-sized planets in Jupiter-sized orbits, and Jupiter orbits
actually are out towards the edge of this plot.
And that's where you start to see a drop-off, but that's not real.
That's just a selection effect, because Doppler spectroscopy needs many years in order to
see these very long orbits.
Remember that Jupiter orbits our Sun in about 11 years, Saturn orbits in 30 years.
Most searches that have been using this technique have only been looking for a decade or so.
So that means we would not have seen those very long orbits yet.
It also means that we're sort of getting to the end of the low-hanging fruit.
If you have to wait two more decades in order to see a Saturn, then perhaps we might want
to start moving to a new technique, because in 20 years we can develop a lot of technology
to see a lot of planets.
Now there's an interesting effect noticed for these hot Jupiters.
Here we have the number of planets plotted against their orbital period.
And you notice a very interesting effect in that there is a pile-up of planets around
a three-day orbit.
Now there's no bias in the observations that would produce this effect.
There's no reason why we would favor seeing planets in three-day orbits, versus five
or ten or fifteen-day orbits.
So there must be some dynamical effect that favors this orbit.
Perhaps it's the tidal effects of gravity from the star onto the planet.
We're not sure.
If we look at the mass distribution of extrasolar planets, we see that there are many more at
low mass, and the falloff going towards high mass falls off as what we call a power law.
And again, this is the trend we expect, because it's easier to make smaller things, and so
you expect in a planetary system that you would get few bigger things.
The slope of the power law will be studied and debated, and the falloff is probably stronger
than shown, because the larger objects are easier to find.
So the low mass peak is likely to be even larger than is shown in this diagram.
Now even though this low mass distribution is not yet well known, we do have one intriguing
observation.
This is a plot of 30 planets that have their minimum mass, the M-sine I, less than a hundred
earth masses.
What you see here is a strong peak just below 20 earth masses.
We call this a Neptune mass peak.
One third of the objects when this plot was made are of Neptune mass.
This might indicate a characteristic mass.
Again the data here is incomplete.
Is there a class of hot neptunes, as well as a class of hot Jupiters?
You can see these classes in a plot of mass versus semi-major axis.
Here is one Jupiter mass on the y-axis.
The y-axis is in Jupiter masses, so here's one Jupiter mass, and so these objects over
here on the left would be the hot Jupiters.
These objects down here would be the hot neptunes, the ones that are, oh, maybe one-tenth, one-twentieth
the size of Jupiter, and these would be the more normal Jupiter mass planets, the ones
out here at a few AU.
So the ones that are interior would be the hot ones, the ones that are out at a few AU
would be what we would consider more normal Jupiter mass planets.
The diagonal lines drawn on this plot show the rough selection effects of finding these
planets, and the green dots are the solar system planets.
All of these green dots are below the line, except for Jupiter.
You can see the lower masses, but only in very small orbits.
You would not be able to discover a neptune in a neptune size orbit just yet.
If we take a look at the orbit shape, this is a plot of eccentricity on the y-axis versus
semi-major axis on the x-axis.
The close-in objects have lower eccentricity.
You don't see any objects less than, say, 0.1 of an AU having very high eccentricity.
So the hot Jupiters have more circular orbits.
But further out, all of the orbit shapes are seen.
They go from zero all the way up through 0.9, etc.
This is definitely not typical of what we see in our solar system, because the green
dots again represent our solar system objects, and here are all of these objects way down
here.
The one that comes up here is Mercury, and that's only at about 0.2.
The average eccentricity of the extrasolar planet population is about 0.25 or 0.3.
Solar planets tend to have much more elliptical orbits than what we see in our solar system.
If we plot the same eccentricity versus the mass of the planet, we get another scatter
plot.
Now you might expect for the larger objects that it would be harder to alter their orbit.
How do you get a really massive planet to go into this really elliptical orbit?
When you scatter things, it's usually the big mass guy scattering the small things, and
so you can get the smaller things into elliptical orbits, but how do you get the big mass guys
into these elliptical orbits?
What we see here is that there are elliptical orbits for all of the masses of these extrasolar
planets.
Now I will say that the circular orbits, the ones that would be further away like Jupiter
is now, will take longer to find because those circular orbits don't come in close to their
star.
When you've got an elliptical orbit and it comes in close, you get a strong velocity
kick on the star, and you can see the wobble.
If you're out in nice big circular orbit, they're a little harder to find, so this finding that
we see here might change in the future.
The last statistic I have to show you today is not about the planets, but about the stars
they orbit.
This shows you the percentage of stars that have planets compared to the iron content
of their host stars.
What we do is we measure the strength of the iron lines in the star's spectrum and compare
that to the sun.
So one on the x-axis is having the same amount of iron as we see in our sun.
There is a very strong trend here that if the star has more iron in it, then it's more
likely to find planets around it.
There are none in the left bin, but you'll also note that there are about one tenth as
many stars surveyed in that left bin.
Now iron isn't the point here.
Iron is just being used as a proxy for all the heavy elements.
The universe started out with just hydrogen and helium.
After the Big Bang, all we had was hydrogen and helium.
These are the lightest elements and the stars fuse these light elements into heavier elements
and then they blow these heavy elements out into space either via gently via winds or
violently by supernova explosions.
So that stars that form early, early in the universe or early in the life of their galaxy
will have few heavy elements to incorporate into them.
Stars that form later will be able to form from gases that have been enriched by these
winds and supernova explosions and they will have more heavy elements.
So the stars that form early will tend to have fewer planets and the stars that form
later will tend to have more planets.
And those are the stars where we want to concentrate our searches for planets for looking for extra
solar planets.
So the implications of this are that we would expect to find more extra solar planets in
the disks of spiral galaxies and fewer in the bulges of the spiral galaxies or the halos
around those spiral galaxies and even fewer in things like globular clusters which are
some of the oldest star clusters in our galaxy.
Furthermore, we have two satellite galaxies called the Magellanic Clouds.
They have very few heavy elements.
And unfortunately this result implies they will also have few planets.
Well, that's enough statistics.
The real questions we want to address is are there any planetary systems like ours?
And are there any planets like Earth?
The answers are both yes and no.
Let's first look at a nearby star.
This one is Epsilon Aridani and it's 10 and a half light years away.
This is a microwave observation of the star and it reveals a ring of cold dust.
I showed you several rings of dust in the previous lecture.
This one has a scale of about 40 astronomical units in radius and it looks very much like
the Kuiper Belt in our solar system.
It's at the same distance that Kuiper Belt is in our solar system.
Now of significance is that it is a ring and it has an empty interior and that may indicate
that planets have formed.
However, Epsilon Aridani is very hard to study with Doppler spectroscopy because it shows
a lot of magnetic variation in its spectrum and those variations could mimic a signal
of a planet.
Success in looking at Epsilon Aridani came through astrometry, measuring the positional
wobble of the star in the sky, not measuring its spectroscopic wobble and it's only possible
because it is a very nearby star, as I said, only 10 and a half light years away.
What they found was a one and a half Jupiter mass planet on a rather elliptical orbit and
here you can see the gray represents the orbit of Mercury, the red represents the orbit of
Mars and the orange represents the orbit of Jupiter.
This planet has a similar mass to Jupiter but a rather different orbit, but that's not
really even the important thing.
What's really important about this planet is indicated in this drawing here.
You can see the planet and you can see the star in the background and you can also see
that dusk disc that I showed you before.
When examining this planet, the planet and the dusk disc have the same orientation.
This is the first time that we have a direct connection between a planet and a dusk disc.
The idea, the sort of assumption we have that planets formed from discs has now been observationally
verified and it's always good when a basic assumption of your theories turns out to be
true.
We have also found some multiple planet systems.
This is a diagram, at least the top is a diagram of the planetary system around the star 55
Cancri.
The bottom is our solar system for comparison.
Now both stars are about the same, both stars are about the same size, mass and brightness.
55 Cancri has 5 planets.
It has a 4 Jupiter mass planet at 5.8 AU and that compares well to our solar system, where
we have Jupiter at 5.2 AU.
So the comparison here, well looks pretty good.
55 Cancri also has a planet at 0.8 AU, 80% of Earth's distance from the Sun, but that
planet is almost 50 times Earth's mass.
It's about 3 times the mass of Neptune, and that's not so good for the comparison.
And the two solar systems actually get even more different in the inner region.
If you look at the inner region of the 55 Cancri system, you see 3 planets, one has
a highly elliptical orbit, two of them have relatively circular orbits, the outer one
has Jupiter mass.
The middle one is another 3 Neptune mass planet, and the inner one has about two thirds of
Neptune's mass.
So in summary for this system, it's really incredible that we have found a 5 planet extra
solar planetary system, but they're all giant planets.
So there's some similarity to our own solar system, but I would say on balance there's
more differences here.
Now I could go through other multiple planet systems, but it would be the same story and
even more differences.
Generally, all of the extra solar planetary systems that we have found, the ones with
multiple planets, are very different from our own solar system.
But in a way, that's to be expected.
Because if our solar system was out there, we would only see one planet, Jupiter.
Many multiple planet systems we see now are basically guaranteed to be different.
Because if you see more than one planet, then you're not structured the way our solar system
is.
We're going to have to wait a bunch of years before we can start to see solar systems like
our multiple planet systems like our own.
So it's a little premature to give statistics on multiple planets, I mean I think we really
need more data before we give statistics, but people always ask.
So about 15% of the surveyed stars have planets.
The count is woefully incomplete.
And 25 of the planetary systems we've discovered so far are multiple planet systems.
And so that works out to be about 10% of the total number of systems that have multiple
planets.
Now to the other question.
What about seeing other Earths?
Now we have found a few planets that have been nicknamed Super Earths, although some
theorists tell me they might be called, better be called mini-neptunes.
We're really not sure of their composition.
And Doppler spectroscopy can not yet see the signal from a real Earth.
The period of Earth is short enough, it's only one year.
But the velocity signal on the Sun is much too small.
It's of order one-tenth of a meter per second.
And the best we can do these days is about one meter per second.
So we need a market improvement or we need to rely on other techniques to really find
Earths.
The first extra solar planets that were discovered around the pulsar were actually Super Earths.
The planets around pulsar, PSR 1257 plus 12 are all in mercury sized orbits and they
have orbital periods of one to three months.
Their masses, well C on the outside, planet C on the outside is 2.8 times the mass of
Earth.
Planet B just inside the reference orbit of Mercury is 3.4 Earth masses.
And planet A, way down in here, is only 2% the mass of Earth.
That's only twice the mass of the Moon.
Now folks tend to discount these planets because they're orbiting a pulsar.
They're incapable of supporting life.
You expect this extreme wind of atomic particles from the pulsar and any atmospheres that they
might have would be stripped.
The low mass Doppler spectroscopy results can only find objects that only several Earth
masses and would be very close to their star.
In this system, Gliese 876, again we see three planets in mercury sized orbits.
The outer one B is two Jupiter masses, the middle one C is half of a Jupiter mass, and
the one in way down close D is 5.9 Earth masses.
Its orbit is only three million kilometers from its star.
Now this star is a red dwarf star and its energy output is only two thousandths that
of the Sun, but its distance is one fiftieth that.
So if you do the math, the energy per unit area on this planet is about four times the
energy that we receive here on Earth.
So it's too hot for life.
Another super Earth was found by microlensing and this is the Ogol 2005 BLG390L system.
You can see they have some really long names.
It has similar masses to the planet in stars, the one I just showed you.
This is a 5.5 Earth mass planet, again around a red dwarf star.
Earth's orbit however is much larger.
It's about three astronomical units, three times Earth's orbit.
So the energy received by this star is very low.
This one will be too cold for life.
You can see the artist has depicted it here as an icy rocky planet in this image.
Now the amazing point about this system is that its star is located twenty thousand light
years away.
Most of the known extrasolar planets are less than two hundred light years away.
Gravitational microlensing has a potentially huge discovery space because it can see these
lensing events all the way across our galaxy.
So the first super Earth we talked about was too hot.
The second one was too cold.
Now we come to just right.
Well, almost.
This is a 5 Earth mass planet around the star Gliese 581.
Again this is a red dwarf star, and again there are three planets in mercury sized orbits.
The trend here is probably not nature that there are always these three planets with
these super Earths, but it's more the selection effects of the observations.
This system contains a fifteen Earth mass planet at six million kilometers and an eight
Earth mass planet at forty million kilometers.
The five Earth mass planet, which if it was made a rock would have a diameter about twice
Earth is in a thirteen day orbit at a distance of eleven million kilometers.
This is at the hot edge of where surface water could be liquid.
The region in a planetary system we sometimes call the habitable zone, but I don't really
like that term.
I would like to call it the liquid water zone.
Now we have no idea if water is there on this planet, but this is the first extrasolar planet
we've discovered where liquid water on its surface would even be possible.
These observations also underscore the importance of small red stars.
Because they emit less light, the water zone is closer in, and because they are smaller
stars it's easier to detect Earth mass planets.
So around small red stars will probably be the first place we will find an Earth like
planet.
So if there is water on this planet, how would we tell if it existed?
How can you tell from afar that Earth has water, especially if you can't see the blue
oceans?
The answer is to look for water vapor in its atmosphere, and we've already started that
search in a way.
This is a drawing of HD 209458.
This is a hot Jupiter that eclipses its star.
It has a close enough orbit that its atmosphere is heated and puffed up.
Now sunlight from the star passes through that planet atmosphere, and if you take a spectrum
during the transit, and a spectrum when it's not in the midst of transit, and you subtract
the two, then you get the spectrum of this planet's atmosphere.
We have found that we are able to detect the chemical signatures of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon,
and sodium in this other planet's atmosphere.
There's also a possible detection of water, although it's stronger for another planet,
one around the star HD 189733.
There neither one of them is fully convincing.
We haven't quite gotten to detecting water in an extrasolar planet, but it points the
way to gaining detailed knowledge by looking at the spectra of extrasolar planets.
We can tell the composition of their atmospheres and possibly detect signs of life.
Again, doing this for an Earth-sized planet in an Earth-sized orbit is many years away.
The overarching result from extrasolar planets is that many, if not most, planetary systems
look nothing like our solar system.
A few lectures ago, I developed the idea of planet formation for our solar system, and
it's demonstrated by the plot I've been using over and over again that everything forms
in a disk, you naturally get circular orbits, and you naturally get rock in the interior,
gas in the middle, and ice on the outside.
It all works very well for our solar system, but it doesn't really work for other planetary
systems.
It just fails miserably because Jupiters can't form right next to a star.
And if you have highly elliptical orbits, it would disrupt planet formation.
So if our solar system scenario were true everywhere, nearly all the planets we discovered
would not be there.
Clearly, our solar system is not a generic solar system, and how we form it is not a
generalized formation theory.
Now, the greatest time in a scientist's career is when he realizes that he has no idea what's
going on.
Ignorance really is bliss because it tells you that there's new knowledge just waiting
to be discovered.
And in this case, it's revisions to our planet formation theory.
Now disk formation has been confirmed.
We have plenty of observations of disks, but two aspects have changed.
Planet migration and planet scattering.
I'm going to play for you a planet formation simulation, and in this simulation, the disk
is seen face on, the red is disk material, and the yellow will be planet material.
It starts with a three earth mass planet, and the plot in the lower left shows the disk
density.
As the planet orbits in the disk, it develops a spiral density wave.
That spiral density wave feeds material into the forming planet.
And eventually, the material feeding onto the planet starts to clear a ring of material.
After the ring is cleared, material still keeps forming on, but very slowly.
The planet ends up at 20 Jupiter masses, and that's a growth by a factor of 2,000.
Now there are three stages to note in this simulation.
This first image shows a time when the spiral wave has developed.
This exerts torque on the planet, and its orbit will decay.
Now it doesn't decay in the simulation because it was held fixed for demonstration purposes.
This is what we call type 1 migration.
The orbit, however, might not decay because of other density variations in the disk.
What we've got here is a smooth disk, and a realistic disk will have clumpiness, and
that will provide other torques on a small planet.
It really could be a random walk in and out, and as I said before, that's what we call
type 1 migration, where the disk is acting on the planet, and the density profile, as
you see in the lower left, the density profile of the disk hasn't been heavily modified.
The second stage is when a gap opens in the disk.
The planet has now modified the disk density, and you can see a strong change in the plot
in the lower left.
Both the planet and the disk are equal players at this time, and some details are not known
how the remaining gas interacts with the planet, but eventually the remaining gas is either
brought onto the planet or scattered away, and the gap is fully cleared.
In what we call type 2 migration, the gap is basically empty.
As you can see in the lower left, the density plot goes all the way down, except for the
planet in the middle of the gap.
Some gas continues to be captured from the edges of the gap, and so there's a coupled
evolution.
The disk controls most of the system, but the planet controls its gap region.
Furthermore, the planet can modify the disk, and this can explain some of the features
seen in the previous lecture about disks, the rings that are cleared out on the inside,
the clumping you see in the disks, and even the lopsided disks.
That formation of these planets can then modify the disk from which they came.
Also, I like to note the resemblance to the structures that we saw in Saturn's rings.
Here is an image of the spiral waves along the anky gap.
The moon pan excites these spiral density waves in the anky gap, just like the spiral
density waves we saw in the simulation.
And in the Keeler gap, the small moon Daphnis, in this image it was pulling material off
the edge of the Keeler gap, similar to the disk and planet interactions that we saw in
the simulation, but on the disk and planet it's on a much larger scale.
Now beyond migration of the planets, there is also an increased emphasis in solar system
formation on scattering.
The gaseous material in the disk is collisional, and that will generally produce circular orbits,
somewhat like Saturn's rings that we were just looking at.
You expect the protoplanets' initial orbit to be circular, and in order to produce elliptical
orbits, the protoplanets have to scatter off each other, or there have to be interactions
with the disk.
These interactions will be chaotic, and you can predict the probability of the various
outcomes, but you can't specify exactly which outcome will happen for any situation.
This puts an emphasis on the increased role of randomness in the formation of planetary
systems.
Just like the formation of the moon, the end result may be determined by chance encounters.
So looking at these extra-solar planetary systems grants us a whole new perspective
on our own solar system.
We have learned so much about our planetary neighborhood.
Think back on all we've covered in this course, the motions, the orbits, the surfaces, the
interiors of the atmospheres, the moons, the rings, the families.
We've developed a coherent picture of the structure, formation, and evolution of our
solar system.
And now, looking at these extra-solar planetary systems, we learn that it may be the exception.
We learn, as happens so often in science, just how much more there is to learn.
We're really only beginning to see the galactic perspective on planetary systems.
And if most planetary systems are not like ours, what does that say about the prospects
for life in the universe?
Is what makes our solar system special?
What enables it to have life?
We'll explore that question in our last lecture, a lecture on life in our solar system and
beyond.
Until then, have a great day.
