The
grandest question in astronomy is that of life in the universe.
Are there intelligent beings like us somewhere in this vast cosmos?
This is the one question that is guaranteed to get the public's attention.
It is also a question to which we have few answers and little hard data.
Hence, much of the discussion in the public sphere is dominated by exaggeration, speculation,
and wishful thinking.
And I can't really blame folks, it's a powerful and expansive idea.
Life in the universe is nearly the entire underpinning of the whole genre of science
fiction.
Personally, I would love it if there were alien civilizations that we could learn about,
communicate with, and even visit.
But in my job as an astronomer, I have to take a less romantic view.
It wasn't too long ago that research on extraterrestrial life was a dead-end career move.
Lately, it has gained respectability as the field of astrobiology.
Yet it is still a line of research with more questions than answers.
In this lecture, I'd like to review what we do know about life on Earth.
I'd like to explore where in the solar system we might find life and speculate about the
abundance of life across our galaxy.
Let's begin with a short history of life on Earth.
Earth formed about 4.6 billion years ago.
The oldest rocks we find on Earth's surface are about 4 billion years old, while the oldest
rock deposits date from about 3.7 billion years ago.
The first appearance of life came shortly thereafter.
This image shows a stromatolite fossil from the Pilbara region of Australia.
These sedimentary structures are created as a result of microbial growth and their indirect
evidence of microbial life.
The fossils here date from about 3.5 billion years ago and are generally considered to be
the earliest evidence of life on Earth.
The microbes that created these fossils were single-celled and didn't have chromosomes
or a cell nucleus.
The development of those cellular structures does not appear in the fossil record for another
800 million years.
About 2.2 billion years ago, abundant oxygen developed in Earth's atmosphere.
Some early life forms released oxygen, especially cyanobacteria, what we call blue-green algae.
The oxygen, combined with iron in the oceans, to produce the banded iron formations like
the ones seen here.
The red stripes in this deposit are called tiger iron, and you can see why from the stripes.
These iron deposits were one method of removing oxygen from the atmosphere.
And around 2.2 billion years ago, these oxygen sinks, the places that the oxygen would be
removed from the atmosphere, became saturated, and at that time oxygen could build up in
the atmosphere.
Around 1.2 billion years ago, the first multicellular life appears on Earth.
And this is an important point.
For two-thirds of the history of life on Earth, it was only single-celled life.
Over 2 billion years, we're just spent developing and improving the structures of the cell.
And now, when multicellular organisms arrive, arise, life really gets going.
Here is a trilobite fossil from 500 million years ago.
It serves as a representative of the life forms that developed during the Cambrian
explosion.
540 million years ago begins the greatest appearance and diversification of life in Earth's history.
In just tens of millions of years, most of the modern phyla appeared in the fossil record.
And then, life quickly grows large.
Around 230 million years ago was the beginning of the age of the dinosaurs.
This is the Barrasaurus skeleton at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
And I used to walk past it every day.
It was a huge reminder that even a species that dominates the planet for over 100 million
years is vulnerable.
About 65 million years ago, almost all the dinosaurs died in a mass extinction.
I say almost all the dinosaurs, because if you visit the dinosaur halls at AMNH, you'll
find that the avian dinosaurs come down to us today as birds.
Now, human ancestors don't appear in the fossil record until a few million years ago.
A prime example is the Lucy skeleton.
This dates from 3.3 million years ago.
It represents a hominid species that has been thought to be an ancestor of modern humans.
However, modern humans don't appear in the fossil record until about 130,000 years ago.
So, what does this brief history teach us?
Well, first, that life takes a long time to develop.
After the first life forms arise, it takes another two and a half billion years for multicellular
life to appear.
And then, once life gets going, it seems to evolve on shorter and shorter time scales.
But the basic life develops on billion year time scales.
Now, second, we learn that life can alter the planet.
Oxygen would have been toxic to early life.
Somehow, the blue-green algae and others adapted and created a major change in the atmosphere,
creating the oxygen part of the atmosphere that we have today.
And the third thing we learn is that life on earth is intimately connected to our solar
system.
There are two direct points in this category, both related to impacts.
One, it takes about a billion years after the earth forms before the first life develops.
This is directly related to the bombardment of the planets after formation.
The impact record that we see recorded on the surface of the moon shows us that the
late heavy bombardment era slowed down between about 3.9 billion years ago and 3.3 billion
years ago.
Life on earth's surface could not have developed earlier in the record because it was too volatile
in the environment.
There are too many impacts smashing into the surface for life to develop.
Hence, by seeing life at 3.5 billion years ago, it seems that it arises quickly once
the conditions are right.
The second relationship to the solar system is that impacts continue to play a role in
the development of life.
This is evidenced by the mass extinction at the end of the age of the dinosaurs.
As discussed in an earlier lecture, the huge Chicksalub impact likely created a change
in the atmosphere and in the environment that led to a mass extinction.
There is even some evidence that an impact 200 million years ago enabled the dinosaurs
to flourish.
If so, there is sort of a weird brand of poetic justice in the solar system.
Now there are other important contributions from the solar system to the development of
life.
Life arises in earth's oceans.
But where did earth's oceans come from?
This is a topic of much research, including some suggestions that comets could have delivered
enough water to create the oceans.
And while comets likely played some role, computer simulations show that the impacts
of large icy bodies would play a greater role.
When I say large icy bodies, you might want to think of the medium sized moons or objects
from the Kuiper Belt.
Now these would deliver a lot of water in a few impacts, and since only a few impacts
would be required, the development of oceans or not might have just been a role of the
dice.
Another chance occurrence was the formation of the moon.
The moon formed from the impact of a Mars sized asteroid just after the earth had formed.
As shown in this illustration, the early moon was a lot closer to earth.
It would have raised much higher tides, and those tides would have sent water hundreds
of kilometers inland and created vast tide pools.
Those tide pools are a prime candidate for where life originated and developed.
Another hypothesis credits these giant tides with helping DNA molecules replicate by regularly
changing the salinity in the coastal areas.
Also, as the moon receded from earth, earth's rotation slowed, and that changed the rhythms
of life on earth.
Finally, the moon also helps stabilize earth's rotation axis.
Remember that earth's rotation axis does a little bit of a wobble, but by having the
moon there, it does less of a wobble than it would otherwise do.
That helps us maintain consistent and temperate seasons here on earth, which is of course
beneficial to life.
So without the moon, life on earth would be strikingly different, and perhaps non-existent.
Now, let's turn from life on earth to looking for life elsewhere in the solar system.
What environments could support life?
Life as we know it requires three things.
It requires a source of energy, carbon chemistry, and water as a mediating fluid for that chemistry.
Many places in the solar system have the first two.
You can find energy and carbon all across the solar system.
But the number of places with liquid water is limited.
So the search for life is primarily a search for liquid water.
One thing that we found here on earth is that life can adapt to a wide range of environments.
We used to think that life required the light of the sun.
Then we discovered these black smokers.
These are ecosystems on the ocean floor that are powered by the energy from hydrothermal
vents.
There is no light from the sun that makes it down to this ocean floor, but yet you have
a whole rich ecosystem of animals gathered around these hydrothermal vents.
We've also discovered bacteria, these are called halophilic bacteria, that thrive in
salt concentrations, salt concentrations two and a half times that of seawater.
And finally, what's very important for the icy world to the solar system is we have found
bacteria that can survive at the South Pole.
The groups of these bacteria are called extremophiles, and they show that life seems to take root
anywhere it can.
So the place in the solar system where we have searched most for life is Mars.
Mars has held a special fascination in our culture ever since the days of Percival Lowell.
Starting in 1895, he published three books with the mistaken assumption that the markings
he saw on Mars were a giant canal system.
He presented an image of a full Martian civilization that was channeling water from its polar ice
caps to its cities at lower latitudes.
We have been searching for the Martians ever since.
Now we never found Lowell's canals, but we have found abundant evidence that water once
flowed on Mars.
Mars Global Surveyor has provided this amazing shot.
This is a fossilized delta.
It is striking evidence of ancient water.
You can see the markings of water flows all across this region, and you can see it's about
10 or 15 kilometers across.
There are telltale markings of flowing water in ancient times on Mars.
Mars Global Surveyor has also seen gullies, and these are gullies along the rims of craters,
and they seem to indicate that there have been more recent water flows than the ancient
ones shown by the delta.
Six years later, we took a picture of this same region, and we saw not only the gullies,
we saw a brand new deposit.
This surprising new deposit is best explained by a brief release of frozen groundwater.
It appears that very brief water flows can occur on Mars even today.
Further, our robotic explorers on Mars have examined Martian rocks in microscopic detail.
They found definitive evidence of water, such as sediments laid down in flowing water.
So we have found abundant evidence of liquid water at some point in the past on Mars, and
even a little bit today, but what we haven't found on Mars are any definitive signs that
life arose in that water.
There was this one thing.
This is the meteorite ALH84001.
It is shown that this meteorite, due to the isotopes in its chemical composition, comes
from Mars, and it was suggested that this shows possible signs of life.
Here is a scanning electron microscope detailed of that meteorite, and these microscopic structures,
the things that sort of look like worms in this image, they're less than a micron across.
They're about 500 or 800 nanometers across.
They were suggested in 1996 to be fossilized nanobacteria.
Now similar bacteria existed on the ancient earth about three or billion years ago, but
that bacteria on the ancient earth were about 100 times larger.
So people questioned this result, and other researchers offered non-biological explanations,
and the question was really hotly debated for a while.
It is still discussed, and as yet, there is no proof of biological activity in the rock,
but it has sparked much research into the way life can develop.
An intriguing point is that this meteorite was found not on Mars, but in Antarctica.
It is believed to have been cast off of Mars about 15 million years ago.
It spent 15 million years traversing the inner solar system until it finally crash-landed
on earth about 13,000 years ago.
And that suggests a very speculative idea.
What if life originally arose on Mars, and such rocks containing life were broken off,
and carried life to earth?
In that case, our search is over.
We have met the Martians, and they are us.
Now that's rather speculative, but we can then look elsewhere in the solar system to
see if we find other places where liquid water can exist.
This is the surface of Jupiter's moon Europa.
It shows ice rafts.
These suggest the existence of a subsurface ocean.
They very much resemble the ice structures that we see floating above the Arctic Ocean
near Earth's North Pole.
Europa may be heated enough by tidal interactions with Jupiter to maintain a shallow ocean below
its icy crust.
Remember that the tidal interactions with Jupiter are what flex the inner moon Io, and
it has all of its volcanic eruptions.
So if the same process is operating on Europa, and there is a subsurface ocean, there could
be microbial life on Europa.
Now remember in previous lectures, we have talked about subsurface oceans not just on
Europa, but also on two other of the Galilean moons.
Here are the cutaways.
The upper left is Io, then the upper right is Europa, the bottom left is Ganymede, and
the bottom right is Callisto.
Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto are all believed due to other properties to have subsurface
oceans.
And folks tend to talk only about life possibilities on Europa, but you've got to remember wherever
there is liquid water, there is a chance of life.
Our recent addition to our list of the possible places where life could exist is Saturn's
moon Enceladus.
Now Enceladus has been observed to be spewing ice particles out of its southern polar regions.
And some models of these jets have liquid water as their source, while others need only
ice.
It is yet another site for further investigation.
Now you may have noticed that in all our discussions of the solar system, the best we're
hoping for to find on elsewhere and on solar system is microbial life.
And that's not the alien life that we're really interested in.
What about advanced intelligent beings like us?
Well, the search for intelligent life really boils down to a series of questions, and the
problem is that most of these questions have rather inexact answers.
The first question, how many stars are out there?
And that's an easy first question, because we have about a hundred billion in our Milky
Way galaxy, maybe two hundred billion, you know, maybe even four hundred billion.
But eh, what's a hundred billion amongst astronomers?
Rough estimate, a hundred billion stars in our Milky Way galaxy.
But not all of those would be suitable for advanced life.
However, that advanced life appears to take billions of years to develop.
We only should count stars that live for billions of years.
However, it is only the high mass stars that are the shortest live stars, and most stars
are low mass, long live stars.
That only cuts out maybe ten percent of the stars.
Next, how many planets are out there?
A decade ago, any answer I gave you would be totally speculation.
But now, we have some initial numbers.
In the planet searches we've done so far, about six and a half percent of the stars
we've surveyed have planets, and that's a lower boundary.
And when you correct for the incompleteness of the surveys, that number grows to around
fifteen percent.
So we say, based on observations, about fifteen percent of planets of stars have planets.
But most of those planets that we've discovered are Jupiter mass planets, and not the ones
that we would expect to support advanced life.
Perhaps maybe the moons around those planets could be suitable for life.
If you have a Jupiter orbiting in a nice orbit, then a moon around that could be some place
that you might find advanced life.
But Earth mass planets are not yet detectable.
They should be there.
However, there's another consideration.
If you've got these giant planets on elliptical orbits swooping through the region where
Earth would be found in our solar system, it makes the formation and stability of Earth
mass planets highly questionable.
There are many solar systems where I can't imagine Earth forming just because there's
a Jupiter swinging through its region that would change its orbit.
Further, the planets that we find have to be at the right distance from their star in
order to have liquid water.
Now, we don't know so much about this, we have to make guesses.
And to be optimistic, we could sort of extrapolate from our solar system and say that for every
giant planet formed, one suitable Earth mass planet forms.
Now, that's what we see in our solar system.
And perhaps that's just wishful thinking.
But I really like to believe that there are plenty of suitable planets and moons out there
to be found.
But there's still a long way to go.
We now have some planets.
But how does basic life develop?
Is it an easy process or is it hard?
We look on Earth and it arose rather quickly.
Once the heavy bombardment starts to slow down, a few hundred million years, we get life.
And the biologists I've talked to seem to think that that should be the norm elsewhere
in the universe.
One of them said to me that he thinks the universe is absolutely brimming with light.
But nearly all of it is green slime.
Algae could be the dominant life form in the universe.
And that's because no one knows the probability of developing complex life.
It took billions of years on Earth and there were a number of outside influences that changed
the process along the way.
Is the story of what happened on Earth a common one?
And when we consider complex life, I'm going to just jump from multicellular organisms
all the way to advanced technological civilizations.
Yeah, you can question if complex species will develop.
If intelligence will develop in those species and if technology will be developed.
But I'm really willing to grant those things because the history seems to tell me that
if you can just get two cells to cooperate, that's the linchpin.
That's the simple power of cooperation then takes over and the rest of that stuff, that's
probably inevitable.
Of course, I got to admit, we don't really know what precipitated the Cambrian explosion.
So perhaps I'm being too optimistic again.
But the really unknown question is how long does advanced life last?
We have had the technological capability to communicate with other civilizations across
our galaxy for at most a hundred years.
Will we get ourselves into trouble in the next few hundred years with global warming?
Or will there be another global mass extinction?
The fossil record shows that every hundred million years or so, much of the biological
slate is just white clean.
The point is that stars evolve on billion year timescales.
Perhaps life is developing around a nearby star, but it won't reach a technological state
for another two billion years.
Will we be around then to communicate with them?
Or put it a different way, it's pretty hard to have a conversation with green slime.
So as I look up at the stars of our galaxy, I really want to believe that there are myriad
of planetary systems, planets like Earth, and advanced life forms living on them.
But there's one final question that tempers that optimism.
If the galaxy is truly teaming with life, then where are these aliens?
If they've been around for billions of years, they should have developed the technology
and found us.
Even just robotic explorers with billions of years to explore the galaxy should be able
to search out all the nooks and crannies.
And how come we see no evidence of their existence?
To put it bluntly, where are the gamma ray signatures of their hyperdrive spaceships?
So there is some logical limit to just how filled with life the galaxy can be.
It would be awfully lonely if we were the only civilization.
I really don't buy the arguments that say we're somehow special.
Our history does show a series of random chance events.
But given 100 billion stars in the galaxy, those odds should pay off many times over.
And so, really, when it comes to thinking about life in the universe, the best we can
do is to look at the stars and wonder.
And that, my friends, brings us full circle in this course.
At the end of the first lecture, I spoke of the essential motivation for astronomy.
Simply just staring up at the night sky and wondering.
And now we've finished this course, and we've learned so much about what's up there.
We've seen the fiery eruptions from our sun and the icy frozen worlds of the Kuiper Belt,
the sterile tranquility of the moon, and the constant volcanic eruptions on Io, the intricate
ring system of Saturn, and the complex history of continental drift.
We've seen the demotion of one planet and the discovery of hundreds of others, robotic
vehicles that explore the surface of Mars and the Voyager spacecraft that are now exiting
our solar system.
They're Jupiter-sized planets orbiting close to their stars, and they're long period comets
that are stretching all the way out towards interstellar space.
We've seen ammonia clouds, methane lakes, and sulfuric acid rain.
We've seen impacts that have scarred Jupiter, created the moon, and caused global extinctions.
There are planet-wide dust storms on Mars and Earth-sized hurricanes on Jupiter.
We can see the hellish conditions on Venus and the perfect conditions for life here on
Earth.
And yet, in the end, after all that, we are still looking up, wondering what else is
out there, imagining the new discoveries that will be made, and how they will change our
view of the solar system, of our planet, and of ourselves.
I'd like to leave you with one final movie.
This is the view of Earth from the messenger satellite, as it goes off to explore our solar
system.
Our planet, rotating on its axis, hanging in the empty blackness and receding into space.
It's a fitting visual metaphor to our continuing journey of exploring the solar system.
Good luck in your journeys, and may they always be filled with wonder.
So long.
