Welcome back. In this lecture, we're going to look at a very practical matter, namely,
how we measure quantities, particularly voltage and current, in electric circuits, and also
how we measure the resistance of individual resistors. Why do we want to do that? Well,
a lot of reasons. For instance, suppose we build an amplifier that's supposed to amplify
the input by a factor of 10. We need to look at the input voltage, and we need to look
at the output voltage, and we need to verify that the amplifier works. Suppose we've got
a circuit that isn't working right. Well, the first thing we do is check the various
voltages in the circuit and see that they have the values they have. We also need to
use voltage measurements and current measurements to read the outputs of electronic instrumentation
that may be measuring other quantities, other physical quantities that get converted like
humidity, barometric pressure, temperature, pH, a whole range of quantities we can convert
into electrical quantities, and then we need to measure electrical voltages or currents
to get the outputs of those quantities. So there's a lot of motivation for measurement.
So this lecture is going to deal with the process of measuring electrical quantities,
particularly voltage, current, and resistance, but it's also going to look at the instruments
we're going to use to measure them. We've had a lot of history behind electrical measurements.
Luigi Galvani, for whom Galvanic Cell, the original name for a battery is named, did
experiments with frogs legs. Found that the legs of a dead frog would twitch when they
were connected by metal wire, as shown in the picture here, and that was a very early
indication of the presence of a potential difference, that is, a voltage. The middle
image here shows a 19th century electroscope, an early device that was able to measure essentially
voltage or actually more like charge, the amount of charge put on two thin gold foil
pieces, and that was used for static electricity experiments. And finally, on the right we
see an electrician using a modern day voltmeter. So we want to come to understand these instruments,
how they work, and not only how they work, but more importantly, how to use them effectively.
Now what do we want to do with an electrical measuring instrument? What do we want its
characteristics to be? Well, the obvious first characteristic is we'd like it to be accurate.
That is, if it reads 6 volts, we want to know that the voltage that that instrument is getting
is indeed 6 volts. That's the obvious thing. There's a more subtle thing, and the more
subtle thing is we would like the instrument not to disturb the circuit it's in. And I
want to emphasize that because this is one of the biggest mistakes you can make using
electrical instruments. I may have a perfectly accurate meter, and it may read 5.4 volts
when I put it in a particular circuit, and it may be 100 percent accurate, but maybe
the voltage before I put the meter there was something different. And so we need to understand
how to use instruments and how to specify instruments in such a way that they will not
disturb the circuit in which we're putting them. So let's begin to think about how electrical
meters work. Several kinds of electrical meters, and you're probably familiar and have seen
both kinds. On the left here I show an analog meter. An analog meter is an old fashioned
meter. There are still plenty of them in use, however. And what an analog meter has is a
tiny coil of wire. And you can kind of see that at the center of the circular part at
the bottom end of the needle in this analog meter. And that wire carries a current, so
the fundamental analog meter is ultimately a current meter, but we can put resistors
in series with it to make it into a voltmeter. And that coil of wire is connected to a needle
and a spring, and the coil is suspended between the poles of a magnet. And if you've taken
another physics course from the great courses or elsewhere, you know that magnetic forces
act on currents. And so that needle twists, and the bigger the current, the bigger the
twist, and the scale is graduated to read in, for example, in this case, volts. And I have
over here a very simple analog voltmeter just mounted on a block of wood. That's all it
is. It's one of these simple moving coil meters. You can't see the coil, but it's down in
under that region. And this one is calibrated in volts, up to 10 volts. And if I put a voltage
across these black and red inputs, the meter will read that voltage. So that's a basic
analog meter, in this particular case, a voltmeter. Probably the meters you're familiar
with are digital meters. Here's a simple digital multimeter. I'll have more to say about that
later. And unfortunately, I can't describe as easily how a digital multimeter does its
magic, how it takes a voltage or a current that comes in at its inputs and converts it
into a numerical readout. You'll have to wait until lecture 23, the next to the last lecture
in this series, and then you'll understand how that process of so-called analog to digital
conversion works, and we'll actually build an analog to digital converter in that lecture.
But we will be exploiting digital meters and using them long before we understand how they
work. So we have a primitive understanding of how analog meters work. Digital meters
are more complicated, a lot of electronics in them, but we will come to understand them
by the end of the time we're using, we're in this course. And let me just point out
a few examples, more examples. Again, this is a little inexpensive digital multimeter.
You might buy this for $10 or $15. You might have something like this at home. Here's its
predecessor, still quite functional, an analog version of basically the same thing, probably
cost about the same, and is useful for simple home repairs and work and things like that.
We will be using in this course a fancier instrument. This is an Agilent multi-digital
multimeter. A much more sophisticated instrument can do a lot more accurate measurements, a
lot more precise measurements, doesn't disturb the circuit you put it in as much. It can
actually be controlled or send output to a computer also, but we're not going to do
that here. But basically it's the same as the other instruments I showed you, but that's
the one we will be using. I'll talk about this big thing later on in this lecture.
So we have a quick look at how meters work and just some examples of different kinds
of meters. Let me pause and give you a quiz this early in the lecture. So here's a vocabulary
quiz. And on the left I have two words, voltage and current. And on the right I have two words
across and through. And I'd like you to think about the meaning of voltage as an energy
imparted to charge by, say, the terminals of a battery or some other device. Or we might
ask what's the voltage between the two ends of a resistor. And then think about current
as a flow and ask yourself which word from the left column goes with which word from
the right column. So pause and think about that a moment.
Okay, coming back from your little quiz, well, they go right across like that. Voltage goes
with a cross and current goes with through. Current is a flow. It flows through things.
Voltage is a difference in energy per charge. And so it goes across between two points in
a circuit. And those words are really important. If you don't have that word connection right,
you will not understand how to hook up meters. In fact, you may damage the meters or worse,
damage yourself. You'll hear misuse of language all the time. So-and-so is in the hospital
because 20,000 volts went through him. Well, volts don't go through anything. Volts aren't
a flow. They're an energy per charge, a potential difference it's called that's imposed across
two points in the circuit. Current goes through. So get those words right. We'll exploit them
again when we talk about how to use these instruments to measure electrical quantities.
So let's talk a little bit about measuring voltage. I mentioned in the preceding lecture
that there was going to be a little project and you could do the project or not, whether
or not you did the project doesn't matter, but we're going to talk about the circuit from
the project in the previous lecture. So here's the circuit. It's got a six-volt
battery. You were supposed to hook it up in such a way that you had a voltage divider
that gave you four volts. And you'll remember the voltage divider equation and the voltage
divider equation says the voltage across two series resistors gets divided in proportion
to their resistance. So with one kilo ohm, 1,000 ohms, and two kilo ohms, the two kilo
ohms is going to get two-thirds of the voltage across it and the one kilo ohm is going to
get one-third of the voltage across it. So we got the four volts across the two kilo
ohm resistor. Now a voltmeter, what does a voltmeter do? Well, a voltmeter like this
simple one I showed you measures the voltage that you put between its two terminals, its
two inputs. That's what it does. It measures the voltage across itself. It doesn't automatically
measure a battery voltage or the voltage across the resistor or anything else. It measures
the voltage across itself. And to exploit that fact, you've got to connect a voltmeter
in a circuit in such a way that the voltage across the voltmeter will be the same as the
voltage across the circuit component whose voltage you want to measure. Remember from
the previous lecture that when we put circuit components in parallel, they have to have
the same voltage across them. So to use a voltmeter correctly, you connect the voltmeter
across the component whose voltage you're measuring. That is, you connect the voltmeter
in parallel with the component whose voltage you're measuring. If you connect it in series,
not going to work because there's no guarantee they have the same voltage across them. You
connect a voltmeter in parallel. So this particular picture is now showing how you would connect
a voltmeter to measure the voltage across the two kilo ohm resistor in that circuit.
It does not measure the voltage of the battery. It does not measure the voltage of the one
kilo ohm resistor. It's set up to measure the voltage of the two kilo ohm resistor.
You'd have to put it across the one kilo ohm resistor to get that voltage, and you'd
have to put it directly across the battery to get the battery voltage. So that's how
to hook up a voltmeter. And I'm not going to repeat the experiment, but I did that in
the previous lecture when I had two light bulbs connected in series, and I stuck the
voltmeter across one of the light bulbs. There was a six-volt battery, two identical light
bulbs, and we ended up with three volts across one of the light bulbs. I didn't measure the
other one, but if I had, it would also have been three volts. So the voltmeter has to
go across or in parallel with the component whose voltage you're trying to measure. Now
there's something a little bit more subtle, because I made the point that a voltmeter
could be perfectly accurate, 100% accurate. It reads exactly the voltage across itself.
Of course, that also is an impossibility. But it could nevertheless disturb the circuit
in a way that means the voltage across the voltmeter when you're doing the measurement
is not the same as before you put the voltmeter there. And so we want to explore what properties
a voltmeter has to have in order that it not disturb the circuit in question. And one of
the reasons I asked you in the previous lecture's project is to first design this voltage divider
that put four volts across the two kilo ohm resistor was because I then asked, what would
happen if you put another resistor across there? Now, before we put the other resistor,
let's notice something. With six volts across a combined resistance of one ohm and two ohms,
that's total of three ohms, because resistors in series add, we have six volts across three
ohms, that's across three kilo ohms, 3,000 ohms, that's two milliamps. Again, kilo ohms,
milliamps, the kilo and the milli cancel out. You can just work things right out in volts.
So there's going to be two milliamps flowing through that one kilo ohm resistor, and that
two milliamps is going to go on through the two kilo ohm resistor, and two milliamps is
consistent with Ohm's law. We got two milliamps through one kilo ohm, there's therefore two
volts across the one kilo ohm resistor, and the remaining four volts of the six from the
battery is across the two kilo ohm resistor. So all this makes sense. So what I asked you
to do in the preceding lecture was then to put another resistor in parallel with the
two kilo ohm resistor, you put 10 kilo ohms. If you work this out, you found that you got
3.75 volts. If you didn't work that out, don't worry, relax. We're going to show you why the
voltage is less. I'm not going to go through the mathematics, but I'm going to show you at least
why it's going to be less than the four volts you had before. And here's why. Here's the circuit
with the two kilo ohm resistor and the 10 kilo ohm resistor in parallel. Remember that the
resistance of parallel resistors is always lower than that of either resistance alone. And the
reason again is we got two pathways, two parallel pathways for current to flow, so it's easier
for the current to flow. And so without going into the mathematical details, that resistance is
less than two kilo ohms. As a result, the current through the whole circuit, the resistance of
the whole circuit is less than three kilo ohms that we had for the combined resistance, and that
means the current is going to be more than two milliamps. And that current is flowing through
the one kilo ohm resistor, and then it's splitting and flowing through the parallel combination,
but it adds up to this current that's greater than two milliamps. But the point is if there's
a current greater than two milliamps flowing through the one kilo ohm resistor, there's a voltage
across the one kilo ohm resistor that is greater than two volts. And that leaves a voltage across
that parallel combination. Remember, parallel resistors have the same voltage, which is less
than four volts. And consequently, there is no longer four volts across that parallel combination
across the two kilo ohm resistor, which is part of it. There's somewhat less in the work. If you
work out the math, the less is 3.75. So what's the implication for a voltmeter? If a voltmeter
draws current from the circuit, it will lower the voltage it's trying to measure. And even if it's
perfectly accurate, it won't get the voltage right because the voltage will be different with the
voltmeter there than if it wasn't there. So the implication for voltmeters is an ideal voltmeter
should have infinite resistance. And in practice, it should have a resistance much greater than the
resistances of the circuits you're measuring. Now, how well do real voltmeters do that? Because
analog voltmeters draw current, and they have to draw current, they ultimately don't do as well as
most digital meters. This particular meter I happen to know, if it's on the one volt full scale
range, it has a resistance of 20,000 ohms. Well, that's twice that 10,000 ohm resistor we were
throwing into that circuit we were talking about. That'd be enough to throw the voltage off in that
particular circuit. Digital meters, on the other hand, including inexpensive ones like you can buy
or fancy instrumentation grade meters, typically have millions of ohms, one million ohm, 10 million
ohms, or typically you could even get them up higher, but then they run into various other kinds
of troubles. But the point is, in practice, the voltmeter needs a resistance much greater than any
resistance in the circuit. And so you can treat the voltmeter as if it were an open circuit, a
complete gap, an infinite resistance through which no current can flow. So that's the implication
for voltmeters. That's how we measure voltage with voltmeters, which are devices that have
effectively infinite resistance. By the way, that shows what would happen if you put a voltmeter in
series with something. It's an open circuit, no current can flow, you'll stop all the current.
And there'll be no voltage across any of the resistances in the circuit, and you'll see the
entire voltage dropped across the meter, but that won't tell you anything. It won't tell you the
voltage across. In this case, the resistor R2 that we're trying to measure the voltage across.
Well, let's move on to measuring current. We'd like to talk now about how you measure current.
Again, we want to measure current without doing any disturbance of the circuit. So here's a simple
circuit, 6 volts now across a 2 kilo ohm resistance, just one resistor, a 6 volt battery, 2
kilo ohms, the current should be I equals V over R, 3 milliamps. The ammeter measures current
through itself. Current comes in one lead, goes through the ammeter, and out the other. That's
what the ammeter measures. And you've got to put the ammeter in the circuit in such a way that that
is the current you're measuring through the component you're interested in. So suppose I want
to know the current through that 2 kilo ohm resistor, which in this very simple series circuit is
the current through everything. So what I have to do is put the two things in series. So the current
through the meter has no place to go but through the 2 kilo ohm resistor, or vice versa. It doesn't
matter what order. So I've got to break the circuit. For an ammeter, you've got to break the
circuit. You've got to put the ammeter in series with the current, the component whose current
you're trying to measure. Now, there's an implication of that for ammeters, and that is if
that ammeter has any resistance whatsoever, it's going to reduce the total circuit current. So the
implication is the ideal ammeter should have zero resistance, and in practice, it should have a much
lower resistance than any resistance in the circuit. Now, this makes ammeters a little trickier, and
in fact, as we'll see in a moment, a little more dangerous to use. Let me do a little demonstration
over here. So here I have my digital meter. It's now connected as an ammeter. This is actually a
different connection I have to plug into because it's that low resistance connection. It's set to
measure amps. Here is my light bulb that I showed you in the previous lecture, a hefty 6 volt light
bulb. And I want to measure the current through that light bulb. I do not take and stick this ammeter
across that battery. To do so would A, not measure the current through the light bulb, it would
alter the circuit dramatically. It would also probably destroy the ammeter, or in the case of
this one, blow the fuse. What I want to do instead is come out of the battery's positive terminal
with the wire that's going into the ammeter. So here's the red wire going into the ammeter, and
here's the black wire coming out of the ammeter, and I'm going to connect that to the wire that's
going into the light bulb. So I'll just join these two wires. The light bulb lights because the
ammeter has essentially zero resistance. So the circuit is just the same as before. It thinks the
ammeter is just a piece of wire, and I look on the ammeter and it's reading about 1.4 amps. That's
a big hefty current. That's why in the preceding lecture, when I connected that light bulb across
the battery, the battery's terminal voltage dropped considerably because there was 1.4 amps
flowing through its internal resistance. So that's how we measure current. So I'm going to disconnect
that before I do anything that might damage things. And I'm going to remind you once again that you
do not want to connect an ammeter ever across a voltage source. So here's an example of what you
would not do to try to measure the current in that circuit because suddenly you have a resistance
that's almost zero across the battery and an enormous current flows, and the meter either gets
destroyed or if it's a reasonable meter, it has a fuse and the fuse blows. And when I teach
introductory electronics, I have a whole little bin full of fuses sitting out there, and many of my
students learn the hard way by blowing the fuse, and then they have to figure out how to change it.
It's not terribly difficult to do. So a huge current flows don't put an ammeter ever across a
voltage source. Okay, there's one other kind of measurement we want to do, and that's a measurement
of resistance. And we actually did that in the very first lecture when I showed you, for example,
the resistance of a simple resistor, and then I showed you the resistance of a photosensitive
resistor whose resistance varied with light. How do you measure resistance? Well, in a common meter
and a multimeter set to measure voltage, current, or resistance, it's a little more, you have to
be a little more active to measure resistance. You have to have a source of current somewhere
in an electronic circuit that generates a constant current, runs it through whatever you connect
across the meter, a resistance you're trying to measure, and determines the voltage, and then
uses Ohm's law to determine the resistance, because i is v over r, or r is then v over i.
So that's how you do it. Connect the resistance, and away you go. An unknown resistance, you can
measure it that way. Here's what you do not do. You do not measure the resistance when it's in a
circuit by putting an Ohm meter across it. That symbol is for an Ohm meter, because that Ohm meter
is going to try to pass current through that entire circuit, through those other resistors,
and through the battery, and it's not going to measure properly the resistance of that one
resistor. We're interested in it. What you have to do instead is to disconnect that resistance
and then put the Ohm meter across it. You can sometimes get away with disconnecting just one
end of it, because then it's not in the circuit. But better take the resistor and isolate it,
and measure its resistance separately. So there are the three common things we've talked about.
Voltage, current, and resistance, and how to measure them. And I want to spend the last third
of this lecture on another voltage measuring instrument, can also occasionally measure current,
but it is a wonderfully versatile instrument that measures voltages as functions of time.
And that's the oscilloscope. And I'm going to begin with a little history of this remarkable
electronic instrument. An oscilloscope is a device that displays on some kind of screen
voltage versus time fundamentally. And I have a wonderful array of oscilloscopes here, starting
with one that was manufactured in the 1930s, before there was a very viable oscilloscope industry.
It has a tiny little screen about three, two or three inches across. Most of the rest of it is
electronic stuff. It weighs a ton. It's not very useful. It can't do much. In fact, it doesn't even
run anymore, so I don't have it plugged in. That's an oscilloscope from the 1930s. Here's an oscilloscope
from the 19, probably built in the 1950s and used into the 1970s and even 80s. There are probably
plenty of these so-called 500 series oscilloscopes in operation in research labs today. I actually
used this model to teach with when I first started teaching electronics at Middlebury College, and
it's a great oscilloscope for its day. Its circuitry uses vacuum tubes, like I showed in the very
first lecture. And more importantly, its display uses a long vacuum tube called a cathode ray tube,
which is basically a cousin of the old TV picture tubes before we all had flat screen TVs.
And just to show you what this does, the oscilloscope moves a beam of electrons, which
hits the screen from inside, causes it to glow, and it moves across there at a rate that
can be varied. And there it is slowing down, and you can see that spot moving across the screen,
and that is actually being supplied with a voltage that is going up and down 440 times a
second. That happens to be the note A above middle C, and so you see what looks like a line,
but it's really going up and down very rapidly. In fact, if I slowed that down, you would see
it going much more slowly. So this can go very slowly indeed, takes many seconds across the
screen, but even this ancient oscilloscope can be sped up so that that trace is sweeping across
the screen in a matter of microseconds, millions of seconds. So that is the versatility of the
oscilloscope. It can display signals as a function of time over very wide time intervals,
and that particular oscilloscope is displaying a sinusoidal waveform at 440 hertz. Now that's a 1950s
vintage oscilloscope. Here's a 1980s vintage oscilloscope. It has solid state electronics,
it's amplifiers. The thing that makes the spot sweep across the screen is basically solid state
electronics, transistors, and related components. But it still has a long cathode ray tube,
which is doing the display. It can be sped up just like the other one or slowed down,
just the same. Same display mechanism. What's different about this one is the
electronics is a lot more sophisticated, takes up less space, is solid state. So you can see the
kind of shrinking in size and weight here. You can also see the screens getting a little
bigger perhaps. Here's a modern oscilloscope, probably from the early 2000s. This is the
model we use in teaching our electronics course for sort of upper class students at Middlebury.
We use a simpler version of the same thing for teaching our most introductory physics courses,
and it's different. It no longer has a long cathode ray tube for the same reason that your
television set doesn't. That has become completely obsolete in favor of flat panel displays.
And in a sense, this is not a real oscilloscope. It's a computer that has inputs that turn
numbers into digital quantities, using the analog to digital conversion process we'll
learn about later in the course, and then displays those quantities as time variations
on the screen. It actually stores them in a memory and then dumps the memory to the screen.
So it sort of simulates the old fashioned cathode ray oscilloscope. And I often wonder
if we hadn't ever invented the cathode ray oscilloscope, would we have just jumped to this
thing? But then I realized, well, we never would have got electronics as advanced without an oscilloscope
because the oscilloscope is absolutely wonderful for looking at electronic signals and what they're
doing is a function of time. And just to give you an example, let me slow down this signal
that's going across here. So this signal is right now at 440 hertz, and I'm going to drop it down
and you can see that that waveform, we're just seeing a little piece of it. But if I slow down the rate
at which the beam is sweeping across these screens, you can see that effect. And I'm going to slow
it down still further. I'm going to drop it to, let me drop it to one cycle per second. And now
it's going up and down at the rate of one cycle per second. Let's see if we can get it. And there
it goes. And you can see that spot going across the screen now at a very slow rate, coming back
and returning. It might take a while for it to return going slowly across the screen. There it
is. And you can see it tracing that up and down of the voltage as a function of time. Now even these
fairly simple, not cheap, but not horribly expensive instruments, this one can go down to
billions of a second. So it can measure time intervals on the order of billions of a second.
So a contemporary oscilloscope, a 1980s vintage or an early 90s vintage oscilloscope, a 1950s and
60s vintage oscilloscope, and a 1930s oscilloscope. Now in this course, I would be perfectly comfortable
using this oscilloscope. And in fact, it has a digital output, not a digital, but has an analog
output which we could supply to a monitor and get a fairly good image on the screen. But instead
in this course, we're going to use this instrument. And we're very grateful to Agilent Technologies
for lending us this very fancy high definition oscilloscope. They've just started making high
definition models. And you might think, well, that's a gimmick like high definition television.
Well, it does have a high definition screen. But the essence of the high definition is
it breaks the input signals into far finer divisions in the language of digital electronics,
which we'll get to later in the course. Most oscilloscopes are eight bit. They break incoming
voltages into two to the eighth, which is about 250, is exactly 256 levels. This breaks it into
two to the 12 levels, which is, let's see, about 4,000 different levels. And because the voltages
can be displayed much more finely, we need a more high resolution screen. And we can take the output
of this. We're not going to do it in this lecture, but we will in subsequent lectures. We'll take the
output of this oscilloscope and we will send it into our big monitor so we'll be able to see
exactly what's happening. Okay, well, I'm going to do a very silly thing with my fancy oscilloscope
here. I'm going to simply use it to measure the voltage of that six volt battery. So here I have
the cable coming from the oscilloscope. You can see that horizontal line that represents zero volts
on that screen. And I'm going to connect the oscilloscope across the six volt battery. It's a
volt meter I connected across. And you see that line jump up. And it jumped up to a point. We're
getting a little bad connection there. That's why it's wiggling like that. But there it is.
It jumped up to three of these squares on the oscilloscope screen above where it had been.
And there's a number in the upper left. I don't know if you can see it. It says two volts per.
That means there's two volts for every one of those squares. Two times three is six volts. So
this is accurately measuring the six volts of that battery. But that is a waste of an enormous
instrument. I could do that much more easily with a simple volt meter. Well let me end by showing
you something much more impressive that this oscilloscope or any of the oscilloscopes I have
here could easily do. I'd like to show you a measurement of the speed of sound. Now the speed
of sound is not like the speed of light, although we can actually do and we do this at Middlebury
College, a comparable measurement for the speed of light. It's a little more sophisticated.
But we're going to measure the speed of sound. And let's look at how we're going to do it. So
we're going to hook up a so-called function generator, a source of various electrical signals.
And I'll show you what signal I use. I'm going to hook that to one input of the oscilloscope
because the oscilloscope can display several voltages at once. And I'm also going to send
it to a loudspeaker. And I'm going to pick up the sound from that loudspeaker with a microphone.
And I'm going to send that into the second channel of the oscilloscope. And we're going to use that
to measure the speed of sound. So here I've implemented the setup that's shown in the block
diagram. I have the function generator that makes an electrical signal. It's connected to the channel
one input of the oscilloscope. That's the channel that displays in yellow at the top of the screen
there. It's also connected to this loudspeaker. A little ways away from the loudspeaker, half a
meter to be precise, 50 centimeters, is a microphone. And the microphone is connected to channel two
of the oscilloscope, although channel two is not turned on yet, so you don't see anything.
Now this function generator is set to do something interesting. It's set to a thousand hertz,
a thousand cycles per second, which if I just ran that would make a kind of high-pitched sound
that you could easily hear. But it's set to make only one cycle of that, which will take a thousandths
of a second. And then it waits 50,000ths of a second, 50 milliseconds, and then makes another one.
So if I turn this on, you first of all hear a buzzing sound. That's the every 50 milliseconds
buzzing associated with that one cycle coming on. And you can see many of those cycles appearing
on the screen of the oscilloscope. I've got the oscilloscope set to sweep rather slowly
across the screen. And now I'm going to do two things. First of all, I'm going to turn on the
channel two input, so we're going to see what channel two is looking at.
And there's channel two. Now channel two is very noisy. There's a lot of electrical noise in this
room. The microphone is picking up other sounds. It's not clean and beautiful, but you can clearly
see, in addition to all that noise, little spikes that correspond to the spikes in the input signal
that's going to the loudspeaker. And the interesting thing about them is you'll notice they're offset
horizontally. Remember, this direction measures time on the oscilloscope. So that offset is going
to give us the time it took the sound to travel that half a meter between the speaker and the
microphone. So let me now speed up the trace on the oscilloscope so we can see just one of these
spikes. So there's fewer, fewer, and there's one. I'll go a little bit further. Okay, so at this
point in time, right there, is the start of that little pulse. And this point in time, and it's a
little bit hard to see because there's some messy things going on here, and this isn't a perfectly
accurate measurement, but it'll give us a good estimate. Right about there is where that sound is
picked up by the microphone, or rather when that sound is picked up by the microphone. And if you
count between those, there are one, two, three boxes, horizontal boxes on the screen of the
oscilloscope, and there is a number I'm reading down here that says 500 microseconds, 500
millions of a second for each of those boxes. So it's taken three of those boxes, or three times
500, 1500 microseconds, or 1.5 milliseconds to go half a meter. If it takes 1.5 milliseconds to
go half a meter, it's going to take twice that, or three milliseconds to go a whole meter. So the
speed of sound is one meter per three thousandths of a second. And if you work that out, it comes
out to a little bit more than 300 meters per second, which is in fact the speed of sound under
normal atmospheric conditions, about 340 meters a second, about 700 miles an hour, or about a
thousand feet per second. So we have used this oscilloscope to do something quite sophisticated
and measure a very small time, and measure it right here with this simple tabletop setup
reasonably accurately. So just to review, we've gone through a number of instruments and shown
how to measure things, and the most sophisticated of those instruments is the oscilloscope. Now,
I could stop there, but I just want to mention the project for this lecture. If you would like
in future lectures to actually build circuits by yourself, you can do that, and we're going to do
that in this course, not with hands-on real hardware, but with circuit simulators that are
available to you on the World Wide Web, and we'll be trying out two of them, and you can take your
pick or decide not to do this at all. But this project for this particular lecture is going to
be an introduction to those software packages, those web-based circuit simulators. So if you want
to get into that, you really want to do the project for this lecture.
Your project for lecture three is really the same as your project for lecture two,
except I'd like you to do the project over again, not doing pencil and paper calculations,
but using circuit simulation. So you're to simulate the circuit from lecture two's project. That's
the six-volt battery, the one kilo ohm resistor, the two kilo ohm resistor. You're to verify that
the voltage across the two kilo ohm resistor is what you expect, and then you're to add the
10 kilo ohm resistor and verify that the voltage is indeed decreased and is indeed what you calculated
if you did the project in lecture two. Now, before we proceed, I want to tell you a little bit about
how we're going to simulate circuits in this course. There is a whole lot of circuit simulation
software out there, much of it designed for electrical engineers, much of it for just one
computer platform. As I was designing this course, I looked for simulation software that was
universal, would work on any platform, and I found a number of web-based simulators,
and there are more of them coming into existence all the time, and of the several that I found,
I've chosen to work with two particular ones called Circuit Lab and Do Circuits. I want to
emphasize that we at the great courses don't have any direct connection with these outfits,
and their products may change from time to time. They may not always work exactly as I describe,
but they're pretty good at simulating circuits, and you'll have fun using either one.
It's almost as much fun as building circuits yourself with real hardware. So in this project,
I'm going to spend a little bit of time introducing the two packages we're going to use for circuit
simulation, and then I'll show you how to go through and build the circuits used in this project,
and then later I will introduce circuits that I've already built and will experiment with them
and do measurements on them. So let's get started. We'll begin first with Circuit Lab. So here we
see Circuit Lab. We have come up with the opening screen for Circuit Lab. I've already logged in
with my account. You can get an account. Some of these products offer free accounts. Some of them
offer accounts that are paid for. You may have to pay a few dollars a month to use them. I have a
subscription account here. I'm logged in under my account, and this is the screen I see, and for
this point I'm going to launch Circuit Lab's editor, which is going to allow me to build a circuit.
So up comes Circuit Lab's editor, and there's a big breadboard here, just like the boards I was
using, or I will be using in various lectures, to mount circuit components on, and on the left
there are a number of components. And so let's see what we want for components here. We want
two resistors to begin with. We want a one kilo ohm resistor, so I'm going to click on resistor.
I'm going to put a one kilo ohm resistor out here. Now if I needed to alter this resistor,
I could go up to my edit menu and do something like rotate it, and let me do that this time,
see if I can rotate it. So I'm going to rotate it. I know that the key command R rotates it,
so in the future I'll just use that. I want this to be a one kilo ohm resistor. Right now it says
it's a 100 ohm resistor, so I'll double click on it, and I get a little dialog box that tells me
I can put a different resistance in. So I could put in a thousand ohms, or I could put in one k.
It's the same either way, a kilo ohm is the same as a thousand ohms. So now I've got a one kilo ohm
resistor, and I want also a second resistor. So I'll get a second resistor, and I want it to be
two kilo ohms. So it's called R2. I could rename these resistors if I want it. So I'll make that one
2k, and I need a battery. So I'm looking for a battery. I scroll down somewhere in here. I know
there's a battery. There's also a DC voltage source that would do just as well, but since my
diagram had a battery, we'll grab this battery. We'll put the battery over here. These things
tend to snap to the grid lines you see, so if you put it in the wrong place or halfway in between,
that isn't a problem. Now the battery came up as a nine volt battery, so I'm going to double click
on it, and I'm going to change its voltage up here to six volts. And there's various other things I
could change about this battery, but I'm not going to bother to do that, and I'm going to just save
that, and I don't need to save it. Actually, I'm just going to try to close that box, and we have a
six volt battery. Now I need to wire this circuit together, and that means I grab these circles
at the ends of the various components. I move from those circles, dragging across to where I
want to make a connection. There's a connection, and it's a little tricky. You'll get used to it as
you do it more often. You want to make a bend, you stop, and then make that connection. There's
that connection, and I need to connect back here, and it looks like I've got a complete circuit,
and I'm ready to go, but I'm not quite. And the reason I'm not quite is because in most
circuit situations, it's good to have a ground, and these circuit simulators require that some
point in the circuit be grounded. So up at the very top, under essentials, is a ground, and I'm
going to grab the ground symbol, and I'm going to attach it to the bottom of the six volt battery.
The negative side of a power supply is off in the ground, and now I'm ready to simulate this circuit.
Now I could put an actual voltmeter, but I don't really need to do that. In circuit lab, I can,
well, there's various things I can do, but I'm going to show you the thing I like to do.
I'm going to put a node name here. I bring a node out. A node is just a point in a circuit.
I'm going to connect the node point there. I'm going to name the node V2 because that's what
I've been calling the voltage across the lower resistor. So my node is called V2. And now I'm
ready to simulate. So I'm in the build mode. I'm going to go to the simulate mode. I'm going to
be running a DC simulation. This is all about direct current. I don't need to do any fancy
stuff with time dependence. Sometimes it's useful to add an expression, and it says,
click any wire or wire terminal to measure voltages and currents. So I'm going to click on V2,
and that's going to tell me it's going to measure the voltage at V2 when it simulates the circuit.
Now I could be fancier. There are voltmeters in here. I could have connected a voltmeter
and seen the actual reading on the voltmeter, but I'm not going to do that.
So let me instead simply run the DC solver, and it says it finished in 0.02 seconds. That was an
easy calculation, and it says we have 3.997 volts for the voltage. Well, it was supposed to be four
volts. That's pretty close. The reason it's not quite exactly right is because that battery has
an imperfection. It's basically got an internal resistance to it. It's not a perfect voltage
source, so we came out 3.997 to all intents and purposes for volts. That's the first part of our
project. Now what we're supposed to do for the second part of our project is to add that extra
10k resistor in parallel. So I'm going to go to build mode, and in build mode I'm going to grab
another resistor, bring it out here somewhere, make it 10k ohms, connect it, go, connect it at the top,
and now I'm ready to simulate again. So I'll go back to simulate. I'm going to run a DC solver.
I don't need to add anything else. I already have it set to read the voltage V2, and the DC operating
point is done, and it's at 3.747 volts. That's essentially the 3.75 volts we calculated. So this
is circuit lab simulation of lecture two's project, which is now the project for lecture three to
simulate that circuit. That's circuit lab. I won't be building a lot of circuit lab circuits from
scratch in the rest of the projects. I'll start with circuits I've already developed, but I'll do
modifications to them using these same techniques. And now let me introduce you to the second of the
two circuit simulators, and you're free to use either one. Both of them basically do the same
thing very late in the course. It's possible one or the other of them will do what we need to do
either better, or one of them won't do it at all, and I'll tell you when we get to that point.
So I'm going to go to do circuits, which I have open in another tab here, and I'm going to,
I'm already in here with myself logged in. There's a little picture of me in it. I go up there,
I logged myself in earlier, and my name is beside that. And it says try circuit simulator. And since
I'm making a new circuit, I'm going to do that. So here we go. And do circuit circuit simulator
comes up. It loads its application, which takes a few minutes. It actually loads not a few minutes,
a few seconds. It loads its application onto your desktop, onto your computer rather. So
do circuits has come up with its breadboard looks very similar. And we're going to do pretty much
the same thing. We're going to grab a resistor. In do circuits, you grab the resistor and you
pull it out and place it in the circuit. You double click it to change its value.
And here it is. It has a one ohm resistor. I'm going to change it to a one. And here I have to
put the k ohms, select it from that drop down menu, and save it as the resistor. So there's a one
k ohm resistor. And let's get it labeled at r0, r0. Just label things differently. Let's grab
another resistor. Let's rotate that resistor. The key combination r rotates the resistor in either
simulation package. I'm going to move that resistor down a little bit so I can connect it nicely.
I need to make it a two kilo ohm resistor. So we'll make it two. And I could just as easily
write 2,000 ohms. It doesn't matter. So there's the 2,000 ohm resistor. Let's make it 2k so we
can see it with the same terminology we have. So we'll make it 2k ohms. But you could have done it
either way. It was the same resistor, 2k ohms. There it is. Let me join these two resistors.
There's my join of those two. I need a battery. Let's see where I can find a battery. There it
is. DC voltage is a battery. Let's drag that battery out. Let's rotate the battery. Let's
double click the battery and make it a 6 volt battery. 6 volts save. Saving here just gets it
on the on the on the breadboard. Saving in circuit lab actually creates a custom version of the of
the piece of component where and I'm going to connect these two. Connect, connect, and let's
connect down below. We're going to go down here, click there, go across. And it's a good idea always
to have a ground. So let's look for our ground. Here's a ground. Ground in two circuits is the
other ground symbol with the diminishing length lines. So here we are. We would like to measure
the voltage at this junction. So to do that, we can put a label there just like we put a node
at the other point. So here's a label. I called that V2 before.
V2, I'll call it. And we will now do the simulation. So that in do circuits is to run the simulation,
run it. And we want to do a DC analysis. So I'll go to DC analysis. I don't want to sweep.
Sweep would allow me to change the voltage continuously. I'm not going to do a power analysis.
I'm simply going to run the DC without sweep. There we go. It simulates, takes a little while,
and the answer is 4 volts, exactly like we expected. So there's our DC result for that one.
We can go back and build some more. And let's just wrap up here by getting another resistor,
the 10 kilo ohm resistor. Here it is. We'll drag it out there. We'll rotate it with the R key.
We'll make it into 10 kilo ohms, 10 k ohms. Save it. And we'll connect it. So I'm going to go from
that node. I guess I've got to bring this resistor down or I'll bring this up. Doesn't matter.
I should have put that resistor in a slightly lower location. I accidentally right clicked on it.
When you right click on this thing, you can get various properties and so on. Let me drop that
resistor down one and make that connection again. And you'll notice it's a little awkward for me.
I have worked with this enough to know how to use it, but I haven't worked with it enough that I've
switched back and forth between the two simulators and get the wiring easily. So there's the wiring
now. And now I will run this analysis. And again, DC, run in DC without sweep. It takes a little
while and there we go 3.75 volts, which is exactly what we expected before. So there we are. Both
circuit simulators are doing the analysis of this circuit correctly. Now before I finish,
let me point out you can save these circuits. You'll have what's called a dashboard in do circuits.
And you'll have what's called a workbench in circuit lab. You can save circuits there. You
can pull them back in and work on them more. A neat thing you can do in do circuits, but not in
circuit lab, is to change the way the circuit is rendered. Here it is rendered in the kind of
schematic symbols for components. But if I click this little icon, I get a warning that this might
cause some wires to be disconnected. But if I do that, I get actual pictures of at least some of
the components. And that's kind of neat when you're first learning how to read schematic diagrams
in circuits. So there's the end of the project for lecture three and a somewhat lengthy introduction
to how to use the two circuit simulators. As with any software package, the best way to learn
these things is not to read an instruction manual or listen to me tell you what to do,
but get yourself started and play with it until you get fluent with it.
