Welcome back. In this lecture we're going to look at semiconductors, the miracle materials
that are at the heart of most modern electronic devices like transistors and diodes and a
host of others. The things that replace the vacuum tubes from the first half of the 20th
century with these tiny, tiny devices that are solid state, consume very little power
and we can cram billions of them on a single chip. This lecture will probably be the most
deep physics lecture in the sense of going into exactly how these devices work. In this
lecture we'll talk about diodes in particular and see how they form the basis of the transistors
that will come in the next lecture. So I'm going to begin by looking at the element silicon
which is a remarkable element. It's the second most abundant element in earth's crust after
oxygen and it's the element at the heart of semiconductor electronics. And let me give
you a very simplified picture of silicon's crystal structure. It's simplified because
silicon is a three-dimensional crystal. It has a more complex structure but the important
point about it is every silicon atom is bonded to its nearest neighbors by sharing of two
electrons. So in this picture you see the reddish dots which are the silicon atoms and
you see the outermost electrons going off and sharing themselves with nearby silicon atoms.
That's the structure of silicon. Silicon is one of a number of elements or compounds that
act as semiconductors. Their electrical conductivity isn't as good as metals but if they're not
bad like insulators and so they're somewhere in between and that's why they're called
semiconductors. And they conduct by a unique mechanism and we need to understand that mechanism
to see how semiconductor electronic devices work. So here is a silicon crystal and if
it were at absolute zero temperature it would just be sitting there looking like this. But
at reasonable temperatures, room temperature for example, it's possible that the random
thermal motions, the random motions that we call loosely heat, might knock one of these
electrons out of its bond and make it free and then that electron would become free to
carry a current the way electrons do in metals. So an electron in this picture now has been
dislodged from the crystal structure. It's free to move and if we apply an electric field and if
you don't know what an electric field is don't worry. Just imagine putting a bunch of positive
charge on the right of this picture somewhere off in the distance and negative charge on the left
and the positive charge on the right is going to attract electrons and it's going to repel anything
that's got a positive charge. So there's our electron in this electric field and it's going to
go happily moving away and that would be carrying electric current the same way the electrons do
in a metal. But something else can happen here. Notice that the bond that's been broken if you
will by the loss of that electron is an empty spot. An electron could go there, an electron would
like to go there and the tendency of electrons in the presence of that electric field is to try to
move to the right. So it's possible that the electron sitting right next to that blank spot could
move into it and we call that blank spot a hole and that hole basically acts like something with
positive charge because what happens is if the electron moves into the hole to the right then
the hole has effectively moved to the left and again in the presence of that electric field
another nearby electron might jump into the hole and in that process the hole has moved and so
what happens in a semiconductor material like silicon the intrinsic conductivity of that material
is caused not only by the presence of electrons as in a metal but also by the presence of these
if I can say it this way the presence of the absence of electrons by these holes and the holes
act like positive charge carriers and we're going to think of them as little particles
carrying positive charge they aren't they're more complicated than that they're the absence of an
electron but they too can move through the crystal structure and in an intrinsic semiconductor like
silicon there are equal numbers of electrons and holes as again the way they get there at all is
because random thermal motions can promote an electron out of the bond it's in and let it be
a free electron and that process creates a hole as well so we have electron hole pairs and in an
intrinsic semiconductor an intrinsic pure semiconductor that's what intrinsic means pure
silicon nothing else in there the current can be carried equally by holes and electrons but the
beauty of semiconductors is we have two kinds of charge carriers instead of one we have positive
holes and negative electrons and that makes semiconductors wonderful materials for building
electronic devices now intrinsic semiconductors that is pure silicon and pure other semiconductors
are actually not very useful they conduct electricity bit only weekly one thing they are good for
because the amount of electron hole pairs that are being formed depends on the temperature because
these electrons are being promoted out of the crystal bonding structure by random thermal
motions the conductivity actually goes up with increasing temperature the resistance of the
material goes down and so pure silicon can be used very nicely as a temperature sensor a resistance
based temperature sensor and that's a very common use for it but most of our semiconductors are not
pure we go to great lengths to make pure silicon and even though silicon is very abundant it's
very expensive and energy intensive to make it really pure and then we add impurities in extremely
small and carefully controlled amounts typically on the order of one impurity atom for every
10 million silicon atoms or something in that order very very small amounts of these materials
they're called dopants process is called doping and the reason we dope the semiconductors is it
does two things first of all it determines what the dominant charge carrier is by doping appropriately
we can make semiconductors that have almost all their current carried by electrons or we can make
semiconductors that have almost all their current carried by holes and we have exquisite control
not only over which sign of charge carrier operates in that semiconductor but also over the detailed
electrical properties in particularly how good a conductor this thing is so we can make resistors
for example by putting the right amount of doping in and so on and two common dopants that are used
to dope silicon are phosphorus which is said to be pentavalent and what that means is every
phosphorus atom has five outermost electrons that would like to participate in bonding with other
materials or other atoms and we're going to use boron which is trivalent it has three outermost
electrons that like to participate in bonding and let's take a look at what happens if we add
dopants to these semiconductor materials so here again is our silicon showing a piece that has
four silicon atoms we're going to replace one of the silicon atoms with phosphorus the yellowish
material now the phosphorus is electrically neutral but it's got five outermost electrons
and only four of them can participate in the silicon structure and if there isn't too much
phosphorus and remember we're putting in parts one in ten million so these are very small amounts
of these contaminants these dopants the phosphorus will fit itself into the crystal structure but
that one electron will be free to wander around so there's this extra electron it's free it's able
to carry electric current it didn't come with a corresponding hole now the material did not
get made more negative because there's extra protons in the nucleus of the phosphorus to
accommodate that the material is still neutral but it now has free electrons in it each phosphorus
atom that we put in liberates an electron and so as a result the majority charge carriers we call
them the charge the main dominant charge carriers in this material are the negative electrons there
are far more electrons coming from the dopants than from that random thermal energy process of
promoting electrons and making electron hole pairs so there are some holes but they don't play a big
role there are a few electrons that got there from thermal agitation but most of the electrons
came from our putting the phosphorus in and so we call this an n-type semiconductor now don't get
confused n does not mean it's negatively charged in fact in some conditions you'll see it's going to
be positively charged the n means the dominant charge carriers the things that are free to move
and carry current are in fact negative and they're electrons in this case well if we do the similar
thing but we put a boron atom in well the boron only has three valence electrons so only three of
them can participate in the bonds and the silicon structure wants four so if we put the the boron in
we are missing an electron in the bond structure and that missing electron is a hole and so in a
boron doped material a boron doped silicon there are lots of holes introduced every time we put a
boron atom into the structure and so the majority charge carriers are positive they're holes and
so we call this a p-type semiconductor and again it does not mean the material carries a net positive
charge it means that the dominant charge carriers the majority of things that can move to carry current
are holes and again remember a hole is really the absence of electrons so what's really happening
is electrons are bouncing through the crystal structure filling in the holes and moving that
way but they aren't free electrons they're still bound electrons so it's in a sense really the hole
that's moving and the hole that is carrying the current so now we have two kinds of semiconductors
n-type and p-type and they differ in what are the majority charge carriers and the whole
business of semiconductor electronics consists in getting the doping right
and then putting p and n-type semiconductor in proximity and we'll spend the next chunk of this
lecture looking at what happens when we put a piece of p-type material and a piece of n-type
material in close proximity and some really interesting stuff goes on when we do that
so we're going to have what we call a p-n junction and a p-n junction consists of a piece of p-type
material and a piece of n-type material and they're sitting right next to each other and between
them is this junction where they meet this is the essence of semiconductor electronics
understanding the p-n junction will allow you to understand all the other devices we're going to
deal with the several kinds of transistors the diodes and so on so here's a p-n junction well
what happens well in the n-type material there are a lot of electrons and there are very few free
electrons in the p-type material as we saw and whenever you have a big concentration of something
over here and a small concentration of it over here there is diffusion the process where some
of the electrons move into the p-type material to try to ease out that sharp abrupt gradient you
know I could do the same thing by opening a bottle of perfume and pretty soon perfume atoms would
have diffused throughout the room and people would smell them on the other side of the room
because when there's a high concentration of material of any kind more of it is moving in
the direction away from that high concentration because there's more of it there than toward it
and so the material spreads out that's called diffusion so electrons diffuse into the p-type
material and there's a lot of holes in the p-type material so holes diffuse into the n-type material
and where the holes in the coming from the p-type material get into the n-type material they meet
electrons and where the electrons from the n-type material come into the p-type material they
they meet holes and they can recombine and then we lose electron hole pairs.
Now something else interesting is happening here.
We are getting actually a slight layer of negative charge in the p-type material and
a slight layer of positive charge in the n-type material and you might say, why doesn't this
diffusion just keep happening?
Well, the electrical repulsion set up by those charges keeps it from happening and eventually
build up an equilibrium where there's some electrons have migrated to the p-type material
and some holes have migrated to the n-type material.
And what happens then?
Then the process of recombination occurs.
We have an electron and a hole, the electron falls into the hole if you will, it's energetically
favorable and they're all gone.
Now the electron hasn't disappeared from the world.
What's happened is it ceased to be a free electron.
It's now part of that crystal binding structure binding the atoms together and it's gone as
far as carrying electricity is concerned and so is the hole.
So the electron hole pairs recombine and they're all gone.
And so what happens is in the region right around the junction of the p- and n-type material
there's a zone where there are very few free charges because the electrons have diffused
to the left in this picture into the p-type material, the holes have diffused into the
n-type material, they've recombined and there's a zone here where there are very few free charges.
And if there aren't very many free charges, the material is a lousy conductor.
So this p-n junction is, on its own, a bad conductor and the reason is because of this
process of diffusion and recombination that have occurred and depleted the region in
the vicinity of the junction of charges.
Plenty of holes off to the rest of the p-type material, plenty of electrons off in the rest
of the negative but they can't get through because there is this depletion zone.
So that's the first thing about the p-n junction that's important.
It's not a good conductor under these conditions.
There is this electric field established, as I said, because there is now a slight positive
charge to the right of the junction and a slight surplus of negative charge to the left
of the junction.
Remember I said p doesn't mean it's positively charged, it means the majority charge carriers
are holes, positive.
N doesn't mean it's negatively charged, it means the majority charge carriers are negative
electrons and in this case we see a situation where in fact the n-type material acquires
a little positive charge and the p-type material acquires a little negative charge.
Now let's start doing some interesting things to this p-n junction.
Let's connect an external circuit.
In fact let's connect a battery with its positive terminal connected to the n-type material
and its negative terminal to the p-type material.
Well now what happens?
Well that electric field that we had in there that was pointing from the n toward the p gets
reinforced by the presence of the battery and what that does is cause the depletion zone
to actually grow and so now there is a bigger region where there are very few free charges
and so the device can't conduct electricity hardly at all and so in this configuration
that battery cannot push current through that p-n junction and this thing has become a non-conductor,
the p-n conjunction.
It basically is an open circuit, that's called reverse bias.
On the other hand if we connect the battery the other way that the battery goes against
that internal electric field that had resulted from the diffusion of holes and electrons
into the opposite materials and it can if it's strong enough that battery and it needs
to be only over about 7 tenths of a volt or so it will then eliminate that electric field
and it will allow current to flow from the p-type material into the n-type material across
the junction.
That's called forward bias and under this condition the junction has become a decent
conductor and electric current can flow around that circuit.
So we now have something that seems to conduct electricity with the battery connected one
way but not with it connected the other way.
It's that one-way valve for electric current that I introduced when we talked about how
to build a power supply for example.
So the p-n junction becomes a one-way valve for electricity, current can flow from p to
n, but it can't flow from n to p.
Okay so let's consider this p-n junction in the context of a device we've already seen
namely the diode.
We used a thing called a diode that seemed to pass current in one direction and not the
other in our power supply to achieve this rectification, this changing of AC into DC.
It was the step that cut off the negative going portion of the AC.
Well this p-n junction does exactly that.
This p-n junction is in fact what a diode is.
So we can replace our picture of the p-n junction with our symbol for the diode.
On the left is the p-side, on the right is the n-side and this symbol gives you an arrow-like
structure pointing here to the right and that shows you that's the direction in which current
will flow.
Now the obvious use of the diode is in converting AC to DC but there are many many other uses
of diodes in electronic circuits and we'll come across a number of them as we go throughout
this course.
However, there are also some specialized diodes and I'd like to take the rest of this lecture
to look at some of those specialized diodes, see how they work and see some real world
applications of them.
So the first specialized diode I want to look at is the light emitting diode.
In any diode with current flowing through it, so it's forward biased with the positive
of the voltage source connected to the p-side of the diode, what happens is holes flow through
the p-type material toward the junction in the direction of the electric current and electrons
being negative flow opposite the direction of the current, they flow in through the n-type
material and at the junction they recombine.
And normally not much happens out of that recombination, a little bit of heat is generated
and so on so the diode loses a little bit of power perhaps.
But in specially engineered diodes, the amount of energy that's released when an electron
falls into a hole recombines, joins that crystal structure again becomes part of a bond between
silicon atoms is that the energy is emitted as a little bundle of light called a photon.
And so diodes that are specially engineered to do this typically have a very thin p-type
layer so thin that it's essentially transparent to the light, the light is created at the
p-end junction and the light emerges and typically it emerges at a particular color
or a particular frequency although increasingly we've learned to make wide spectrum LEDs.
So that's a light emitting diode, its circuit symbol is shown at the upper right, it's simply
a regular diode symbol with a couple of arrows coming out of it and those arrows are supposed
to represent the light coming out of the light emitting diode.
Let me show you a few examples of light emitting diodes.
Let's go over here.
I have here a setup which I'm going to be using a lot from now on, this is three of
those boards I showed you before that I had built the power supply on and we built the
filter on one of them in the previous lecture.
I'm going to build lots of circuits on these boards and in fact as you see the board now
it's actually set up with a number of circuits which we'll be using in future lectures but
we're focusing on this region right here.
And this region has a couple of LEDs, one reason we're using this big board it has a lot of
auxiliary components, it has ways to connect things to it, it has switches, it has a built
in function generator, it has variable voltage supplies and a lot of other things and we're
going to use the power supply built into here to power some LEDs.
What I have here are a simple green and red LED and as soon as I turn on the power they
light up.
For many years the use of LEDs was restricted to very simple low power applications like
indicator lights that show you when something is on or off for example or what condition
it's in.
So there's a red and a green LED.
Now you may notice that these two LEDs are actually wired through these points to a resistor
and the resistor is going to ground and the other side of the LEDs is wired to a positive
5 volt power supply.
You never connect an LED or any diode for that matter directly across a voltage source
because remember a diode when it's in its low resistant state, when it's in its forward
biased state is essentially a closed circuit, a short circuit and very large currents will
flow.
So you need a resistor to limit the current that can flow in the diode and in particular
in the LED.
So these LEDs have a current limiting resistor connected to them.
Now if we want to step up a little bit in sophistication, below these two red and green
LEDs is a seven segment display.
These are increasingly being superseded by LCD screens, liquid crystal display screens
like we have in our smartphones and so on, but they're still used in a number of applications
where we need to display numerical or sometimes alpha numerical information and this has a
number of straight line segments, it has a couple decimal points and the straight line
segments can be lit and what I've done with this particular one is simply taken a wire
which I can connect to different points on that display one at a time.
So for example if I plug it in there, the bottom most segment lights and you might use
that to make part of for example an eight or maybe a two.
Let's come up through here, there are a number of connectors, that segment is lit and as
I move along there's the middle segment that would make the cross piece in the eight or
the five or the six or the two and we can go on and on the other side there are additional
there's the decimal point lighting up and there's another segment.
So by connecting these different segments we can make displays of different numbers,
I'm only connecting one at a time so I'm not making any numbers but as we'll see in subsequent
lectures particularly when we get to digital electronics we'll use these devices to display
the count in a digital counter or in the next to last lecture we'll make an analog to digital
converter basically a digital voltmeter, we'll put in a voltage and we'll get the voltage
displayed with one of these seven segment displays by carefully lighting the right segments
to make the numerical display. So that's all fairly widely established, well established
uses of LEDs but we can do other things with LEDs probably within a few years of my making
this course and maybe by the time you're watching it all our light bulbs will be LEDs.
We've already gotten to the point where we can replace standard light bulbs, here's a
standard 60 watt light bulb and we can replace those with LEDs so I have in this lamp an LED
it looks about the same size and shape as the incandescent bulb, I'm not sure we would
have designed it that way if we hadn't already had all the infrastructure for incandescent
bulbs but that's what we have and so that LED lamp is screwed in there and this is a
fairly modern LED lamp because it has to be able to do several things that my small ones
can't do, it has to be able to tolerate large amounts of power to make large amounts of
light and it also has to be able to produce pleasant looking light, a spectrum that gives
us a sort of warm white light and both those things were big technological challenges in
the development of LEDs but I think you can see that when I turn that on we pretty much
achieved that, that looks pretty much like the globe, an ordinary incandescent 60 watt
light bulb, now if you did the project for lecture one where I talked about an incandescent
light bulb and what would happen if you replaced it with an LED you found that the power used
by the LED to produce the same amount of light was far, far less than the power consumed
by the incandescent light bulb so these are real energy savers and don't be dissuaded
by their relatively high cost which is still dropping very rapidly as these come into full
scale production and we get more and more different varieties of them because over the
lifetime of this thing and this thing will last almost forever, you will get back in
your electric bills far more than you paid for the LED lamp rather than pay a few cents
for an incandescent lamp, play a few dollars for an LED lamp and you won't go wrong so
there is a modern use of LEDs and within years, a few years all of our light bulbs will be
LEDs, you probably have a flat screen TV and if you do and if it's a relatively new one
it probably has LEDs as its back light that sends the light through the pixels that either
turn on or turn off to show you the picture on your screen, some of them still have fluorescent
lamps but most of them now are made with LEDs so LEDs are really everywhere, they're in lots
of displays, they're in lots of simple indicator lights but increasingly they're there to provide
illumination, so that's a special kind of diode, the light emitting diode but it is
a diode, you have to connect it the right way for current to flow, okay, let's look
at another special kind of diode, here's another diode which is basically the light emitting
diode in reverse, this is the photovoltaic cell, a photovoltaic cell is a device that
takes sunlight in and produces electricity and it too is a PN junction diode, in this
case you see the N type material on the top, the P type material thicker on the bottom,
the N type material is thin so light can get through it, there's an electric field established
in there by that diffusion process that moves holes into the N type material and electrons
into the P type material and you can see that electric field, that would want to push positive
charge downward and negative charge upward, it's balancing that diffusion effect that's
already occurred and now what if some light comes in, well if light comes in and strikes
the junction, a photon, an individual little bundle of light energy, a quantum of light
if you will, can have enough energy to create an electron hole pair and if you design this
photovoltaic cell correctly you will design it so you'll get that process of electron
hole pair creation occurring for photons with the energy invisible light particularly
in sunlight and so if an electron hole pair is created, right at the junction there's
that electric field and that electric field drives electrons up and it drives holes down,
remember there aren't usually a lot of holes in electrons at that junction because they've
all recombined but you can with the light create an electron hole pair, sometimes they'll recombine
you've lost that energy but sometimes they'll be swept away by that electric field and then
if you connect an external circuit the electrons can move through the external circuit and that
represents a current flow in the direction opposite the direction the electrons go and
so you can light an external light bulb or run a motor or do whatever you would like to
do with your photovoltaic cell and today you see photovoltaic arrays all over the place
because photovoltaic cells have become very inexpensive, the prices are still dropping
dramatically and they're beginning to supply not yet a substantial but a seriously appreciable
fraction of the electricity that we use so photovoltaic cells are with us very much and
I have two examples of those over here, this is a little demonstration photovoltaic cell
that we use in our physics labs and this is actually a solar battery charger that's used
to charge batteries and cell phones and things like that and it works off ambient light in
the room or sunlight or whatever so photovoltaic cells and LEDs are sort of the opposite of
each other, one has electricity flowing through it, electric current takes electrical energy
turns it into light does so much more efficiently than incandescent light bulbs and the other
is the opposite takes light in and makes electric current.
Before I end I want to introduce one other interesting kind of diode and I'm not going
to say a whole lot about it but if you do the project for this lecture you can work
with it and that's called the Zener diode.
Now normally you put voltage across a diode the wrong way, the reverse bias way and not
much will happen.
You will have no current flowing, you'll build up a voltage across it and if you make that
voltage too big you will eventually overwhelm the junction and you will basically destroy
the diode and current will flow then and it will no longer be a diode for you.
But there's a special kind of diode that's engineered to be able to tolerate that breakdown
in the reverse direction, it's called a Zener diode because that process is called Zener
breakdown and a Zener diode can be engineered to have that breakdown occur at a particular
voltage so I've drawn the VI characteristic curve here for a Zener diode and it looks
at the right like a regular diode, it goes up very steeply at about 7 tenths of a volt
but to the left this particular one suddenly starts conducting current again if you put
more than 3 volts across it in the wrong direction, in the backward direction and at that point
it maintains 3 volts across it almost regardless of how much current flows.
So Zener diodes maintain a constant voltage after you've broken them down in the reverse
direction, they aren't destroyed, take the voltage away, they're back to normal, put
more than 3 volts negative over them or try to and they will maintain 3 volts across them
in the reverse direction.
So they're wonderful for voltage regulators, they're often used in power supplies to establish
a reference voltage that then determines the output voltage of my power supply.
When I built a power supply and used an electronic regulator circuit there was a Zener diode built
into the integrated circuit voltage regulator, it wasn't the only thing that was holding
the voltage but it was establishing a reference level voltage.
Well that's a lot about diodes, many different kinds of diodes and I'm going to now let
you think about diodes more by building some circuits with diodes if you'd like to do
the project for this lecture.
So don't have to do the project but again here are some interesting circuits using diodes
and I'm not going to tell you what they do, I'm going to ask you to build them and experiment
with them again, build them with your circuit simulators and experiment with them and see
if you can figure out what they do.
And if you do that and want to see the solution to that I will actually construct these circuits
in the real world as well as in simulations and we'll have a look at what these interesting
diode circuits do.
So in lecture six you learned a lot about PN junctions and semiconductors and all kinds
of fairly abstract stuff so I thought I would give you some practical applications of the
one circuit component we learned about in this lecture or learned more about which is
the diode.
So here are three diode applications, I'd like you to build each of these and study
what it does which means look at the output as a function of the input or look at the
input and the output together and see how they differ.
And so the first one has a capacitor and a diode, the second one has a resistor and two
diodes and two batteries and the third one has a couple of three resistors and two diodes
and two batteries.
And what I'm going to do is take you through the results quickly and then I'll go into
the circuit simulators and show you in a little more detail how I made these circuits.
So the solutions for the three quickly as they came out from circuit lab look like this.
Circuit one is what's called a diode clamp.
It doesn't unusual thing, you'll notice that diode, that diode says the output can never
go negative because if the output ever went negative we'd have a short circuit to ground,
the diode would be forward biased and therefore we wouldn't be, we'd be essentially at ground
potential or at most seven tenths of a volt below it for that drop across the diode.
So this circuit clamps its output to zero volts or above and the effect of that with
charging the capacitor is to shift a voltage that is swinging either side of zero upward
until it's clamped so it stays above zero.
So this is a circuit that takes an input waveform, in this case I wanted you to use a ten volt
peak to peak thousand hertz, one kilohertz triangle wave so there it is and it's shifted
up so that it's always above zero.
What does circuit two do?
Well circuit two is a diode limiter.
What it does is it says okay as long as the voltage is below three volts at the input
neither of those diodes will turn on.
Once the voltage gets above three volts the left hand diode will turn on, the diode becomes
a short circuit once it's turned on, that connects the top of the three volt battery
to the output and it holds the output at three volts.
So it clips the triangle wave off and in the, in the graph you see the triangle wave itself
and then you see it clipping off at three volts, actually a little bit different from
three volts because of the point seven volt drop across the diode.
Similarly if the voltage at the input drops below minus three volts the right hand diode
turns on and you get the same thing you clip at minus three volts.
We could have chosen different batteries and clipped at different levels.
And finally in the last circuit we don't have the diodes connected directly to the output
but we form a voltage divider between the input and each diode and the effect of that
is the input voltage can continue to increase but once the diode turns on the lower end
of those second, the lower resistors is now held at the three volts or minus three volts
and that means the voltage goes up half as fast as it would have before, half as fast
if those two resistors have the same value and that's called a shaper.
It takes what was a triangle wave and makes it more complicated.
It goes up and then it bends over and then it bends down and then it bends down and you
could imagine adding many shaping circuits and taking a triangle wave which you'll see
how to generate in a much later lecture, we'll build the circuit that generates a triangle
wave and you could imagine breaking it, breaking it, breaking it, breaking it and making it
into a sine wave.
And that is in fact how some function generators produce their sine wave which is a little
bit harder to produce than a triangle.
So those are the project solutions in circuit lab.
Here's my circuit lab circuit for the same thing.
And if I run a time domain simulation on that circuit, I've got the parameters all set up.
There again you see that clipping occurring right here when we begin to turn on the left
hand diode or the right hand diode.
Now I did ask you for something else in this project or I'm going to ask you for something
else and that is to meet the Zener diode and get used to the Zener diode.
I mentioned the Zener diode briefly in the lecture as a diode that can conduct in the
reverse direction and when it does it maintains a constant voltage across itself and it's
a much better way to make circuit two or three, the clipper or shaper circuit because you
don't want to stick batteries into some circuit.
Well the Zener diode does the same thing.
In this circuit I've got two three volt Zener's.
If the voltage at the input rises above three volts, that upper Zener will conduct in the
reverse direction, the lower Zener acting like a regular diode will conduct in the forward
direction and the output will be held at three volts.
If the input goes below minus three volts the same thing will happen except it will
be the lower diode that Zener conducts and the upper diode that conducts normally.
There's that circuit symbol for the Zener with a little bend in it and there I remind
you again are the VI characteristics of the Zener.
So let's go to do circuits and look at what do circuits can do for us.
So here is do circuits doing the shaper and the clipper all in one because it just matters
where I take the voltage out.
There's the input voltage, the voltage between the two resistors will be where it gets shaped
and the voltage right at the Zener's will be where it gets clipped and so let's run
a time domain analysis of that.
Takes a little while, 99% and there we are and we see the input waveform which is the
triangle going all the way.
We see the clipped waveform where the Zener right connected at the top of the Zener's
going right across at about three volts.
Again there's some issues with the diodes and the little drop across them.
There it is clipping and the in-between point is the shaped point where we are shaping the
waveform not clipping it completely off at three volts but not letting it rise as rapidly
as it could otherwise.
Those circuits are very useful, circuits that clamp and lift a waveform up above zero, circuits
that clip a waveform to keep its voltage from going above or below a certain level or circuits
that take a waveform and shape it to make a different waveform.
