Welcome to the second of my two lectures on the magic of negative feedback. If you think
back to some of the demonstrations I showed you in the previous lecture, there was a lot
of negative feedback involved. There was optical feedback, there was mechanical feedback between
a motor shaft and a potentiometer. There was possibility of thermal feedback and so on.
In all those cases, the circuits I showed you had op-amps whose output swung between
its two limits, plus and minus 15 volts. But they did so in such a way because of the negative
feedback that kept the voltage at the minus input close to the value it had at the plus
input, which in some of the circuits was in fact zero. We're going to look now at circuits
in which the feedback mechanism is a lot faster. It's electronic feedback. It doesn't require
a mechanical movement or a light bulb to change temperature and brightness. It's going to
be direct connections from the output of an amplifier back to the input, and we will see
that that gives rise to a remarkable versatility in using op-amps. And what it's going to do
for us, most importantly, is to tame that enormous op-amp gain, a thousand, a million,
ten million, whatever it is, which I said didn't really matter, and you'll see why it
doesn't matter, and you'll see why we can tame that down to make any gain we want. Now
this is going to be the most heavily mathematical lecture I have for you, but bear with me
briefly, and let's begin by looking at a very simple op-amp circuit that employs negative
feedback. So we'll analyze the circuit here on our big screen. This circuit is called
an inverting amplifier. You'll see why as we get through it. So we're going to start
with the plus input of our op-amp at ground, zero volts. We're going to have an input
resistor, call it R in, and we're going to connect whatever we want to amplify to that
point marked in. And the all-important feedback, the negative feedback, we're going to take
feedback from the output of the amplifier back to the negative input. That's why it's
going to be negative feedback because it's going to the inverting input of the amplifier.
And we want to know what the gain is, what's V out versus V in, what's the ratio of V
out to V in, and that's what I'd like to show you. Before I do that, I have to issue a math
alert. Now my students at Middlebury College are used to this, especially in the upper
class electromagnetism courses where we will go on for a day deriving an equation involving
complicated vector calculus. It's not going to be that bad here. But it isn't a math alert,
and the beauty of a math alert, besides the ugliness of all the math, is that heavy math
is coming, but it's going to bring us important insights. And in this particular case, it's
going to obviate any future math. So once we get through this bit of heavy math, we'll
have a rule that will allow us to analyze circuits like this almost trivially. We won't
have to go through this math again. So we're operating briefly under a math alert and bear
with me as I go through the math that finds exactly the answer to that question, what's
the gain of this circuit? What's V out versus V in? Okay, so let's remember what we know
about op-amps. We know that intrinsically that triangular thing, the op-amp, produces
an output which is its intrinsic gain, A, which is supposed to be a big number, but
right now I'm going to ignore that fact and later we'll talk about A being big, times
the difference between the input voltage at the plus input versus the input voltage
at the minus input. By the way, here's one of many instances in which I'm no longer going
to show you the power connections to the op-amp. They're assumed, they're there. If you wire
a real op-amp, you better put them or the thing won't work. If you wire an op-amp in
one of these circuit simulators, they may be assumed depending on which op-amp you choose.
So here we are and we're asking, what's this output voltage over that input voltage? What's
the ratio because that's the gain of the amplifier? Here we go. In this particular case, the plus
input is connected to ground, zero volts, and so V plus is zero. So V out, which was
A times V plus minus V minus, becomes A times zero minus V minus, and that's just A times
minus V minus or minus A times V minus. So the output is minus A times whatever's at
the input, but we don't know what's at the input. We only know what we put in over here,
what we're calling the input voltage to the entire amplifier. Now, let's think about what
happens here. That input voltage is going to drive some current I through that resistance.
We want to figure out what that current is, and we can do that using Ohm's law. And here's
how we can do that. We know one thing about ideal amplifiers. They have essentially infinite
resistance at their inputs. What that means is no current can flow into the input of the
amplifier. That was one of our important characteristics of ideal amplifiers. No current goes into here.
Now, it's not quite true. Tiny bits of current go in. Depending on the input transistors,
it could be microamps or nanoamps or picoamps, 10 to the minus 12 amps, it's small. We ignore
it. And so that means any current that's flowing through our end, the only place it can go
is up through RF. These resistors are truly in series, even though you see a little junction
there because that junction doesn't lead anywhere electrically. It leads to an infinite resistance
or almost infinite resistance that we can ignore. So that current is flowing through the series
combination of RN and RF. And what's the voltage across that combination? It's the difference
between the input voltage and the output voltage. So I, Ohm's law, is the voltage across that
string of two resistors, V in minus V out, divided by the total resistance, which, since
they're in series, is the sum RN plus RF. So that's the current that's flowing. It still
doesn't answer our question. What's the game? What we're getting there? So that's the current.
There's the current flowing. We've got it figured out. Now, we can figure out what V minus is if
we knew what that current was. We can figure out what the voltage here is because there's a drop
across that input resistor RN. And that drop is given by the voltage across that input resistance
and times the current. And so whatever V in is, the voltage here is going to be less
by an amount equal to the current times the resistance because that's the voltage dropped
across that resistor. So V minus becomes V in minus I R in. That's what V minus is. So now,
I'm going to take this somewhat complicated expression for I, and I'm going to stick it
in that expression for V minus. Oof. Grind through a little algebra. Well, not much algebra,
just sticking that expression right in there in place of the I. And there, we now have an expression
for V minus. Now, what do I do with that? I put it in up here in the expression for V out
in terms of V minus. Okay, so we have this expression for V out, but the reason it's a little bit
complicated to solve is that V out also appears on the right hand side. So we have to do some
algebra to extract that. You may not want to do that algebra. You may want to do that algebra.
If you'd like to, I invite you to pause, press your pause button, and work through that algebra.
If you don't want to do it, I'm not going to do it for you on screen here. I'm simply going to
give you the result, but I assure you it takes nothing more than ninth grade algebra to achieve
this result. So V out becomes minus, that's why it's called an inverting amplifier, this somewhat
complicated expression involving the resistors in the circuit and the intrinsic gain of the op amp
itself times V in. So the gain, in fact, is everything that multiplies V in. It's negative,
it's an inverting amplifier, and there is its value. Well, that doesn't really tell us too much.
That's not very enlightening, but let's go further with that. So here we are, our inverting
amplifier. We found that this is the gain, and now remember that the ideal op amp has a gain
much greater than one, and I kept saying it doesn't really matter. Is it a thousand? Is it a hundred
thousand? Is it a million? Doesn't matter, as long as it's much greater than one, and here's why.
Because if the gain A is much greater than one, then A times R in is surely much bigger,
a million times bigger, a thousand times bigger, I don't care, but much bigger than R in itself,
A times R in. So I can cross out R in in the denominator there. It's negligible compared
to A times R in because A is so big. Now I'm going to make another assumption, which is the
assumption that this feedback resistor is not huge. What do I mean by not huge? It's not so huge
that it's comparable to A times R in, but it still might be much bigger than R in. It could be a
hundred times R in. It could even be a thousand times R in if A were a million, and it would still
be negligible compared to A R in. So I'm going to make the assumption that RF is nowhere near as big
as A times R in, but it still may be, again, much bigger than R in. The feedback resistor can be
bigger than the input resistor. It just can't be A times bigger. And so we're going to neglect
the feedback resistor also. And now we have this expression, which is quite a bit simpler.
In fact, it's really a lot simpler than it looks because now we have A in the numerator and A in
the denominator, and we can cancel the A. And there's the justification for the statement I've been
making over and over and over again that the intrinsic gain of the amplifier that might be
a thousand or ten thousand or a hundred thousand or a million or whatever doesn't matter. In this
configuration with negative feedback, it just doesn't matter, and we get that V out for this
circuit is simply minus RF over R in. You want an amplifier with a gain of two, make RF twice as
big as R in, and you'll have an amplifier while it won't be two. It'll be minus two because this is
an inverting amplifier configuration. You can tell an op amp is in an inverting configuration
if the input to the whole circuit dumps into the minus input of the op amp. Guarantee you
that's an inverting configuration. The output comes out with the opposite sign of the input.
Doesn't mean the output comes out negative, by the way. A negative input produces a positive
output, and a positive input produces a negative output. And because this op amp that we developed,
and I showed you the circuit for a few lectures ago, because this op amp was developed and designed
with no capacitors coupling through it, it will amplify DC. If I put one volt in and RF is twice
R in, I'll get minus two volts out. And if I put a sine wave in, I'll get a sine wave
varying twice as much, but going the other way, and so on. So V out is simply minus RF over R in,
a remarkably simple result coming after all that heavy math. Now, before we go on, let me point
out, we did the heavy math once. We're never going to have to do it again. You see an amplifier like
this, you know how to make it like that. Not only that, you see another op amp circuit,
and the results of this heavy math are going to help you to analyze that circuit very simply
without ever going through that heavy math again. And we want to look a little bit further at this
circuit to see what happens. So we know what the gain is. It's minus RF over R in. Let me ask
another question. What's the voltage here? What's the voltage at the inverting input to the op amp
itself? What is that voltage? Well, V out, as we know always for the op amp, is AV plus minus V
minus. In this case, because V plus is at ground right there, then this is simply minus AV minus,
as we wrote before. Or, equivalently, V minus is minus V out over A. Now, this is a typical op amp.
It's output swings between, say, plus and minus 15 volts. A is a thousand, a million, whatever,
10,000, 100,000, whatever it is, A is huge. And so that voltage, V minus, is tiny. And what this says
is, this circuit, through the magic of negative feedback, manages to hold V minus extremely
close to zero. In fact, if A were truly infinite, it would be zero. If A is a million, the most
V minus will be is 15 millionths of a volt, 15 microvolts. That's tiny. Even if A was a meager
thousand, 15 millivolts would be the biggest that gets. Remember, I talked about op amps. I said,
if you don't connect any feedback, the op amp is going to go flying to one limit or the other.
It can't help it. But the minute you have negative feedback, you hold the difference between V plus
and V minus, or you don't, but the negative feedback does, holds that difference to such a small
level that, in fact, that huge gain, multiplying that small little bit of voltage difference,
gives you a reasonable output. Remarkable. Okay. That's an inverting amplifier. Analyze
to death, but we're never going to have to do that again. So V minus is essentially zero,
very, very close to zero. And that's the important takeaway message here. And because of that,
we call this point a virtual ground. It's as if that point were connected to ground,
which is zero volts. It isn't. And if you did connect it to ground, the whole thing wouldn't
work. But as far as this input is concerned, the other end of that resistor is zero volts. It's
just as if it were connected to ground. The current that flows in that resistor isn't really going
to ground. It's actually going through the feedback and back into the op amp and through all those
transistors and things. But as far as the external circuit is concerned, this point,
once the negative feedback is working, is at essentially ground potential. It's essentially
zero volts, even though it isn't really connected to ground. That's an idea that takes a little bit
of time to wrap your head around. But there it is, a virtual ground. And we draw the virtual
ground with that little ground symbol in a circle to show it's not really a ground,
but electrically, it's as if it were a ground. This input thinks it's just connected to a resistor
that goes to ground. That's the circuit. What this input does, delivers a current V in over R in,
because the other end of R in is at zero, is exactly what it would do if the other end of
R in were, in fact, connected to a real ground. So there's our inverting amplifier and this concept
of a virtual ground. And let's now take this concept a little bit further, because now we can
come up with some simple rules that allow us to analyze op amps. So let's look at these rules.
Here's our inverting amplifier again that we just analyzed. And here are the two rules,
and the rules are really simple. When I teach electronics, these rules, I write them down on
a big piece of paper and I hang them up in the lab and they just sit there the whole semester,
and the students really know them by the time they're done. First rule, no current flows into
the op amp inputs. Again, these rules are approximate, but that's a pretty good approximation,
because these op amps have very high input resistances. They have huge input resistances,
especially if they're field effect transistor input op amps. Even the Meager 741, they're
in the mega ohm region, millions of ohms. Furthermore, in the presence of negative feedback,
particularly in this configuration, the inverting configuration, when that minus input is at virtual
ground, there's no incentive for any current, even if there were a fairly low resistance inside the
op amp to ground, because the voltage there is so small, held there at this very low level by
the negative feedback, there would be very little incentive for current to flow. So the huge input
resistance is effectively enhanced in the presence of negative feedback, particularly in this
configuration. That's op amp rule number one. Let me sort of already seen that rule. Here's
op amp rule number two. Whenever there's negative feedback and the negative feedback is working,
we say it's in control, then V plus and V minus are essentially the same. They're almost identical.
Amazing result from negative feedback. Negative feedback forces those two inputs to be at the
same voltage. In this configuration, where we force the plus input to ground to zero volts by
grounding it, that means the minus input is also at zero volts, essentially. That's our virtual
ground. With negative feedback, the two inputs are going to be forced to the same voltage. How
does that happen? Well, think about what would happen if V minus were greater than V plus.
Well, op amp says take V plus minus V minus. If V minus is greater, that's negative. Multiply it by
a big value. You're going to get a big negative output. That big negative output through the feedback
resistor is going to be felt at the minus input, and that's going to make the minus input voltage
go down. It will no longer be bigger than V plus. If it goes down so far that V minus is less than
V plus, that makes the output positive, and that tries to bring V minus back up. That is, in fact,
exactly what happened with our servo voltmeter, except there the feedback was by the mechanical
motion of that motor, and it took a little bit of time. And what happened was the needle continued
to kind of bobble back and forth as the amplifier first went to one limit and drove the motor in
one direction and went to the other direction and other polarity and drove the motor in the other
direction as the op amp swung between its two extremes of possible outputs, because the feedback
was slow. The only difference between that and the circuit we're now talking about, the inverting
amplifier, is here the feedback is fast. It's electronic. Electronic signals and resistors
and wires travel at a good fraction of the speed of light. That's faster than the amplifier itself
can react. Here the feedback is slower. Even with the intelligent light bulb I showed you,
the feedback was slower because the light bulb had a cool down a little bit warm up and the
photoresistor responded slowly. But here, with the feedback provided electronically,
it's very fast. And so instead of the op amp rapidly oscillating back and forth between its
two limits, it simply settles down to an appropriate level in between, appropriate to the
conditions set up by that circuit and under the conditions that the plus and minus inputs
are essentially equal. So those are the op amp rules. And those rules make it very easy to
analyze circuits with op amps. We'll go back in the next lecture, for example, and redo this
inverting amplifier with a gain of whatever it is, RF over R in, and we'll do it very quickly
with very little math. We certainly won't need a math alert. We'll just apply these rules and you
can apply these rules to any circuit involving an op amp. And the rules will work as long as you
provide conditions that keep the op amp in control. That is, allow the negative feedback to do its
magic. So let's consider a case where we have an op amp whose gain A is a thousand. That's
pretty low for an op amp, but that'll do for us. So V out is always A V plus minus V minus
in this inverting configuration with V plus equal to zero. That is the positive input,
non-inverting input to the op amp grounded. We have V out is simply minus A V minus. So we'll
consider that. Now let's suppose that V minus were one volt. Now I've argued that it can't be.
I've argued that V minus in this case has to be a tiny, tiny, tiny fraction of a volt. And I've
tried to convince you algebraically, but suppose that were true. Suppose V minus were equal to one
volt. Well, one volt times a thousand is a thousand volts. So in some sense, if I can
anthropomorphize the op amp, V out wants to be minus a thousand volts, because if V at the
minus input is one volt, that's the inverting input, we're going to try to get minus a thousand
volts. Of course, we can't do that unless this were an op amp whose power supplies went to plus
minus a thousand volts, and that would be some op amp. Typically, they go to plus minus 15.
So what happens is the output voltage tries to head toward minus a thousand volts, but it can't
go that far. It heads toward the negative supply voltage of minus 15 volts. So it heads down.
V out heads down. Remember, V in B minus was plus one volt. Well, as V out heads down, again,
through the magic of that feedback resistor, V minus also heads down. So if V minus is one volt,
it's going to quickly be reduced. And because of the feedback resistor, it's why it gets reduced,
V minus also heads downward, and as soon as V minus goes negative, V out turns around and
heads back toward plus 15 volts, because now if V minus is negative, V at the plus input,
which is zero, is greater than V minus, and the amplifier output wants to go to big positive
number, and it heads toward plus 15 volts. And that drives V minus positive, again, and that
cycle keeps repeating. And that's exactly what's happening in the bobbling of the servo voltmeter,
but the reason it doesn't happen very much here is we don't actually get those output swings
is because the feedback is effectively instantaneous, almost instantaneous, and so what happens instead
is V minus assumes a small average value for its voltage, and that's how this circuit or
any other circuit with negative feedback in control of an op amp manages to keep the plus
and minus inputs the same. So op amp rule number two is when you have an op amp with negative feedback,
you will get an output voltage that is not at one of the limits, but within those limits,
how does it manage that? Because it holds the difference between V plus and V minus
to a very, very tiny value, and that tiny value is appropriate to the inputs,
and as we saw in that complicated mathematical analysis, that's what makes this particular
circuit work. Okay, enough theory. Let's move on and take a look at an actual op amp circuit that
does this, and we'll put that circuit on the oscilloscope so we can talk about it in more detail.
So over here I have on my board, the part of it we're interested in is this little black chip.
It happens to be a 741 op amp. I've got some standard resistor values. I picked a 10 kilo ohm
resistor and a 22 kilo ohm resistor. Those are standard values. RF is the 22 kilo ohm resistor.
Here it is. The output of the op amp is over here on the right hand side of the feedback resistor.
The minus input is on the left hand side. Meeting at that point, the minus input
are the feedback resistor, 22 kilo ohms. The input resistor, which is 10 kilo ohms.
So according to my derivation of the gain of this thing, we ought to have a gain of about
22 over 10 or 2.2, just a little over 2. So this is effectively a gain of 2 or a little bit more.
Inverting amplifier, so it's a gain of actually minus 2. I have the input to the amplifier coming
in through this red wire from this coaxial cable, which is connected to my function generator.
And my function generator is producing a voltage that, well, let's see what it does. The voltage
is displayed on the yellow curve here. The yellow is at 2 volts per division. We've got just about
one division there. And consequently, we're looking at a display of about going plus or minus
one volt. Dows to minus one volt, goes to positive one volt. That's the input. By the way, you're
seeing some little glitches on there. Those are probably due to switching of the light dimmers
in the studio lighting, their electronic noise. We could get rid of them with a suitable filter,
but I haven't bothered to. Okay, so that is the input, the yellow curve. The green curve,
which is coming along this probe, this probe is connected to the output of the op amp. That's
the other side of the feedback resistor, that all important feedback resistor. And that,
so we're looking at the output. So let's look at what we see at the output. Well, both of these
channels are on 2 volts per division. So these curves are displayed in their actual relationship.
And I think you can see that the second curve is actually just a hair bigger than twice the
amplitude of the first curve. I can see that because here's going about two divisions and
we're going just a little bit above two divisions, a little bit below two divisions. So we've got a
gain of a little bit more than two. And that was, in fact, our resistor ratio, 22 kilo ohms to 10
kilo ohms, a gain of about 2.2. And it just is just right. Furthermore, you can see that this is
an inverting amplifier because where the input peaks, the output troughs, where the output peaks,
the input troughs. So it's a gain of minus two. It's an inverting configuration in this amplifier.
Well, that is what you're interested in if you're building an amplifier. And it would be trivial
for me to change the value of that feedback resistor and make any gain I wanted within reason.
I could even make a gain of less than one. If I wanted to reduce a voltage by half,
I could use 10 kilo ohms at the input and 5 kilo ohms at the feedback. So we can do whatever
we want there. However, what we probably don't usually look at if we're using an op amp, but
which is interesting for our purposes in learning about how the op amp works, is we want to know
what's happening at that minus input. And so let's go take a look at the minus input on the
oscilloscope. I have the minus input of the op amp right here, the junction of that input
resistor and the feedback resistor. I have that connected through this probe, and that's going to
the red channel of the oscilloscope, which I will now turn on.
And there you see it. Let's talk about what we're seeing there. So here you see a very noisy signal
that looks like it's pretty small, and it sure is small because where those other two channels are
on two volts per division, this one's on 50 millivolts per division. So one division on here
means one 40th times as much voltage as one division on the yellow or green input or output
curves. So this is a very tiny variation. It's on the order of going up or down maybe 20 millivolts.
That is the V plus, the V minus input. That's the input that is supposed to be zero volts,
and it is almost zero volts. The fact that it's not quite zero volts tells us that the gain is not
quite infinite. In fact, if we wanted to work out what the gain is, we've got maybe 20 millivolts
in, and we've got something on the order of two volts out. So we've got a gain, let's see,
20 millivolts times 10 would be 200 millivolts times 100. We've got a gain of about 100 or something.
Well, I thought it was supposed to be thousands or millions. Well, the gains of these amplifiers are
quite frequency dependent, and as you go up in frequency, the gain of the amplifier actually
goes down. And I chose a 5 kilohertz signal here because if I had taken a 1 kilohertz or the 440
hertz A above middle C, we wouldn't have even been able to see the variation at the minus input.
It would have been so close to zero. So I went up to 5 kilohertz where the gain of the amplifier has
fallen off. A 741, actually by the time you're at a kilohertz, it's fallen off in gain to about
a thousand. So this is actually a bit less than a thousand, somewhere between 100 and a thousand.
So we're looking there at the minus input, and we're seeing op amp rule number two realized.
That is effectively at zero volts. Okay, before I wrap up, let me just do one dramatic thing
to this op amp. Let me pull out the feedback resistor. So the feedback resistor is that
all important resistor, and I pull out the feedback resistor, and you can see several
things happening. I lost my probe there on the output, but let's not worry about that.
What you see happening is while the output went to zero because I disconnected the probe,
but you see the minus input is now swinging dramatically back and forth. In fact, if I lower
the gain on the input channel here, you can see that the minus input is doing basically what the
input of the whole circuit is doing because the op amp is completely out of control.
And let me see if I can reconnect to the output here, that pin, and you can see that the output
is swinging between plus and minus limit as the input sine wave goes up and down. This op amp
is no longer in control. It's not in control because it doesn't have any negative feedback,
because I pulled the feedback resistor out. And if you're actually building circuits with op amps
and you find your op amp has gone to limit, chances are your feedback loop is broken,
or you forgot to put a component in or something like that. Once the feedback is working, it guarantees
that the V plus and the V minus are essentially the same voltage. So let me wrap up. What we've done
here is use negative feedback to tame that enormous gain that's intrinsic to the op amp
and allow us to make amplifier circuits with any gain we choose by choosing the right resistors.
And the gain we get doesn't depend in the least on that intrinsic great big A of the operational
amplifier. We'll build many more interesting circuits with op amps over the next few lectures.
If you want to get a feel for them, do the project for this lecture which involves your
designing a simple inverting amplifier and picking the resistors and then checking it out in your
circuit simulator.
Okay, this project has two parts. Some of you must have loved all that algebra, and even if you didn't,
I hope you appreciated it. So if you're a theory and math aficionado, here's a very simple op amp
circuit about the simplest one you can do, and we'll deal with this circuit a little bit later
in a simpler way. But if you like that algebraic analysis, try analyzing this one in the same way.
Show that when A is very large, you get a very simple relation between v out and v in that
doesn't depend on A. And if A is only a thousand small for an op amp and v in is one volt, find
the value of the error signal v plus minus v minus. So take a moment, you're going to need
pencil and paper and do a little bit of algebra for that one, and I'll come back with my solution.
So here's my solution. We start with the op amp relationship that v out is A times v plus minus
v minus. In this case, v plus is the same as v in. We're taking our input to the whole amplifier
at the plus input. The feedback connection makes v minus equal to v out. Now v out is A
v plus minus v minus, but v plus is v in, so it's A v in minus v minus, but v minus is v out.
So we have this relationship a little more algebra, and we get to this relation that v out is A v in
over one plus A. That's an exact relationship between v out and v in, regardless of the value of A.
But now we remember that A is big for op amp. So if A is large, one plus A is approximately
equal to A. And so our relationship becomes approximately v out is simply A v in over A.
A over A is one, and so that gives us v out equals v in. So that is a very, very simple
circuit whose output voltage is the same as its input voltage. Let's work that out for this
particular amplifier. For v in equals one volt, v out is A v in over one plus A. If we want to get
that exact without making that approximation, that's a thousand times one volt over a thousand and
one, and that's 0.999 volts for all practical purposes one volt. So this amplifier, even with
as low a gain as a thousand, gives us an output equal to its input. We want to know the error
signal. Well, the error signal is v plus minus v minus. Work that out. v plus was one volt. That
was the input. v minus was the output. That was 0.999 volts. So we have a one millivolt error
signal. So that error signal is truly tiny. Okay, that was the first way of looking at this project.
The second project now is to implement an amplifier. So let's turn and do that. So for practical types,
I'd like you to design a gain of three inverting amplifier, simulate it with one of the circuit
simulators, and verify its gain for both DC and AC. How big is the error signal? Check that time
dependent voltage at the op amps inverting input. Well, I'm going to do that in one circuit
simulator. I'll use do circuits for this one, and I will show you what I get for the result. And
I'm not even going to bother to do the DC analysis. You can do that by putting a DC source in, and
you'll find that you get minus three times that DC source at the output. But here I have a do circuits
inverting amplifier. It's got a gain of minus three because it's inverting. That's where the minus
comes from. It's got a 30 kilo ohm feedback resistor, RF, and a 10 kilo ohm input resistor.
That's what gives us the three. I'm putting in a one volt, one kilohertz sine wave,
and I'm going to look at V in, V minus, and V out, all three of them. So let's run this analysis.
We're going to do a time domain analysis. I'm sorry, not time domain. Yeah, we're going to run a
time domain analysis right now. Here we go. Takes a while to simulate. 99%, and we're basically
done. And we see all three of those outputs. Here is the input. Here's the output at minus three times
it because it's inverted relative to the input. And here's the error signal, which on this scale
is completely negligible. You just can't see it. And if you want to boost this up a little bit,
I'm going to change the y-axis properties, which are now going from about minus three
volts to three volts. And I'm going to go from minus point one, two, three, four, one. That's a
tenth of a millivolt to plus one, two, three, four, one. And let's see what we get when we do that.
And there is that very, very, very small error signal. You'll notice the vertical axis just read
zero. The upper end of it is point zero, zero, zero, zero, one. So this is probably, so that's
a tenth of a millivolt. So this is probably about a third of a tenth of a millivolt. That is about
30 microvolts. That is a truly tiny signal, reminding you again that these op amps with
their large gains, and this one now has a bigger gain than the thousand we were assuming in the
mathematical part, these op amps really, truly maintain their two inputs at almost exactly the
same voltage.
