Welcome back. All that math we did last time was worth it because now we're going to be
able to analyze all kinds of interesting op-amp circuits without having to do a lot of math
because we understand those two simple rules that govern the behavior of op-amps, namely
that there's no current flowing into their inputs and with negative feedback, the two
inputs, the plus input, the non-inverting input and the minus input, the inverting input
have to be at the same voltage. The negative feedback guarantees that and it will keep
things that way. So let's plunge into the first of several
lectures in which we look at increasingly complex circuits involving op-amps and circuits
that do other things than simply amplify. So I'm going to begin by looking at the circuit
we had last time, the simple inverting amplifier, and I'm going to analyze it again using the
op-amp rules. But no math alert this time because it's very straightforward. And I'm
doing this because I want to show you how simple the op-amp rules make it to analyze circuits
involving op-amps and then we'll use the rules in the same way to develop other circuits.
So here again is our inverting amplifier, an op-amp, an input resistor R in, a feedback
resistor RF, but now we know the op-amp rules. Remember where they came from? They came from
doing all that complicated math, but we never have to do it again. The op-amp rules came
from doing the complicated math and then making the assumption that the gain A, the intrinsic
gain of that triangle, the intrinsic gain of the op-amp was much, much bigger than one.
That gave us rule two, that V plus is equal to B minus. It also helped us with rule one
although rule one is also a feature of the op-amps in the way they're designed. So let's
see if we can understand how to apply these rules to our inverting amplifier and in a
very short time get the same result we got last time with much more complicated steps.
So rule two, rule two tells us that the inverting input and the non-inverting input are at the
same voltage. We've forced the non-inverting input to be at ground zero volts and that
means the inverting input is also at effectively zero volts. We saw that very tiny variation
last time, essentially zero volts, down in the millivolt range or lower. So effectively
rule two tells us that the negative input is as if it were ground, once again it's not
really connected to ground and that's important for the workings of the circuit. But as far
as that input resistor and whatever is connected to the other end of it, on the other side
of the input resistor is ground. Not really, but that's what the circuit acts like. So
rule two tells us that V minus is zero. We've got a virtual ground there. So the input voltage
thinks it's just applied across a resistor, the other end of which is grounded and so
Ohm's Law tells us that the current is simply V in over R in because we've got V in on one
side and zero on the other side, the voltage across the resistor is simply V in. Ohm's
Law, I is V in over R in. Now we go to rule one. Rule one tells us, well, that's not quite
what it says, that's what it infers. Rule one says no current flows into the op amp
inputs. That means this current we've drawn that's flowing through R in can't go into
the op amp through its input. The only place it can go then is through RF. So our inference
is from rule one that I goes through RF. There it goes. Same current that came in is on
its way through the feedback resistor. What does it happen to it after that if you're
wondering? Well, some of it might go to the output if there's other stuff connected there.
The op amp transistors will sink it in and eventually deliver it back to the ground and
the power supplies and so on. So the op amp is doing its magic to make this happen. Ohm's
Law tells us if I have zero volts here and I've got a current I flowing through RF, I've
got a voltage drop across RF of I times RF and this side is more positive than this side.
But this side's at zero because that's the way the current's flowing. This side's at zero.
So this side is negative and it's negative by zero minus the current times the feedback
resistor. So V out is zero minus IRF and that's simply minus IRF because zero minus IRF is
minus IRF. We use Ohm's Law to figure out I. So V out is minus V in over R in. That's
the current times RF and if we rearrange that, it's simply the ratio of the feedback resistor
to the input resistor times V in and it is a negative gain, a gain RF over R in but negative
RF over R in because we are coming into the inverting amplifier. So there is a way of developing
the inverting amplifier very, very, very quickly using the two op amp rules and we will analyze
all subsequent op amp circuits, even much more complicated ones basically by applying
the op amp rules. We can also make complicated circuits by building up different renditions
of this particular circuit. Before we do that, I want to say a few things about this inverting
amplifier circuit and this particular configuration. First of all, the feedback enhances the zero
volts of that virtual ground as I said last time because with that voltage at almost zero,
there's no incentive for current to go into the op amp even if it didn't have a big input
resistance. So that's one nice aspect of this. On the other hand, remember an amplifier would
like to have a big input resistance. Well, the op amp does but this whole circuit is
the amplifier we've now built and in this configuration, there's typically significant
current flowing at the input. We had a 10 kilo ohm resistor there for example in the
circuit we built in the previous lecture. So one disadvantage of this circuit is that
it doesn't really provide very, very high input resistances. If you had to make this
input resistance, if you needed to make it 100 kilo ohms and you wanted a gain of 10,
that would need to be a million ohms and that's beginning to get a little too big for this
op amp comparable to the intrinsic resistances inside it. So you can't really use the inverting
amplifier configuration to make an amplifier that has a very large input resistance. Now,
in many cases, that's not a problem, but it could be. The other problem with the inverting
amplifier might be a problem in some applications is it's an inverting amplifier and you might
not want it to invert. Well, how do you solve that problem? Well, you solve that problem
by adding another stage of inversion. Two negatives make a positive and so let's look
at a very simple circuit that does that. Here I have a two stage non-inverting amplifier.
Two stages because I got two op amp stages. The first one if you look at it has a 10 kilo
ohm input resistor and a 30 kilo ohm feedback resistor. So that's a gain of minus three.
The output of that one goes into a 10 kilo ohm input resistor of another op amp in exactly
the same inverting configuration. This one's got a 10 kilo ohm feedback resistor, too.
So I don't want to say it has no gain because it doesn't have zero gain. It doesn't give
zero at the output. It has unity gain, we say. It has a gain of one. The output is equal
to the input, but it's a gain of minus one because it's the inverting configuration and
so that second amplifier simply inverts the output of the first amplifier. We had minus
three for the gain of the first amplifier, minus one for the gain of the second amplifier
and so this whole two stage non-inverting amplifier that I've constructed here has a
gain of positive three and there is the output from due circuits oscilloscope that you can
actually put a simulated oscilloscope connected to your circuit and due circuits and there
it is and you see in the red curve the input and you see the output is in phase with it.
That is, they peak together. It's not inverting and you see that the output is three times
the input and so we have a two stage non-inverting amplifier with a gain of three, a gain of
positive three, which is the same as saying it's not inverting. Well, let's take a look
at the real thing instead of just looking at things we can do in simulation or by drawing
circuit diagrams and what you see is a couple of op amps. There's the first one. That's
the very same op amp we used in the previous lecture. I've just changed the resistors a
little bit. I've got a 10 kilo ohm resistor at the input and the closest I could get in
the standard resistor values was a 33 kilo ohm so this is more like a gain of 3.3. By
the way, later on we'll be working with some very precision resistors you can buy that
are good to 1% and then I could have bought a 10k and a 20k or a 10k and a 30k but I'm
using just standard resistors here. So here's the op amp. The output of the op amp is over
here. The output goes back through that 33 kilo ohm feedback resistor to the input to
that first op amp. The input resistor feeds in and here's the input signal coming in from
our function generator. This time it's a one kilohertz signal. The input resistor and the
feedback resistor join at the inverting input of the first op amp. The output not only goes
back to the input through the feedback resistor there's the negative feedback but it also
goes into the inverting input of the second op amp through that other 10k resistor and
then there's a 10k feedback resistor and the output of the second op amp is over here. Well
right now we're looking on the big screen at the input to the circuit and the output
of the first op amp which we see is an inverting amplifier where that's trough, that's a peak,
it's an inverting amplifier with a gain of about 3. These both are on 2 volts per division
so that they're in the same scale and that's about 3 times the amplitude of that one. And
so we've got a gain of 3 inverting amplifier in our first stage. Now let me just move the
oscilloscope probe to the output of the second stage and lo and behold we've now, whoops,
that's a problem. Okay, now this is a good educational point. I didn't mean that to happen
but let's go on with it. What in earth is going on? Well I can see what's going on.
I can see that the output of the second amplifier is not doing what it's supposed to be doing.
In fact, if you look at it, it's swinging up to some very large value which is in fact
that 2 volts per division, about 12 volts. Oh, that looks like it's close to the op
amp's limit and it's going down to about minus that. So somehow this op amp is not in control.
The feedback isn't working and the chances are what's happened is the feedback resistor
has somehow become disconnected. So let's see if I can fix that and get that feedback
resistor back in there. The common problem when you're working with op, and there it
is. I had a bad connection at the feedback resistor and when I connected the probe it
pulled it out of the little connector in that board. So we fixed it and now we have a gain
of 3, 3 times that and it is non-inverting peak here, peak here, trough here, trough here.
So you want a gain of 3 non-inverting amplifier, there it is. Make it out of 2 inverting amplifiers,
one with a gain of 3 and the other with a gain of minus 3, the other with a gain of minus
1. So that's what we did. Works great. We could have by the way had a gain of the square
root of 3 in each amplifier if we had wanted and we still would have come out with 3 but
I chose to make a gain of 3 and a gain of 1, gain of minus 3 actually and a gain of
minus 1. So there is a simple embellishment on our idea of inverting amplifiers. Let's
move on and look at some other amplifiers we can develop here in with these circuits.
So let us take a look now at a slightly more complicated situation, a situation in which
we're going to talk about an amplifier that's going to have two inputs. Let's see what we
get. So here is an amplifier called a summing amplifier, but it's not a summing amplifier
yet. It's simply the same inverting amplifier we've just been talking about. I've drawn
it with an input voltage. I'm calling it in 1 this time because we're going to have two
inputs. There's an input current. I'm calling I1. The current is flowing to virtual ground.
It isn't really flowing to ground. It's going through the feedback resistor, but as far
as that input resistor is concerned, its right end is basically connected to 0 volts to ground.
Now here's the beauty of this situation. I can connect a second input resistor with
a second input voltage, input number 2, to that same point, that virtual ground point.
And for that reason, that point is sometimes also called the summing point. Because what
happens at that point is currents that are coming in through those two resistors all
think that they're going right to ground. So they don't know anything about the other
currents that are flowing in the other resistors, and they become completely independent of
each other. That wouldn't be true if that point weren't virtual ground, but were connected
to ground through yet another resistor because the voltage drop across that resistor would
be determined by both currents and so on. It would affect the currents through each resistor.
But because of that virtual ground, each of these resistors just thinks it's connected
to ground on the right-hand side. And the current that flows in I1 and the current
that flows in I2, according to op-amp rule number 1, no current can flow into the op-amp.
So both those currents together flow through the feedback resistor. And the current in
the feedback resistor is the sum of the two currents coming in through those two resistors.
So we have what's called a summing amplifier, and let's work out in a little bit more detail.
V out, well, what is V out? Just as in our simple analysis before, we've got that virtual
ground at the inverting input, zero volts. We've got a drop now of I1 plus I2 times the
feedback resistor across the feedback resistor. The left-hand side is zero, so the right-hand
side, which is V out, is minus I1 plus I2 times the feedback resistor. Now, what are
I1 and I2? Well, they are V1 over Rn and V2 over Rn. For now, I've given those two resistors
the input resistors the same value. So if I take those quantities, V1 over Rn, lower
resistor Rn, V2 over Rn, the upper resistor is also Rn, and I plug them in for the I's
there and I work things out, I get that V out is minus the sum of V1 and V2 multiplied
by this factor, R feedback over Rn. So this is a summing amplifier. It's an inverting
summing amplifier. Its output is basically the sum of the input voltages negated, inverted,
and then multiplied by this gain factor, Rf over Rn. So we can build a summing amplifier.
I mentioned earlier that op amps are called opera amps partly because they do mathematical
operations. Well, here's an op amp doing a mathematical operation. It's adding two
voltages and the output is basically the sum. If you don't like it to be the negative
sum, put a unity gain inverter on the back of it, just like we did with the gain of three
amplifier before. If you don't want it to change the voltage but actually simply add
them, make R feedback equal to Rn and you will get an output voltage whose magnitude
is the sum of the input voltages. So this is a summing amplifier and very useful circuit
and it works because we have this virtual ground at the minus input of the op amp which means
that the two currents can flow independently without either one knowing what the other
one is doing. And before we move on and actually look at one of these amplifiers in the flash
as it were, let's look at two other possibilities. Let's first of all look at what we could do
if we didn't want an actual sum. We wanted to weight the sum. We wanted one input to
count more than the other. Well, then we could take the input resistors and make them different.
And then I1 would be V1 over whatever R1 was and I2 would be V2 over whatever R2 was
and when we put those in, we get a weighted sum weighted by those two different resistors
weighted by two different gains. And so we don't have to simply add the inputs. We can
add them and give them different weights if we want. And to see if you've got this whole
concept and that's a lot coming at you pretty fast, let me give you a quick quiz. So here's
a circuit in which I have an inverting summing amplifier at the beginning. It's got a 10
kilo ohm input resistor for V1. It's got a 15 kilo ohm resistor for V2. It's got a 30
kilo ohm feedback resistor and then it flips into a unity gain inverter. What's V out in
terms of V1 and V2? Press your pause button and figure this out and we'll come back and
look at it. Okay. Well, here we have what input one sees. It sees 10 kilo ohms and 30 kilo
ohms so it basically has a gain of 3. Let's look at the other two resistors. The V2 resistor
is 15 kilo ohms. It goes to the same 30 kilo ohm feedback resistor. That's a gain of 2 or
rather minus 2. And then we have the unity gain inverter. So before we get into the unity
gain inverter, we've got minus 3V1 plus 2V2. We invert that with the unity gain inverter
that doesn't change values but just changes basically the sign. So there's the unity gain
inverter and V out is 3V1 plus 2V2. Okay. Well, let's take a look at what this circuit
does. First, if you'd like to have a little bit of lab time, you could actually simulate
say a gain of 2 summing amplifier that weights both inputs equally, do it in your circuit
simulator and verify that it works. And we'll use inputs of 1 volt and 2 volts and then replace
them with sine waves at slightly different frequencies and see what you get. And I've
suggested some parameters if you're using circuit lab, do circuits usually defaults
to parameters that will work for this. And I'd like you to describe how the output would
sound. If you don't want to do this lab time, don't bother. But if you do want to do it,
pause, do the lab and let's come back and look at what we get for results from this.
So here are the results. On the left I'm doing DC results. I've got 1 volt at V1 and 2 volts
at V2. The output is supposed to be, it's supposed to be a summing amplifier, an inverting
summing amplifier that weights the two equally and indeed, and it has a gain of 2 here. And
so indeed we have 1 volt plus 2 volts is 3 volts. Double that, you get 6 volts. Invert
it, you get minus 6 volts. And that's indeed what the voltmeter reads. In the case of the
AC, things get very interesting. I've got an input voltage sine wave at one frequency
and a sine wave at a slightly different frequency. And when the troughs line up, they cancel
each other. And when the crests line up, they reinforce. And the closer the two sine waves
are in frequency, the longer you have to wait till they come into phase or go out of phase.
You see the output of circuit labs graphing, showing what that pattern looks like. And
I'm asking you to imagine what that would sound like. Well, I'm going to play you that
sound, not for the frequencies shown here, but for a case where they're even closer,
a 440 hertz sound and a 442 hertz sound. And here's what they sound like. And what you're
hearing is a phenomenon called beats, in which these two very close frequencies come into
synchronism and then go out again and in and out. And you see a very slowly varying intensity
of sound, varying at roughly the difference frequency of those two waveforms, which is
just two hertz. So one interesting example of what you can do with a summing amplifier
were summing two waveforms that are slightly different. By the way, you may remember that
I've used my function generator on several occasions to add a couple of signals, to add,
for instance, noise to a sine wave when I wanted to demonstrate a filter. Well, what
the function generator has in it is a summing amplifier that can be switched in at its output
and it has two different channels that can generate two different waveforms. And you
can use those two different waveforms to add them. You can use the summing amplifier to
add them and then you get that output, which is the sum. And in this case, this is an example.
Okay. Well, that's several examples of circuits we can make with op-amps. I want to go show
you one other circuit, which is somewhat similar to, but not exactly the same as the circuits
we've built already and then we'll actually use it to end by building a really useful
circuit. So here's another use of the inverting configuration. Sometimes you have not a sensor
or an input signal that is a voltage, but something that actually produces a current.
One example is a transistor because the collector circuit of a transistor produces a current
that depends on the base circuit and many other sensors that produce a current. But you'd
like to be able to read that current with some kind of easy to read meter like a voltmeter.
So you need a current to voltage converter and a current to voltage converter is even
simpler than the kinds of circuits we've been dealing with already. So what this circuit
shows you on the left is a circle with an arrow in it that represents a current source.
It shows you that that source is going to provide current flowing in the direction shown. And
we're going to apply the op amp rules. So the op amp rules say the with negative feedback
V minus is equal to V plus and we've got a feedback resistor there. So we've got negative
feedback. So that means the negative input, the inverting input of the op amp is at virtual
ground. So that's how the current source is very happy. It's happy to pump its current
thinks to ground. But rule one says it doesn't really go to ground. It goes through the feedback
resistor. Same current going through the feedback resistor and around and then to the output
or back into the input of the op amp back, excuse me, into the output of the op amp or
out to some external circuit. The op amp takes care of all that. But there's what happens.
And just as with the analyses we've been doing before for the voltage amplifiers, we can
say the output is minus I times the feedback resistor because the left hand side of the
feedback resistor is at zero volts. There's a current I flowing through it. And that current
I is multiplied by the feedback resistance to get the voltage across the feedback resistor.
So V out is minus I in times RF. So a current to voltage converter is like one of these
inverting amplifiers we've been building, except it doesn't even have an input resistor
because it is getting a current at its input directly rather than a voltage, which if you
will produces a current through the input resistor. So it's even simpler. And let me
now reconfigure my setup a little bit and show you a very practical application for
a current to voltage converter. Okay, so here is a practical application for that current
to voltage converter that I just discussed. It looks pretty similar to that circuit, except
instead of that arbitrary current source, I've got some particular practical device.
And I need to talk a little bit about that device so you can understand what it does.
On the left is a phototransistor. Now what's a phototransistor? Well, if you look at this
device, it looks sort of like a transistor. It's got a collector. It's got an emitter.
Does it have a base? Well, yes, it has a base, but it's got no connection to that base. And
instead it's got a couple of arrows coming in. They look like the arrows we use to talk
about a light emitting diode. They were the light going out. Well, this is light coming
into the phototransistor. What a phototransistor does is it uses light to produce electron
whole pairs at the base. And when you connect a voltage to its collector, this is an NPN
phototransistor similar to the NPN transistors we've been using, you will get a current that
depends not on a base current because there's no connector to the base, but depends rather
on the intensity of the light falling on that base. These transistors are built in transparent
plastic cases. That base is exposed to light. And when light falls on it, the energy of
the light creates electron whole pairs. It's very similar in some ways to the operation
of a photovoltaic cell, although a PV cell is just a diode. And this is a little more
complicated because it's a transistor. Well, that transistor produces a current that's
dependent on the intensity of the incoming light. And now we take that current and we
run it into a current to voltage converter. So here comes the current, which is proportional
to the amount of light, the light intensity. That current by the op amp rules can't flow
into the op amp. So it flows through the feedback resistor where it causes a voltage to drop
across the feedback resistor. So the right hand end of the feedback resistor is at a
lower voltage than the left hand end. The left hand end is at zero volts by op amp rule
number two because that says with negative feedback, which we have because of the feedback
resistor, the two inputs, the inverting and nonverting input of the op amp will be at
the same voltage. And that in this configuration, where the plus input is grounded, gives us
a virtual ground at the inverting input. So same configuration as the inverting amplifiers
we've been building, same configuration as the current to voltage converter. In fact,
this is the current to voltage converter, except our current source is now a light
sensitive, a light intensity, a current source that produces a current proportional to the
light intensity. And so we get at the output an output voltage, which is proportional to
the light intensity. Now with the circuit hooked up as I've shown it here, we would
get a negative voltage for current flowing down in the direction I've shown here. So
I'm going to go to a circuit which is very similar, but I want to tell you a few differences
in this circuit. The main difference is I would like to do something which I think is
really silly in this digital age, but to me it makes sense. There are times when I really
like to see an analog needle move to show me what's happening in a circuit, especially
when changes are occurring. It's a little harder to grasp the changes when you're looking
at a digital display, especially because a digital display is usually bobbling around
in the last few digits as things vary slightly, and you miss the point that the big variations
are what you want to look at. So rather than hook up my fancy digital voltmeters, I've
taken a very old fashioned analog voltmeter here, and I've connected it to the output
of this circuit. So now I have a way of reading the light intensity, that is the output voltage
of the op amp. The other difference is, because this voltmeter reads only positive, well,
I could have switched the leads, but that would have looked confusing. So because it
reads positive, I've actually turned the phototransistor around, so it's going the other way. I've
connected the emitter at the top, and I've connected that to minus 15 volts in fact,
and I've connected a resistor to limit the current, so the phototransistor doesn't get
too much current through it. But it's basically the same circuit I've just shown you, and
let's take a look. Here is the phototransistor. It's a little transparent looking package
with two leads, it's only got two leads because it's got no base connection, a collector and
an emitter. The base connection is the light coming in, making the electron hole pairs,
and I think you saw the needle wiggle a little bit as I was playing around with it. The transistor
goes into the inverting input of the op amp, and here's the all-important feedback resistor
that comes back and gives us our negative feedback, and lets this whole circuit work.
If I put my hand over the transistor, you can see the voltage go down. Right now the
transistor is responding to the ambient light in the room, and it is producing a significant
voltage, about three volts at the output, and if I take a flashlight and turn on the
flashlight, you can see that that voltage goes up. We don't have as much variation as
we might like because we've got such intense studio lights, I could perhaps increase that
by changing some of the resistor values, but there we have it. And if I were to work underneath
shade here, you probably can't see that too well, there we go, I can go all the way down
towards zero and then sneak that light in and it goes up quite a bit. So we have a light
meter. What's this good for? Well, most cameras have a light meter in them. You don't see
the light meter in a modern camera, but it's in there and it does things like calculate
how long the exposure ought to be. So that's a light meter, and it uses a current to voltage
converter with a photo transistor as the current source, making a current that's proportional
to the intensity of the light falling on it. Well, we have seen quite a few applications
in this lecture of op amps. They're very versatile, they're wonderfully easy to analyze once
you understand the op amp rules, and we're going to go on in the next couple of lectures
and look at some more applications of op amps. If you're interested in working with such
an application for yourself, I have a rather challenging project for you with this one.
It's to make basically a circuit that becomes an electronic thermometer, and you've got
some challenges because I want you to convert from a sensor that produces a voltage output
that corresponds to Celsius temperatures, and you need to convert it to Fahrenheit.
And that's a challenge because you've got to do two things. You've got to convert the
size of the degrees because they're different, and you've also got to account for the fact
that there's that 32 degree offset. Zero Celsius is the freezing point, but 32 Fahrenheit
is the freezing point. That's a challenging project, probably the most challenging one
you'll have encountered, but I urge you to try it, and there is no one right answer.
But if you do that, and then we talk about the project, you'll see what the solution
is.
Okay, well, this is a pretty challenging project. You've now got a fairly sophisticated understanding
of op amps and what they can do. So your project is this. You're building an electronic thermometer
and you have a temperature sensor that produces an output voltage whose value in millivolts
is equal to the temperature in Celsius. So when, for example, it's 20 degrees Celsius,
you get 20 millivolts. You're to design an op amp circuit with this sensor at the input,
which produces an output whose value in millivolts is 100 times the temperature in Fahrenheit.
That is when it's 70 degrees outside or inside or whatever the sensor is sensing, the circuit's
output should be 7000 millivolts or 7.0 volts. And your op amp should use plus or minus 15
volt power supplies, and these are the only power sources available to you. By the way,
this is a real problem. I once built an electronic thermometer before they became widely available,
and I had to make exactly this conversion, and I had a switch that let you choose between
Celsius and Fahrenheit. And then an optional part will be to simulate the circuit and verify
its operation. So this is more of a design project. So think about it, get pencil and
paper, draw the thing, it's going to take you a while. It's a bit of a challenge.
Okay, so here is my solution, and I'll talk about my circuit lab solution, and then I'll
show you the implementation also in due circuits. So here's what I've got. I've got an inverting
amplifier with a gain of minus 18. Why minus 18? Because the difference between Celsius and
Fahrenheit is a factor of 1.8. One Celsius degree is 1.8 Fahrenheit degrees. So we need
that conversion. And so there's a gain of minus 18. And I've got another amplifier with a gain of
minus 10. So together they have a gain of 180, which is going to be what we want to take those
millivolts up to tenths of volts basically. But there's also a problem. And the problem is we need
that 32 degree offset between the freezing points of Celsius and Fahrenheit. So to do that, I'm
going to bring in another current through another resistor. The only source I have is plus or
minus 15 volts. So I've got that connected up there to my power supply. It's chosen to be a
summing amplifier here. And I'm going to take the current that's flowing in through that new
resistor I've added. And I'm going to make it account for that 32 degree offset, which in my
scheme of things for this circuit represents 3.2 volts. So that current is 15 volts over the
resistance. Why 15 over R? Because the other end of that R is connected to the summing point,
the minus input, the point that's at virtual ground. So we have 15 volts across that resistor.
That gets amplified by the ratio of the feedback resistor. And that is 39 kilohms. And we want
that to come out 3.2 volts. In other words, when there's no other input to this op amp, when it's
zero degrees Celsius, we want to get 3.2 volts corresponding to 32 degrees at the output. And
so you work that math out. And that's where I get the 182 kilohm resistor. So that is the way the
circuit works. Let me show you it's simulated in Circuit Lab because it uses a new feature. So
I'm going to simulate the circuit. Here's the circuit now on the big screen. I'm going to simulate
it. And I'm going to run not just a DC simulation, but a DC sweep. And a DC sweep allows you to
start at one voltage and end at another voltage. So I'm going to start at zero volts and end at 30
millivolts at the input. That corresponds to zero degrees Celsius up to 30 degrees Celsius, which
is a pretty warm temperature. So when I run the DC sweep, I get a graph that looks like a straight
line along the bottom are the input voltage, which is which I'm naming V Celsius. And they're in
millivolts. And so for example, if I go over here to 10 millivolts, 10 millivolts corresponds to 10
degrees Celsius. If I look along there, that is go along horizontally, I'll find the corresponding
voltage at the output. And the output voltage is 5.000 volts, five volts. Well, in our scheme of
things that corresponds to 50 degrees and 50 degrees Fahrenheit is indeed the same as 10 degrees
Celsius. And the same would be true anywhere along this linear scale. So you can verify that this
circuit works by plotting a number of different values or simply using Circuit Lab's DC sweep. So
that's what Circuit Lab does for us in this circuit. And it makes it clear that the circuit works. If
we took a look like look in do circuits, the circuit in do circuits looks very similar. And in do
circuits, we can run also a DC sweep. It takes a little while. And there is our DC sweep. And we
get exactly the same thing. For example, 0.01 volts, 10 millivolts corresponds to five volts at the
output. So 10 degrees Celsius corresponds to 50 degrees Fahrenheit. That was a pretty sophisticated
assignment to work that out and get the summing amplifier to sum in the 32 degree offset, not
trivial. If you did that, pat yourself on the back for doing a really sophisticated circuit.
