Welcome to the final lecture on operational amplifiers. In fact, this is the final lecture
on analog electronics exclusively, although we will come back to some analog electronics
when we mix it with digital electronics toward the end of the course.
Today's lecture, I want to look at what happens when we use capacitors along with
operational amplifiers. And you might say, well, we did that in the previous lecture when we built
that peak detector. We used the capacitor to detect the peak of a voltage. But the capacitor
wasn't really active with the op amp. The op amps were sort of there to help the capacitor
get the charge and hold the charge. Now we want to use capacitors actively with op amps. And what
that means is putting them in the feedback loop of the op amp. So before we do that, let me begin
by reviewing what a capacitor is. Remember that a capacitor is a pair of conductors separated
by an insulator. So we represent it by these two plates with the wires connecting in. We put
positive charge plus q on one plate, negative charge minus q equal in magnitude opposite sign
on the other plate. And we get a voltage across the two plates. And that voltage
is related to the charge by the charge being the capacitance, the measure of what this capacitor
can do, its capacitance in farads times the voltage. Now how does the charge get there?
It gets delivered by whatever current is flowing in the wires leading to the capacitor. And the
rate of charge buildup, as we found way back in the lecture when we worked with filters,
is proportional to the current. So the faster the current is coming in, the more current
is flowing, the faster charge is being delivered onto the plates of the capacitor. And the voltage
is proportional to the charge. And so the rate of voltage increase is proportional to the current.
In other words, a capacitor is not like a resistor. It doesn't obey Ohm's law. It doesn't
have a proportionality between voltage and current. Rather, it has a proportionality between
rate of change of voltage and current. And let's look a little bit further about what happens
when we try to put charge onto a capacitor. One of the simplest ways to do that is in a
circuit with a battery. So I've got a battery, a resistor, and a capacitor. They're all connected
in series. And I start with the capacitor uncharged, and I want to ask what happens.
So the capacitor is initially uncharged. V sub c, the capacitor voltage, is zero.
But current can flow because that capacitor is acting at that instant almost like it's a short
circuit because it has no voltage across it. All the battery voltage is dropped across the
resistor, and so a current v over r flows, and that current delivers charge to the capacitor.
And that current depends on the voltage across the resistor, and initially that voltage is big.
It's the full battery voltage. As the voltage across the capacitor increases, however, which it
does because as charge goes on the capacitor, the voltage is proportional to the charge,
that means the voltage across the resistor decreases because the capacitor voltage and the
resistor voltage have to add up to the battery voltage. So the rate of charge buildup on the
capacitor decreases because that rate is determined by the current, and the current is determined
by the voltage across the resistor, and that's going down. So the rate of increase of the
capacitor voltage also decreases. And eventually what happens is the capacitor voltage becomes
equal to the battery voltage, but that takes a very long time typically. And that timing,
how long it takes, depends on the so-called time constant of the circuit, the product of
the resistance and the capacitance. And if you work that product out, you will find it actually
has the units of seconds. And so if we were to plot the voltage across the capacitor versus time
as a function of time in measured in this time constant r times c, you would find that there is
a sort of exponential charging curve. The voltage rises rapidly at first, and then it tapers off,
and only asymptotically does it approach the battery voltage. So that's what happens when
you try to charge a capacitor with a battery. Don't take my word for it, let's do it.
So over here, I have a very simple setup consisting of a 6 volt battery, a 6.8 kilo ohm resistor,
a 2200 microfarad capacitor, 2.2 millifarads, and our good old-fashioned analog voltmeter
connected directly across the capacitor. And right now, I have this black wire,
which is short-circuiting the capacitor, so the capacitor is guaranteed to have zero volts across
it. What I'm going to do is remove that wire, and the capacitor will charge, and let's watch it charge
on the voltmeter. And the voltage goes up gradually, it goes up fairly rapidly at first,
now it's approaching 2 volts, going up a little slower, it's going up slower and slower,
it's approaching 3 volts, it's going up slower and slower, it's approaching 4 volts,
it's going to go up very, very slowly until it eventually gets fairly close to 6 volts, although
because this is a simple old-fashioned analog voltmeter, it has a pretty low resistance itself,
and it's acting a bit like a voltage divider, so it will never quite get all the way to 6 volts.
But the point is this, when you try to charge a capacitor with a battery,
or another constant DC source, through a resistor, you get a voltage that rises rapidly at first,
and then the rise decreases, the rate of rise decreases. There are many situations
in which you would like a steady voltage rise, a voltage that rises steadily with time. I can
give you one good example, and that's an old-fashioned cathode ray tube, a oscilloscope,
where the electron beam would sweep across the face of that tube, and it did so with a voltage
that rose steadily on some electrodes in that tube, and you needed a circuit that produced
a voltage that rose steadily with time, and that's not what happens when you simply try to charge a
capacitor with a battery and a resistor. So we'll end this little experiment by shorting the capacitor
back to zero again, and talk about how we might achieve a steady rise in voltage. Well, how we
might achieve that is with feedback. Feedback is going to come to our rescue, and we're going to put
op amps, or we're going to put the capacitors in the feedback loop of an op amp. So let's see
how that works. We'll go over to our onset first and do a pretty careful analysis of what happens
when we put a capacitor in the feedback loop of an operational amplifier. So here I have a
configuration, and you'll recognize it as the inverting configuration, because the plus input of
the op amp is grounded, the minus input of the op amp is connected through a resistor to some
input. We'll talk about that in a minute. But instead of a feedback resistor, we have a feedback
capacitor. But as long as the system is in control, let's put a voltage across that input. Let's
assume for now it's a fixed voltage like we'd have from a battery. Rule two says
the plus and minus inputs are equal. In this case, the plus input is at ground,
so the minus input is also at zero volts. It's not really grounded. It's at that virtual ground,
again, being held there actively by the op amp's action. Now I have to caution you,
in circuits with capacitors, it's very easy for the op amp to get out of control,
and then that's no longer true. But while the op amp is doing its thing correctly,
and we're in control, we have the negative feedback working, that will be at virtual ground. So
that's what rule two says. Ohm's law says i equals v over r, then, because as far as the
resistor is concerned, the right-hand end of it is at ground, the left-hand end of it is at v.
Rule number one says the only place the current can go is through the feedback loop.
And so what does the current do? In this case, it delivers charge to the plates of the capacitor.
If it's a positive voltage, it puts positive charge on that plate, and positive charge leaves
the other plate, and negative charge goes on the other plate, the capacitor charges.
And the current is therefore carrying the charge to and from the capacitor plates,
because it can't go in to the input of the op amp. Now here's the beauty of this circuit,
the current is constant. Why is it constant? Because the op amp is working to keep this
point at virtual ground. And so the current is constant, and the capacitor charge and voltage
therefore increase at a steady rate. And they do so, and the voltage goes up and up and up,
but it can't go up forever because the op amp's output voltage can't exceed the capacitor,
can't exceed the supply voltage of the op amp. And when we get to that point, we have saturated
the op amp, the feedback is no longer in control, and the output is at one or the other of the limits.
In fact, as I've drawn it here, this graph isn't quite correct because I've got current flowing
in this way, and that means this end of the capacitor is positive and the output would
actually be negative because this is an inverting configuration. But you get the idea,
the voltage increases in magnitude, it would actually go down, and then it would reach the
minus limit. If I reverse that voltage, it would go up. So the beauty of a capacitor in the feedback
loop of an op amp is, it allows us to make a circuit in which we can make steadily increasing
voltages, voltages that increase steadily with time, and there are many, many occasions when
we want to do that. So we have this inverting configuration v out is in fact minus vc.
But that's not all we can do with capacitors in the feedback loop of an op amp.
Here is what happens if we put in a time-dependent voltage at the input. Instead of just a steady
voltage at the input, a constant voltage, which results in a rising or falling linearly depending
on the sign of the input voltage at the output, let's put in a voltage that varies with time.
So I've marked it explicitly v in parentheses t. v in is a function of t time, and I've marked the
current i also to be a function of time. And let's analyze what happens with this circuit.
Rule two says, as always, in this case with the plus input grounded, that the minus input is at
virtual ground. Ohm's law says, as it did before, that the time-changing current is equal to the
time-changing voltage over that resistance, and rule one says no current flows into the inputs of
the op amp, and therefore all the current is flowing to carry charge onto or off the plates of
the capacitor. Now what does the capacitor do? It therefore accumulates the charge that flows
from the current that's flowing in the wires leading to the capacitor. If current is always
flowing in the direction shown in this diagram, the capacitor charge just keeps building up.
If current ever flows the other way, charge is removed from the capacitor, but it accumulates
if you will, the algebraic sum of all the currents. In other words, builds up currents over time. vc,
the capacitor voltage, is proportional to the charge on the capacitor, and consequently we get a
situation in which the output voltage of this circuit is proportional to the total charge
that has accumulated on that capacitor. Not like in our peak detector, because now we're counting
charge that both flows off and flows on. So the circuit is what we call an integrator. It integrates
or adds up the algebraic sum of the charges delivered by all the currents over time. Have you
had calculus? If you have, you'll recognize what this circuit is doing basically is integrating.
The output voltage is the integral of the input voltage, and the constant in front of the integral
is rc, that time constant once again. If you haven't had calculus, don't worry about this,
but if you've ever seen calculus, a capacitor integrates. An op amp circuit with a capacitor
in the feedback and a resistor at the front is an integrator and performs that difficult
mathematical operation of integration, which is why this kind of circuit was once used in analog
computers to solve complicated mathematical equations. We no longer do that, but it has been
done. And by the way, just another hint for those who have had calculus. If I switch the c and the
r, put the capacitor at the input and the resistor in the feedback loop, I'd have a differentiator,
and the circuit would take the derivative of whatever signal I was sending at the input.
So a circuit with a capacitor in the feedback loop is an integrator. It sums up the charge
delivered by all the currents that are coming in to the input of that circuit. Let's take a look,
in fact, at how that works. So over here at this point on the board, I have an op amp again,
a 741 op amp. I have a 1 kilo ohm input resistor. I have a small capacitor between the output and
the input, and that's it. The integrator circuit coming in is a sine wave coming out of my function
generator and also showing on channel 1 of the oscilloscope, the yellow channel. Let's take a
look at the same time at the output. Well, the output is coming through this probe. It's connected
to the output of the op amp, which is also one side of the capacitor. Let's take a good look.
First of all, the output is also a sine wave. Its amplitude isn't the same. Those two channels are
on two different scales, so the amplitude of this is actually a little bit less than half
of that, and that's determined by a combination of the frequency of the sine wave and also the
values of that R and C, and I've chosen them so that they work fairly well for this particular
circuit. Now notice something else, though. Here is the peak of the sine wave coming in,
but the peak of the sine wave going out is in a different location, and it isn't completely out
of phase. If it were, the peak of the green would be below the trough of the yellow, but it isn't.
It's sort of halfway along. In fact, the green is peaking right about where the yellow is crossing
zero on the way up, and we've sort of seen that before because we talked about how capacitors
change phase, but now we can think about it a little bit more mathematically. In fact, if you
know about calculus again, you know that the integral of sine is cosine, and what's a cosine?
A cosine looks just like a sine, except it's shifted. Cosine peaks at zero when its argument
is zero, the function cosine, and sine peaks when its argument is 90 degrees and zero when its
argument is zero, and we have exactly that same thing right here. This little triangle
marks the time the oscilloscope thinks is time t equals zero, it calls it, and that's when the
sine wave that was our input is rising on its way up, and that is when the cosine wave, which is
the integral of the sine, is peaking. So this starting here at t equals zero, this is a cosine,
one cycle of a cosine, this is one cycle of a sine. So this device has actually performed this
mathematical operation, we call it integration. And even if you don't know about calculus, what
the circuit has done is accumulated the currents that are being pumped in as a result of this input
voltage applied across that input resistor and those currents flow on and off the plates of the
capacitor and the result in a voltage across the capacitor and consequently an output voltage of
the op amp that is out of phase by 90 degrees by a quarter of a cycle relative to the sine wave.
Well, that's all well and good, and we could think about the mathematics of that some more,
but let's look at some more interesting waveforms. I haven't done much with this,
but again, this function generator is capable of many different waveforms. And so I'm going to go
over here and press the waveform button, right now it's set on sine, and I'm going to change it to a
square wave. Whoa. So let's think about what's happening here. Now the input is a square wave,
again that means it starts out at some low value. In this case we're at 500 millivolts per division,
and so we are coming in a low voltage of about minus 250 millivolts going up to a high level
down, up, down, and we're staying at these two levels. So what happens? What happens is as the
level is low, remember this is an inverting configuration, this integrator, the voltage rises,
the voltage cross capacitor rises at a steady rate. When the input voltage is negative,
we get a rise because of the inverting configuration. When the input voltage swings positive,
we take charge off the capacitor plates, we get a steady fall. When the capacitor, when the
square wave goes negative again, we rise, and we've generated a beautiful triangle wave. Well,
not quite beautiful, there's this little spike at the top, it has a little trouble handling this
rapid change that's going on, but that has turned the square wave into a triangle wave. The integration
of a square wave is a triangle wave, and we don't need to know calculus to that, we can just see
that by saying if the voltage is steady, we know we get a steady rise or fall in the capacitor
voltage, and that's what we're seeing here, and that alternates as the square wave at the input
alternates sign. Well, we can do more than that. We can go back and look at other waveforms.
Here's a waveform called a ramp, and that ramp waveform
has inside it a circuit very much like the one we've been talking about,
which produces a steadily rising voltage, then it switches right back to where it started,
and rises again, and just keeps repeating that cycle, and lo and behold, you can convince yourself
that what happens if the voltage is steadily rising, the charge on the capacitor then rises at first,
and then begins to level off, and then goes down, and it repeats that process.
By the way, I didn't show it here, but if I had made this a symmetric ramp that went up and down,
and up and down, we would have seen that this looked almost like a sine wave, it wouldn't be a sine
wave, it would be a series of parabolas, because the integration of the function x, a rising function,
is x squared over 2, if you know calculus, and so we would get something that looks like a sine wave,
but that's sort of a cheap way to make something that is approximately a sine wave,
and very cheap function generators might attempt to do that. It's not a good way to make a sine wave,
but it would look, it would almost look indistinguishable from a sine wave.
Okay, so there is this circuit performing the process we call integration. Well, what do we want to do
with this circuit besides do calculus? Well, let me show you one useful example, and that is,
let's go back to our light meter again. We've used the light meter twice already,
we used it first to make just a simple light meter that gave an output that was proportional
to the amount of light falling on it, then we made a peak detector that detected the maximum
amount of light. Now we're going to make an integrating light meter, a light meter that
records the total amount of light that's falling on this thing. You might imagine making such a
device to determine something about the amount of solar energy you get over a period of 15 minutes
or something as the sun fluctuates going in and out of clouds, or something like that.
We're going to build an integrating light meter. It's going to determine the total amount of light
that falls over time. You could imagine making a camera that looks at the total amount of light
that comes in and says, I'm going to close the aperture when that reaches a certain level,
which gives me the right exposure. So an integrating light meter is a useful thing,
and we're going to start with the light meter we had before. It was based on a photo transistor.
The photo transistor sent a current into an op amp connected in the inverting configuration
at first with a feedback resistor, and we got an output voltage that was proportional
to the light intensity. Now we're going to do something different. We're going to replace
that resistor with a capacitor. And so that capacitor is going to now charge,
and instead of an output voltage that's proportional to the current that's flowing,
we're going to get an output voltage that's proportional to the total amount of charge
that that flowing current has delivered. And that's why this will be an integrating light meter
that will add up exactly the total amount of light that has fallen on that photo transistor.
So let's go ahead and build that thing with our current proportional to the light,
the current going on to the capacitor plates proportional to the light, and therefore the
charge is proportional to the total amount of light that has fallen on the photo transistor.
And so the output voltage also becomes proportional to the total light.
So let's look at a circuit that does that. Okay, so here we are. I have the same circuit
I've just been using. And by the way, you may wonder why I keep stopping to
to reconfigure. It's because I want to show you that wiring op amps is really simple. And once
I've got an op amp sitting on my board, it's very simple to reconfigure it into a totally
different circuit. All I've done with my integrator circuit I showed you before
is to replace that relatively small capacitor with a very large capacitor, a 2200 microfarad
capacitor. That's because I'm going to be concerned here with relatively slow variations.
And before I had a 1000 hertz variation in this capacitor works better to accumulate the
large amounts of charge that are going to come flowing on here. By the way, you've noticed some
LEDs. Don't worry about those. We'll talk about those shortly. Now right now I have changed the
circuit so that instead of connecting the input from my function generator, I've got this orange
wire here looping over to a photo transistor, which you can just barely see a little clear plastic
photo transistor, the same one we used before. And the output of the circuit is looking at my old
fashioned analog voltmeter. And because this is an inverting configuration, and this time I'm not
turning the transistor around, you'll notice I have the red into the black and vice versa. So the
voltmeter will still read the negative voltage as a positive voltage. So the other thing you'll
notice is I have this big yellow looping wire and that wire is at this moment short circuiting the
capacitor. I'm going to pull that wire out. And the photo transistor is going to begin to pass
current depending on how much light is falling on it. And that current is going to accumulate charge
on the capacitor and the capacitor is going to begin to build up charge. So I'm first going to
pull this out and we'll let the ambient light add some charge to the capacitor and then we will go
with our flashlight. So here we go. Capacitor begins to charge from the ambient light accumulating
ambient light. We'll put the brighter light on. It goes up faster. We'll take the light away. It
still continues to go up. This is not a peak detector. It's adding up the total amount of light
that's fallen on this over time. Put some more light in, up it goes further. Put some more light in,
up it goes further. So that's an integrating light meter. That's a circuit you might use to
determine over some time interval of your choice. Could be a thousandths of a second. Could be,
as in this case, a few seconds, the total amount of light that's accumulated in this system. And so
we have an integrating light meter, a very practical device, using this idea of an integrator,
a capacitor in the feedback loop of an op amp which accumulates a total amount of charge
depending on how much current has flown into that system. Okay. Here we are for our last analog
circuit and probably our most sophisticated. And you'll notice that I have intentionally removed
that function generator. I've used that a lot throughout this course. And you may have wondered
how it works. Well, the reason I've removed it is to emphasize that our final circuit is a function
generator that we are going to build ourselves. We're going to build a generator, in fact, makes
both triangle waves and square waves. And we're going to see how it works. And then if you want
to do the project, you can build one yourself. So let's talk a little bit about how you make a
waveform generator. In general, to make a circuit that undergoes some kind of periodic back and
forth oscillations, you typically need a combination of both positive and negative feedback.
And that's what we're going to have in this simple triangle square generator that we're going to build.
So how does a function generator work? It has a more sophisticated circuit than what I'm showing
you, but here is a lot of the basic idea. So here's the circuit I'm going to build and demonstrate
and that you can also build and play with in the project if you choose to do it. Consists of three
operational amplifiers. Two of them are in the inverting configuration. The one on the left
is an integrator. We recognize that from this lecture. The one in the middle is that circuit
with positive feedback, a kind of Schmidt trigger-like thing, although a little more simple. It simply
has a voltage divider string at its output and its plus input is tapping off a portion of that.
So this one's got positive feedback and this one is functioning as a comparator and it's
comparing the output of the first operational amplifier, the one that's the integrator,
with whatever's at the plus input of the second operational amplifier and whatever's at the plus
input of that second one is half of what is at its output if those two resistors are the same.
They don't have to be, but if they are. And what's at the output of the second op amp? Well, I don't
know, but I do know that it is open loop, that is it has no feedback, at least right within itself.
There is kind of overall feedback going on in the whole circuit, but OA2 doesn't have any intrinsic
feedback and so its output is at either plus or minus limit, plus or minus approximately 15 volts
for typical op amps. So that's the situation and so the junction of those two resistors,
which is equal to the voltage at the plus input of OA number two, is either plus 7.5 volts or
minus 7.5 volts. And so when the output of the integrator, the output of op amp number one,
reaches either plus or minus 7.5 volts, things are going to happen. That's going to switch the
output of op amp two to the opposite value. And what is op amp three? Well, it doesn't have any
feedback either. It's got its plus input at ground. So it's also a comparator and it's just
sensing whether the input to the minus input of that op amp is either above or below zero.
And so it's basically functioning as an inverter because if the minus input is below zero, it's
less than the plus input and the output goes positive to positive limit. If the minus input
to OA3 is greater than zero volts, greater than ground, it's going to switch the other way. So
OA3 is simply functioning to invert whatever the output of OA2 is. So OA2 is at plus or minus 15
and OA3 is then at minus or plus 15. So that's the inverter. And there's the feedback
that makes this all work. So I claim that is a triangle square wave generator. I claim we're
going to get a square wave there. I claim we're going to get a triangle wave there. We're also
going to get a square wave at the output of OA2, but it's going to be out of phase with the square
wave at OA3 because OA3 is an inverter. We'll also get a square wave at the junction of those two
resistors and it will have half the amplitude of the square wave at the output of either OA2
or OA3. So there it is, a lower level output, a square wave. So this is a triangle square wave
generator. Does it work? Let's try it out and see. So here I have that circuit wired.
Three op amps in a row, one, two, three. The integrator, you can see the capacitor,
which is its feedback loop. The second one with that voltage divider string going across and down
here, that's the voltage divider. And the third one which inverts. And at the output of the third
one, I have a resistor and two LEDs. And those LEDs look like they're just lit all the time,
but they aren't lit all the time. Let's take a look at what we actually see at the output of those
circuits. So I have the oscilloscope on. You'll notice now I'm using only one probe on the oscilloscope
because we've got a circuit that makes its own waveform. This circuit is not something that
needs an input and then makes an output. This is a circuit that makes its own output. So I'm going
to connect this first to the output of the last op amp, the one that's functioning as an inverter,
and there's our square wave. And that square wave is swinging between about, let's see, we've got
five volts per division. Here's zero, one division, two division, about two and a half, about 12 and
a half volts, which is about the most you can expect out of a 741, swinging down to about
minus 12 and a half volts, a nice square wave. So now we're going to connect to the output of
op amp number one, which is at one side of the capacitor. Let's just clip on to the capacitor.
And there we go. And we have a beautiful triangle. And if I put both of these on at once, you would
see the triangle switching at the peak and minus just as that square wave that's coming out of those
other op amp switches. So there is a beautiful triangle square wave generator, very simple
circuit, three 40 cent op amps, a few resistors and a capacitor, and we've got a function generator.
What determines the frequency? Well, obviously the value of the capacitor for
one thing because the bigger it is, the longer it takes to charge. And so let's instead of
putting that capacitor, let's switch to a much bigger capacitor and see what happens.
Okay, so now I've replaced the capacitor that was a fraction of a microfarad with a capacitor
that is in fact 100 microfarads, much bigger. So it's going to take much more time to charge.
Let me turn the circuit on and you can see what's happening. Now you can see
those LEDs that are connected at the output of the square wave part of the function generator
are flipping back and forth between red and green as the output goes alternately toward plus limit
and then toward minus limit. Well, that is a pretty sophisticated circuit we've developed.
And that is where we're going to wrap up with analog electronics. I do recommend that if you'd
like to do the project, you simulate the triangle square wave generator we just described. I give
you some parameters. I caution you that doing this circuit is really pushing the limits of some of
these simulated circuit software that you've been using. And for some values of components,
some kinds of op-amps, they may simply not work. If you do the project, I'll give you some more
hints about how to make it work.
Okay. Well, in this lecture, we built the most sophisticated of the analog circuits we'll work
with. We actually built a function generator, a triangle square wave generator, and I'd like
you to simulate that. I'd like you to use 10 kilo ohms for all the resistors as I did there,
0.1 microfarad capacitors, equivalently 100 nanofarads. And you're going to find that you need
to use 741 op-amps. You need to do this in circuit lab. Due circuits, op-amps are a little bit too
perfect to make this work. And you need op-amps with explicit plus or minus 15 volt power supplies.
Why all that? I'm not sure. Why don't some of the other op-amps succeed with the circuit? I'm not
sure. It has to do with the fact that different, these simulated op-amps are a little too perfect,
as I said. And sometimes they will converge on zero volts at their output and zero at both inputs
in situations where a real op-amp wouldn't. So we're going to use 741 op-amps in circuit lab
and use the ones that have explicit plus or minus 15 volt power supplies. You can't use the ones
where the power supply is just sort of assumed. It just doesn't work. Simulate it for about
five milliseconds with .01 millisecond time step. And you need to click yes to the skip
initial function in there. And look at the outputs of both the integrator and then either of the
other op-amps. These are supposed to be the triangle and square outputs. And if you want
to challenge, can you add a control that will adjust the frequency? Okay? You're going to have to do
some playing around with circuit lab to get that working. Take some time, do it, and then come back
and take a look at my solution. Okay. Here on the big screen is the solution I've come up with
in circuit lab. It's basically the circuit I built in the lab or in the lecture. The only
difference is I've taken on the challenge. And instead of a pair of resistors, I had a pair of
10k resistors here as my voltage divider. And maybe you built it that way. I've replaced that with a
20 kilo ohm potentiometer whose dial part can be put anywhere along there. And my point is that
adjusting that should adjust the threshold voltage at which this second op-amp, the comparator,
switches. And that should adjust the time it takes to get to there. And that should therefore
adjust the frequency. Now, you might have said I could adjust R1 and that would have worked also.
You might have said I could put in a variable capacitor. That would also have worked. Oh,
rather cumbersome and expensive solution. But this solution is actually the best,
because I can dial all the way from down here, 0 volts up to the full output of that op-amp.
So let's see what happens if we simulate it. Beautiful. Square wave swinging between plus
and minus 15 volts. Triangle swinging between plus and minus about half that, about 7.5 volts,
because right now I have the two resistors equal as if they were two individual 10 kilo ohm resistors.
Beautiful. Now let's go back and see if we can adjust our frequency.
So I'm going to lower this dial a little bit. Think a minute before I do that,
will this raise or lower the frequency? So I'm going to click on this and notice the potentiometer
has a place for its total resistance, the 20,000 ohms. It also has a place for k, the fraction
I am along. And that's 0.5 right now. I'm going to drop that down to 0.25. So I'm only 0.25 of the
way along. And let's see what happens when I simulate it now. Run the time domain simulation
again. Some funny stuff happens at first. But now we're down nearer to zero volts for the switching
point. We're down below 5 volts. And so we switch sooner. And so there are more of these cycles
showing on this screen in the same amount of time. And consequently, we have a higher frequency.
I mentioned that the op-amps are a little too perfect in some ways, and they do strange things.
And at the beginning, this op-amp does some oscillations before it settles down
into our nice triangle square. And let's just end with one more thing. Let's take this variable
resistor and run it up from 0.25% of the way along to 0.75% of the way along and do the
simulation again. And we run the time domain simulation. See if you can see something that's
a little bit disconcerting about this frequency control. There we have, we have to go much higher
now before we undertake the switching. And so it takes longer for the capacitor in the integrator
to charge, takes it longer for it to get down to the other switch point, and so the frequency
is lower. Notice what else has changed. The amplitude of the triangle has changed. So
my frequency control is also inadvertently an amplitude control. The lower frequencies have
higher amplitude, not particularly desirable in a function generator. And I'll leave it as a real
extra credit problem for you to figure out if you could make a triangle square generator
with separate controls for frequency and amplitude. It's not particularly trivial.
