Today, I have not a second but a third conversation on the great simplification with my friend and
colleague Chuck Watson. I've known Chuck for 15 years. He's a former Air Force pilot.
He's a risk analyst. He's worked for the government, government agencies like NASA,
the State Department, the private sector. Since I've known Chuck, he never calls attention to
himself or his own deeds and stories. He is singularly focused on stabilization and mitigating
risks. I learned on this conversation some things about him that he's never told me in 15 years.
He is a reluctant spokesperson for the systemic risks involved in a nuclear escalation,
but I think the fact that he agreed to do this conversation and share his expertise on the
difference between convention on nuclear weapons, what are the escalation pathways, what are the
damages, and more specifically, what can we do as a nation, as a world, and as individuals to
minimize the risk of a nuclear civilization ending exchange is why he agreed to share these things
today. I hope you all spend the time to listen to this roughly 90-minute conversation with my friend
and risk expert Chuck Watson.
Hello, my friend. Hi, Nate. How are you? I'm good. How are you?
Well, it seems like we are always talking about something depressing that I have to say this is
probably one of the most important topics that we can talk about.
Unfortunately, I agree with you. You have been on this podcast twice already to talk about Ukraine
and Russia actually several months before that situation came into reality and to talk about
nuclear war, nuclear weapons. I've gotten a lot of feedback from listeners
that I want to hone in today on what we can do internationally as a nation and as individuals
to minimize the risk of what you've referred to as a potential civilization ending nuclear exchange.
So that's where I want to go with today's conversation, avoiding nuclear war in the near
term. But I want to first kind of recaps a few of the things we talked about and also take a
deeper dive in some of the basics, kind of like what nuclear weapons are, how they're different
than conventional, what a limited or large-scale nuclear exchange would do to our world,
and how the current geopolitical legal war landscape makes it increasingly, unfortunately,
possible that this could happen. So one thing that I've learned in the past couple of months
is, well, two things that I've learned. Number one, I know very little about this
important situation. And number two, I can't really believe much of what I'm reading,
because it feels like yesterday's podcast was with Tristan Harris talking about social media
and algorithms. It feels like there's these stories spinning around that I don't really know
if they're true or not. And so on this topic, I am privileged, lucky or cursed, depending on the
perspective, to have someone count someone as a friend who, A, is extremely knowledgeable about
this stuff, and B, is willing to talk about it. So maybe we start there just to be clear
to our listeners that you are an eminent expert on this topic. Could you share a bit about why
that is, your background, as much as you can share in any case, on why you have insights and
expertise on this topic? Well, and I always get nervous when people use the word expert on any
topic. And I would have to say, my somewhat ignominious career, I've been involved in a lot
of the topics that get blended into this whole subject, because we're not just talking about
the technical aspects of nuclear weapons and how they're used from a military standpoint.
This is so interwoven with things like diplomacy and international law and the moral codes and all
of these other factors. And unfortunately, there's a tendency to get so piped. And again,
I've been quite fortunate in that I've been involved on the military side of things. I've
been involved in the planning emergency management, it's called now, but it used to be called civil
defense. And that's actually an interesting point and diversion that we want to avoid. But I will
say it's interesting because coming at it from a civil defense standpoint, when you think about
a hurricane versus a nuclear bomb, well, you'll pick the hurricane any day of the week. And so it
helps to give you some perspective on various kinds of disasters. So that's a piece of it. The
diplomacy side, I've spent a lot of my career working on international projects. So I've really
come to appreciate things like how international technical agencies, how the UN works, how
multilateral and bilateral negotiations happen and how those agreements work. And that's something
that, again, it's not any particular brilliance or skill or talent on my part. It's just that I've
been fortunate to end up being in those rooms and in those discussions. I'm not somebody that you
would have ever heard of, but I've probably been in the room on a lot of fairly in hindsight
momentous events over the last 40 years. And it makes for an interesting perspective, I hope.
I don't know if you're comfortable sharing this. And if you're not, we can edit it out. But
you've told me in the past that you have a flag that used to fly over the White House signed
by Ronald Reagan for your efforts back in the day. Can you speak to that or not?
Yeah, I actually, one of the bits of trivia and mementos that I have is I do have a flag that
was presented to me in the Oval Office by Ronald Reagan. And so you say that and people immediately
go, ah, hi, you know, you're one of those ultra conservative types. But I have a signed thank
you note from Janet Reno for a particular mission and operation that I did as well that's
framed lower on the wall, but it's still on the same wall with the with the flag from President
Reagan. So I like to feel that my role is and my oath was to protect this country. I think the
best way to protect this country is also taking into account that we've got to look out for humanity
and we've got to look out for the bigger picture and be very careful about getting too narrowly
focused on our own issues and particularly getting to work with senior diplomats and even
presidential level leaders from other countries. You really start to understand that we do have
we've been called the indispensable nation, which I think is true, but the way it's used is very
deceptive and destructive. I think we have a positive role to play, but part of that positive
role is by recognizing other countries have interests and looking out for everybody is
beneficial to all of us, which is a really kumbaya thing for somebody that grew up in the
Republican Party to say. Well, it's why we're friends, right? We face a lot of existential
issues or at least perceived to be existential issues. And that's why I'm doing this podcast,
talking to knowledgeable people who care. And you're certainly one of those. So thank you for
that intro. Let's get into it here. Briefly, let's start from the absolute basics. What is
a nuclear weapon and how do they work briefly? So going back to the 1930s, physicists started
to figure out that you can generate enormous quantities of energy by breaking the binding
energy between actually inside of atoms. And so when you talk about splitting the atom, that's
basically what a fission bomb is doing. The other kind of nuclear reaction we need to talk about
is fusion, which is what goes on in the sun. And that's basically the opposite. You're cramming
lightweight elements together to make heavier elements. So the first race to build a nuclear
bomb gets started because of physicists coming out of Germany. And of course, the very famous
Einstein letter that people may have heard of warned that there was a tremendous potential to
build a bomb that was, and I'm going to use the technical term in order of magnitude. And I mean
that literally 10 to 100 to 1000 times more powerful than a conventional explosive. And the way it
works is really pretty simple in the sense that if you take unstable atoms like uranium, certain
isotopes of uranium, if you cram them together, then the neutrons that get produced causes that
material to tear itself apart. And so that's a fission bomb where you basically take two chunks
of uranium that are subcritical. In other words, they won't go off on their own. You cram them
together and they blow up because they end up splitting themselves and converting the binding
energy, the atoms into energy. And it happens in an uncontrolled way. You have a nuclear bomb.
If it happens in a controlled way, you have a nuclear reactor that you can generate heat and
generate power from. So the race in World War II was to build this super weapon.
And to give you just a little bit of context on how powerful nuclear weapons are,
it would have taken approximately 200 B-29 missions to drop the equivalent bomb energy of
what the single B-29, the Enola Gay, dropped on Hiroshima. So it's thousands of times more
destructive. One nuclear bomb is thousands of times more destructive than a conventional
explosive. And that's just the explosive part. Yeah, we'll get into that. But I just want to
understand the origin of why our species developed this. Was it because they wanted to kill a lot
of people because that would be an offensive move? Or was it a shock and awe? We need to
demonstrate we're capable of this. So an offensive move was actually a defensive move.
What was the thinking back then, just briefly? Or can you speculate to that?
Yeah, I've read quite a bit about that. Richard Rhodes has a fantastic set of books about that
that was done in the after some of the material became declassified in the 90s, early 2000s.
And it's really pretty interesting because it's a lot of those factors. First off,
there is fear. You have to remember when the nuclear weapons program got started,
Hitler was overrunning Europe. Even though it turned out to not be true, and there's some
speculation that Heisenberg, the lead German scientist, actually sabotaged their program
because he didn't want his government to have access to that kind of power. But at the time,
fascism, the world was plunged into war. Nobody knew how it was going to come out.
So the thought that the other side could get this super powerful weapon where it would replace
hundreds if not thousands of airplanes and bombs with a single device. Well, that just scared
everybody to death. So that started the race. Then as it became clearer that, well, we were so far
ahead that Germany, Japan had no hope of actually building a device during the war. It became more
of an efficiency thing in the sense that, okay, if you've got to destroy a city, well, this bomb
can do it and it only takes one airplane to do it. And so it becomes almost frightening to say
that this is the way humans think it's a cost effectiveness calculation.
It's optimal forging theory at a large scale in a military sense.
And there is one additional point that you mentioned the shock and awe. Well,
by 1944, it was pretty clear that, of course, both Germany and Japan were going to be defeated.
And so then there was the race to develop and shape the post-war world. And so, of course,
that meant that, well, Russia bounced back. Yeah, the Soviet Union bounced back. It was
clearly going to be a major player. So then the thinking started to go, well, we need to send a
message that we have these powerful weapons and to use that in the post-war negotiations.
And there was legitimate thought to, if using this bomb shortened the war, well,
you can say it's selfish. But if you're one of those soldiers waiting to invade Japan, then
there's a very powerful argument to say, I don't want to be one of those hundreds of thousands
of casualties if we have to invade Japan. If I'm destroying some of their cities with this
powerful device ends the war sooner, then that's a good thing. So it was all those factors blended
together. How many nuclear weapons were there in 1944? How many were there at the time of
proud profit in the early 80s in the Reagan administration versus how many are there now,
just rough ballpark? Yeah, so in 1944, there were zero. In 1945, well, 44 was zero. But 45,
that was actually a big fear because when they dropped the first bomb, little boy was a uranium
bomb, only bomb. And then the one on Nagasaki was called Fat Boy, it was a plutonium bomb.
There was only enough material to make three. And so that was a big fear is, okay,
we use these and if they don't fold, then we've got to try to build more. And it's a difficult,
at the time, it was very difficult to do that. So then through the 40s, it was very small numbers.
In fact, the original idea was to build more of the Nagasaki types, but they ended up building the
uranium types. And so you had the low dozens of bombs. But then in the 50s, we figured out
smarter ways to build these things. I'm going to use air quotes around smarter. And so it ended
up going from 10s, then when the Soviet Union was able to explode their first bomb, a race got
started. And in hindsight, it's insane the number of bombs that we have and continue to have.
The focus tends to be on the strategic bombs, the really big ones. And that number hit the tens of
thousands that has come down now to the mere thousands. And the thing that gets overlooked is
there are still tens of thousands of tactical nuclear weapons, the ones that are cherish
cherishima size or smaller. And those have never really been counted in treaties or looked at that
closely. And that's actually where the biggest danger today was. So in short, we went from dozens
to tens of thousands on both sides down to thousands of strategic remaining tens of thousands of
tactical that are either in storage or easily assembled. And that's pretty much where we are
today. So I mean, this is the definition of an arms race in the purest sense.
How similar is this to dear antlers and conspicuous displays of prowess in the biological world?
And at some point, didn't people wonder, boy, at 10 and 50 and 100 and 1000 and 5000, we no longer
are representing what's possible militarily to win a war because we are now at the world destroying
level. Did that ever come into the discussion? And how is this different than a biological
display of fitness and strength? Well, it's interesting because when you get in that world,
you start to get focused on the very, very deep technical aspects. And we could go off on long
tangents on why did you need 10,000 weapons? Well, you get into issues like fratricide,
you get in, which is where two bombs going off. Well, is that going to interfere with one going
to interfere with the other or cause the other to not even go off? You then get into issues of
counter force strategies, what kind of targets are you after? And you can talk yourself into tens
of thousands of weapons if you're narrowly focused on the military mission and on targeting and those
kinds of things and completely lose sight of the big picture of, yeah, you just turn the earth into
a wasteland with even 1000 of these weapons. If those 1000 go off and they almost certainly will.
So making that better from a purely technical question standpoint is irrational.
Yeah, it's irrational rationality. I don't know if any other way to put it is you get so focused
on the technical problem, you lose sight of the fact that it's insane. So the nuclear experts
back in the day were siloed, so to speak. They didn't look at this from a systems view.
Yeah, they were, you know, if you're a bomb designer, you're trying to figure out how to
build a better bomb and bomb and it's kind of, it's a little bit psychotic and it scares me when
I think of my inquiry looking back on getting focused on narrow technical issues, because it's
fascinating the physics of it, the figuring out altitudes to set a bomb off at or looking at those
kinds of things. It's a fascinating technical problem. You lose sight of the fact that
you're talking about wiping out civilization and killing millions of people, because it's such a
fascinating and difficult physics problem. And so you put the humanity out of your head,
because you wouldn't be able to solve the math if you didn't.
Okay, let's continue on. Comparing nuclear weapons to conventional weapons. How big
are the bombs that are being used between Russia and Ukraine right now, back and forth?
And how does conventional weaponry compare in magnitude to nuclear weapons?
Yeah, that's a really interesting point, and you can get into an interesting technical
discussion there too, because bomb yields, in other words, how much energy, how much blast
gets generated has actually declined over time. And that's, that's a separate issue. But in terms
of comparison to a bomb that say the US used in Iraq or Afghanistan or even today, the Saudis
using in Yemen or, you know, we're, Israel's using in Syria yesterday. And again, I'm pointing all
that out because we focus on Ukraine, but people are bombing each other all over the world right
now with conventional weapons. The biggest in the US arsenal is called the GBU-31. That's, you know,
we love to have our acronyms on all of our systems. And it's a 2,000 pound explosive.
So it's going to create a blast radius of about 60 meters, you know, 70 yards or so.
And that's the biggest bomb that we use routinely. Now, to give you an idea of what happens when you
talk about nukes, when you're talking about regular explosives, you talk about pounds of explosive.
But with a nuclear weapon, you talk about tens of thousands of pounds of TNT equivalent. So the
Hiroshima bomb by comparison was 14,000 tons, 14 kilotons of explosive energy equivalent. So
that bomb that we routinely use today. That's one ton. That's one ton. And the biggest bomb
the US has ever used, which was the Moab, the massive ordnance airburst bomb in Afghanistan,
was about 11 tons. The smallest weapon in the US arsenal today is 300, nuclear weapon is 300 tons.
And again, that's a point that I think we need to talk about. It's very different about nuclear
bombs. If you've got a conventional bomb, it's pretty much a fixed explosive. But with nuclear
bombs, there's something that we talked about that before dialy yield. And so I had never heard of,
to be honest. And it was funny because you talk about silos. I was thrown off that you had never
heard from that. And then I started asking around and no one that I know has ever heard of dialy
yield, which is no one that I know that's not in the business has never heard of dialy yield.
Essentially, you can program a nuclear bomb. So that beat, it's called a B61 is our current air
drop bomb. It weighs 715 pounds. Okay, so compare that to the 2,000 pound little over 2,000 pound
GPU 31. So this B61, it's a third of the weight. And its smallest setting is
300 tons. So its smallest setting is 300 times as powerful as that 2,000 pound GPU. And just
by changing the setting on that bomb, I can increase its yield to 170,000 tons, literally with a few
keystrokes. Okay, so one bomb that weighs 700 some pounds can have an explosive impact of 300 tons
or 300 times our largest bomb conventionally, or not 300, but 170,000 times, depending on how you
dial it. And how does what happens? What's that? Well, yeah, just depending on the settings,
literally with a few keystrokes and configuration changes. What is happening mechanically in
that bomb to make that difference? A lot of that, of course, is classified. But one thing that is
publicly discussed and known is modern weapons are what are called boosted fission devices.
And what that is a fancy way of saying that normal like the plutonium or uranium bomb
is fission. But what you do is you add a little bit of deuterium or tritium gas.
And that when the bomb goes off, the fission bomb part goes off, that causes fusion,
which is the process that goes on in the sun. And it's a little more technical than that because
you're actually it's the fusions only a few percent of the energy, but it's causing more efficient
fission. That's what's called a boosted device. So basically, by controlling how much of that
tritium gas you're injecting into the core, you can change the yield from 300 to 170,000.
So we have we're working MIT and other places to build fusion reactors
for sustainability, low carbon energy, depletion reasons. But we already are using fusion
or hopefully we won't be using it, but the technology exists in our nuclear weapons,
where we're dropping small suns on cities or whatever. Is that right? Yeah, essentially,
you know, that's again, that's a little bit simplistic interpretation. But yeah, that's
basically what's going on. And again, to be clear, the nice the thing about fusion is that
it's more controllable than fusion in a lot of ways. And it's a harder problem to do it as a
sustained reaction. But in terms of with nuclear bomb design, you can use that to control the
yields by the amount of gas that you're injecting. So how big was Hiroshima bomb? About 15 kilotons,
15,000 15 kilotons. And now this dialy yield one, you said is 170,000. So 12 versions. Yeah,
there are actually versions of the B 61 that can go up to into the 300s. 300,000 tons. Yes.
So that would be 20 times a Hiroshima bomb. Yeah. And we have hundreds of those in the world.
Yeah. Yeah. And that was there's stockpiled in Europe, for instance, which is just to mention,
these are small devices. It's not like you've got a missile or a silo. It's just a looks like a bomb.
You put it on any of the number of our airplanes, and you can go deliver a tremendous amount of
destruction. Okay. Okay. We're going to get to the destruction in a minute. Well, the discussion
of destruction. Why would someone want the ability to have an option of 300 tons or 170,000 tons
of impact? Why is it important to have that dial as an option? What does that give you?
It gives you a lot of flexibility. I'm going to put my Dr. Strangelove hat on here and talk about
it gives you so much more flexibility. Let's say that your target is a missile silo. Well,
what you want is the fireball of the nuclear explosion to hit that silo because it's hardened.
In other words, it's going to blast just the pressure wave isn't going to destroy that silo.
You have to hit it with that 3000 degrees Celsius fireball. Well, that 300 ton device would actually
do that. The fireball is fairly small. The fireball would only be 50 or so meters across.
So you hit that silo with that small device, you could actually destroy that silo,
not cause a lot of surrounding damage. The same if you wanted to take out a communication center
or some other very critical piece of military infrastructure. Well, let's say you want to
destroy an airport. Well, an airport, maybe you would want to use a wider setting to make sure
you've destroyed and damaged all the runways or port facility. For instance, you don't want to
destroy 100 yard area in a port. The port of Savannah is several miles in size. So you don't
want to blow up just one small part of that port. You want to take out the entire port.
In that case, you may want to dial it up to 50. Well, if you've got a city, which we shouldn't
do, we've signed treaties that says we're not going to fire bomb cities, but let's say it reaches
the point where you're in an all out nuclear war and you want to destroy a city. Well, in that case,
maybe you dial it up to 170 or in military terms, let's say you've got a large formation of troops
that you want to destroy. Well, in the open, well, maybe you use a 170. So it gives you a lot of
military flexibility. We're going to talk about the impacts. But what about the perception? If a
missile is launched and heading towards a country, they have no idea whether it's a small bomb or
170,000, they don't know what the dial is. So there's like a game theory embedded in all this,
right? And how does that play into this? Yeah, exactly. And as we are want to say,
it's worse than that. The US has just deployed the upgraded version of the W76 bomb, which is
launched from the Trident missile on our missile submarines. Well, it is a dialy yield, and it
can go from 0.3 to 80 or so kilotons. And so the right now by treaty, we're limited to four of those
per missile, but those treaties are going to expire next year. And we can actually get a 14
warheads on that missile, which means we can hit 14 targets. Well, put yourself how do you hit 14
targets with what? How do you hit 14 targets with one missile or even four? That's, yeah, that's
another piece of the wonderful world of nuclear weapons targeting. It's called a Mer multiple
independent reentry vehicle. So what you have in the missile nose cone, you launch it ballistically,
it's headed towards the target. You have what's called a bus, which is a device that holds the
both the bombs themselves, the warheads reentry vehicles, along with countermeasures, because
you want to throw out a bunch of noise and junk so that the other side's missiles, anti missile
systems won't be able to maybe lock on to your to your incoming weapons. So what it does is at a
certain point in the trajectory, the individual warheads detach, they have little motors and
steering veins and can't go into too much detail on that, but they have mechanisms that they can
steer. Today, they're packed, they have GPS targeting. So they can steer themselves so you
can hit targets several hundred kilometers apart with a single missile. And as of next year, our
current treaty, which limits us to four per missile expires, we can put 14, and of course the Russians
can do the same, can put 14 warheads on a single missile. So imagine you've just seen it, you have
what's called a hot datum, you've seen a submarine fire its missile, you don't know whether it's
one 300 kiloton or four 300, sorry, four 300 ton going after small targets or 1400 kiloton going
after your major cities. So doesn't the mere existence of a dial-a-yield situation, it's
almost like a cloaking device that no one knows what's inside that, doesn't the existence of that
lower the threshold for an escalation? It does, and I am adamantly opposed to those kind of systems.
I think, especially when you put them on strategic platforms, because it's bad enough that they're
on aircraft, but when you put them on a missile submarine, it's extremely dangerous, but and
you know, the game theory types, and when you get stove piped, you look at it and go, well,
you know, it's strategic ambiguity and it gives us more flexibility. You don't want flexibility
with nuclear weapons, and there's a very strong reason. Why not? And that's the question. The
reason is, every time we've gained this out, when you start with a small nuclear exchange,
it ends up going and escalating, you get into a spiral, escalation spiral, and you end up using,
going all the way to strategic and you end civilization. Like the Matthew Broderick movie,
Wargames. That movie was actually partly inspired by a real world event that in the early 80s,
there was an exercise that was done during the Reagan administration called proud profit.
And you'll notice there was such a sea change in the 80s. You had Ronald Reagan, anti-communist,
go look at his speeches from the 70s. You're not going to find anybody more staunchly anti-Soviet,
anti-communist, evil empire, tear down this wall. The rhetoric was extreme. Well,
you had Reagan, Weinberger, the secretary of defense. You had Alexander Haig, who came in as
secretary of state. They came in, you're ready just to show the Russians, the Soviets, and I
tried to make a distinction between Soviets and Russians because there is a huge difference. But
so they came in, they were going to show the Soviets what for. Well, they ran this exercise and
their thinking was, well, we can use a nuclear weapon as a demonstration. We can use it and not
escalate. Every exercise they ran ended up in a global exchange. And you'll notice what happened.
It scared the crap out of everybody, rightly so. The rhetoric toned down and then we started talking.
One of the best treaties this country has ever done was the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty.
It had a tremendous beneficial effect of de-escalating the situation in Europe. And we
abrogated it. We pulled out of that treaty. You look at, there's only, the only...
When did we pull out of it and why?
Roughly four years ago, it was during the Trump administration. But the Obama administration
was set in motion pulling out of it. There's been talk, the Bush to the W. Bush administration
talked about it. There's been discussions of pulling out of it for at least 20 years. So
you can't really blame Trump. He just did what everybody else was gearing up to do. And the
reason is, again, based on military flexibility, so that, well, we want to be able to use for
military planning purposes, these small tactical nuclear weapons. And the other argument was,
well, it's only the US and Russia that's involved in it. What about Iran? What about China? What
about North Korea? So the idea was that if not everybody was in it, then we're just going to
pull out, which we can get to the diplomacy side of that later. But I think it was certainly
foolish because if INF were in play today, a lot of this rhetoric about using nuclear weapons over
Ukraine or in Europe, we wouldn't be talking about it. So, right, exactly. So getting back to Reagan,
evil empire in the 70s, and all of a sudden there was a pulling back of that rhetoric and
discussions started to happen. And here, 40 years later, the amount of nuclear weapons in the world
is larger, they're bigger, they're more powerful, they have better technology, and the rhetoric
is totally shifted. Yeah. Well, just to be really clear, the numbers in raw totals are down some.
The problem is the ones we have left are more usable because of the technology.
They're more accurate, which means you're more likely to use it because you're thinking as,
oh, I can hit just what I'm shooting at. Of course, that's not taking into account things like
fallout. It's not taking into account the psychology of it. And it's not, again, the secondary effects
we didn't talk much about. We talked about blasts, but you look at radiation, you look at fallout,
those kinds of things become important when we talk about consequences. But in terms of
the danger, it's much worse because the frameworks aren't in place for the discussions. As you say,
we're not talking, we don't have treaties. We also have an attitude that we can use these
nuclear weapons and not escalate. And again, proud profit showed very clearly in other exercises.
I referenced that one because it's one that's known publicly. But all the analyses that were done
looking at the big picture, it always ends the same way, and that's in a general exchange.
If someone in our government, in the Department of Defense is wargaming out these scenarios now,
aren't they finding the same result that it's going to end in a general escalation?
Or if they are, are they being shouted down or aren't there people that are doing that anymore?
It blows my mind that that's not happening. I think we've lost a lot of institutional memory
over time. And one thing to remember is that at the time of proud profit, I was in my early 20s.
I was one of those kids that got through high school and college a little bit early and ended
up in government service. And I was, again, on the fringes of these things, but I was in a position
with communications and everything. I had a pretty broad picture. And so I was in my early 20s.
The principles were in their 50s, 60s. Even the people that were at the mid-level were in
their late 40s. Well, we're 40 years later. They're gone. They're not in government anymore. They're
not, you know, a lot of them are deceased. So that's where, again, I think I'm a little bit of a
different voice and perspective because I was so young and seeing these things. And of course,
not so young anymore, but anyone who would have been our age more than likely would have not
been in the room on that. I was just lucky because of the position. So I think that there's a loss
of institutional memory. I think within the Pentagon and within the people who plan these
sorts of things, it is well known. The frightening thing is I don't know that the principles in
this case, like our leadership in the State Department, the CIA, the executive branch,
you notice how different the rhetoric is over Ukraine, for instance, between the State Department
and executive branch are being more militant than the Pentagon is being much more reserved
about a lot of issues. And I think there's a good reason for that.
Because they know the potential escalation and impact and civilization risk.
They do. And I think, too, I think people should be a little bit careful with the rhetoric around
Russia right now. And I've heard in the last, as we recorded this in the last day or so,
there's been a lot of talk about, oh, Putin's threatening to use nuclear weapons.
And again, this gets to the whole area of linguistics and understanding Russian culture
and language, understanding anyone else's language. I'm sure we have the same problem
with China and others. It's just unfamiliar with Russia. What Putin is doing is, in my view,
reminding us of the risks. Yeah, there's a little bit of an implicit threat underneath it,
but he's reminding us that, look, this is dangerous brinksmanship. And if you look at
his statements over the last few years, he has warned that escalations in Ukraine could lead to
this point. So yeah, I don't want to get off on that tangent of how we ended up there. But I think
it's important to realize that what I'm seeing is that from the Russian side, they are very aware
of the dangers of this situation. And there's a myth, I know you've got questions about myths
coming up. And I don't know if you want to start hitting those or...
Well, I want to make sure that we articulate the actual risks from nuclear weapons and the impacts.
Yesterday, you and I exchanged an email where you broke it into immediate and then longer term.
And in the immediate, there was shockwave, thermal, and radiation. And in the longer term,
there was delayed fallout in particulate. Could you just unpack this? We summarized it
in a previous discussion that I will put in the show notes for people to listen to, but
just give us an overview of the impacts from nuclear explosion. And then I'm going to have a
follow-up question on a large exchange of lots of them, what that would do.
Right. And so again, the two key differences really with nuclear weapons, dialy yield,
I think that's critical. The other piece is if you look at conventional explosion,
that's 90-something percent of the energy goes into the blast wave, the shockwave that's
destroying buildings. And you get a little bit of thermal heat and fires from it. But
the vast majority of the energy is the shockwave. Nuclear weapons are very different. The first
that we tend to not talk about too much, but it's important is the fireball.
It's literally the temperature of the sun. It's going to vaporize anything within that range.
Fairly small, a few hundred meters across to maybe a kilometer across from the very large weapons.
But I don't want to forget to mention that because the fireball is what's causing all these other
effects. So the shockwave, that blast wave propagates out at first, it's supersonic. It's
actually moving faster than the speed it sounds. You can imagine, you've heard a sonic boom,
well, you can imagine what that's doing on the surface from a bomb blast. And that causes most
of the immediate structure damage. The other thing that happens is the thermal radiation.
It's burning. It's the temperature of the sun. You're taking a piece of the sun and putting
it on the earth. So it's causing flash burns and fires of anything combustible, sometimes 20,
30 miles from the detonation site. So that's a huge thing. So the first thing is the blast wave
tears up the buildings and stirs things up. Then the thermal radiation sets everything on fire.
So you're getting the worst effects of a shockwave and a firestorm. And then the radiation.
One of the scary, fascinating things about nuclear bombs, and particularly this gets to
the small yield. So you look at, say, a B61 that's set for the 300 ton setting,
the blast size is maybe 300 meters across, but the radiation is deadly out to 600 meters.
So that's where some of your older listeners may remember the neutron bomb or enhanced
radiation weapons. Those went out of fashion in the 80s, partly for the reason that it's kind of
creepy that you can set this bomb off and kill people, but leave the buildings and tanks and
things fairly much intact. And so that went away in the 80s. But, you know, just like fashion and
MTV, we're back, you know, it's back to the 80s. And we've now built those weapons that at the time
were speculative. So that's the key things. You've got the shockwave, you've got thermal radiation,
you've got immediate ionizing radiation. That's your immediate effects. Longer term. Well, you
have, those are delayed effects, things like the fallout. So a lot of material gets sucked
into the blast, is irradiated, becomes radioactive, you've got debris from the bomb.
You know, even at a high end nuclear blast, you're only consuming 30 or so percent of the
material in the device. So the rest of that radioactive material just gets spewed all over the
place. And so that becomes radioactive fallout. That can fall for hundreds of miles away from the
site and last for hundreds of years. So you think about Chernobyl, you know, we're still talking
about the fact that people driving through that area stir up dust. You've got areas in Europe,
hotspots, where you can't drink the milk from the cows because the radioactive isotopes are still
in the soil, it ends up in the grass. And this is not in Russia. We're talking about
in parts of Poland, in parts of Germany, where you still get radioactive milk from cows,
eating stuff that's left over from a nuclear reactor accident 40 years ago. Well, imagine
you set off a few dozen or a few hundred nuclear weapons, again, a limited exchange.
You're going to have these hotspots all over the world for decades that's contaminating our food
and water. And that's just the immediate radiation effects, the particulates, the dust, the soot.
That ends up getting blasted into the stratosphere. It's going to hang out there for years. So you
potentially can end up with even a small exchange of a few dozen weapons could cause cooling in the
atmosphere, which could impact crops, the particulates, the settling, the obstructing of the normal
sunlight can interfere with the oceanic food chain. You collapse or damage the oceanic
food chain. You just caused a real problem for all life on this planet. And that's not even from,
that's before we get to the really bad scenarios of thousands of nukes going off.
You, in a recent email to me, said there are three countries that have the potential to destroy life
on earth. That was your quote. Can you explain how that would happen? And to be clear, because I
actually, I actually had a, there was an ecologist that corrected me on that. Of course,
we're not talking about destroying life on earth. We are talking about destroying virtually anything
bigger than a cockroach. So to me, that's right. Yeah. I mean, you're, so to be clear, you're
complex life, complex life. Yeah. So
that seems fantastical exaggeration to me. So I would like you to be explicit on how that could
happen. It isn't. The reason being that for twofold, first off, with a large scale exchange of say,
3000, again, remember that strategically each side has, you know, on the order of 2000 strategic
weapons, these are the big missiles, the submarine launch, let's say that half of those on each side
get deployed and go off. So you have that's 2000 nuclear weapons going off in the Northern
Hemisphere, a few in the Southern Hemisphere. So the amount of radiation, the amount of material
ejected into the atmosphere, roughly equivalent, we think that the problem with some of these
is that the modeling tends to get into classified materials, but there have been some public
studies, that kind of an exchange. You're talking same level of impact as the asteroid impact at
the end of the Cretaceous that killed off the dinosaurs. So right there is your. Because of what?
Because of the particulate in the atmosphere and shutting out the sun or? Yeah, exactly. That's
the nuclear winter scenario. You get particulates, you get soot ejected into the stratosphere that
causes a tremendous diminution of sunlight and energy reaching the surface. And that's, we have
that's a separate, that's separate than the radiation, completely separate from the radiation.
You're talking about having 30% of the Northern Hemisphere uninhabitable for several centuries,
not to mention all the radioactive dust blowing around and contaminating everything else. So
even assuming you don't have catastrophic ecosystem collapse from the cooling and loss of
sunlight, the radiation is going to be such a severe problem. And that's not even getting to
some of the other issues that we talked about, that obviously that kind of exchange,
you've just destroyed all of the mechanisms of human civilization, forget economies and energy
use and all those other things. The, you know, when you've killed off 2 billion people and destroyed
most of the functioning economies in the world, you know, the people that are left, it's not going
to be a pretty sight. But again, the most likely scenario is you have catastrophic
nuclear winter, you end up with catastrophic ecosystem failures. And that's before you even
get to the radioactive effects and radiation effects. I wanted to have this conversation
with you because I think more people need to understand the seriousness of this risk.
And I was hoping that people would listen to it and think about it and share it.
But I'm just, my initial reaction is I'm going to lose listeners because of this conversation.
Here's the thing. We can do something about this. Okay. We've already, we're going to get to that.
We've already, we've already, and again, it is depressing, but we already did something about
this once. In the 80s, we actually did significant de-escalation. But back to the, the topic at
hand, that big exchange, you get into arguments whether or not it's possible. I think it is
because I think people in the heated moment get dumb pretty fast.
Well, it's at that point though, it's, at that point, it's almost the evolutionary game theory
of spite, which is, oh my God, all these missiles are heading our way. Those bastards, we're done,
we better take them with us. I mean, it's like, it's, if I can't win, I'm going to,
I'm going to lose and make them pay more sort of thing.
So that's absolutely true. And although it does raise an interesting question of during the Cold
War, we came very close to exchanges. And they were prevented not by policy, not by,
you know, brilliant technical systems. They were prevented by single moral and ethical individuals
who said, wait a minute, the consequences of that, I'm not going to follow instructions.
That's the irony of, of the preventing nuclear wars. A lot of times it's people going against
the rules and saying, you know, I don't want it in civilization.
Isn't that just a profound insight that there's this tragedy of the commons and collective
action problems and the cleverness of our species in, and nuclear weapons is, is the pinnacle of
cleverness, trumping wisdom and the super organism and all that. But the things that actually
provide wisdom are at the individual human level. And, and that that's how this has been
avoided in the past.
It's individual human beings making the humane decision.
Could that happen again?
Uh, I think it could. I hope it could. I would like to believe that it could. It scares me that
unfortunately part of the thing that we're discussing, you know, does, I grew up with the
threat of nuclear weapons. I knew what it would do. Are the young officers, the middle grade
officers and middle grade people in the State Department, even at the upper levels, are they
aware? Are they just going to let things go on autopilot? Are they
as frightened of nuclear war as they should be? And I wouldn't, that's, I think, a very important
point is that doesn't mean being paralyzed. It doesn't mean that you just give up and, and
but what it does mean is that you understand at a deep human level. That's what I was referring
to earlier. The problem is it's so easy as an academic exercise. It's horrific. I see it in
myself how fascinating it is that you see the physics, you see the complexity of the problem,
and you start to go down those little rabbit holes, but it's, we're talking about human
life here and the life on this, on earth. And I would like to think that is foremost in people's
minds, but you know, the guys making the decisions in the 80s had to do duck and cover exercises in
elementary school. The guys making the decisions now didn't have to go through that. And I'm not
sure that's a good thing. Okay, two more questions on this topic, and then we'll move on. Number one,
you've just outlined a complex life-ending scenario where thousands of these get
exchanged from multiple parties. But what would, what would a regional war like,
say Pakistan and India with 100 nuclear bombs, not thousands, what would that do to our biosphere
and our planet and our civilization? Something that's not the worst case, but still a reasonably
possible bad case. Yeah, so again, to break it down, you've got roughly 10
nuclear countries in the world right now that have significant arsenals. Of those three,
the big three have the capacity to have the big civilization ending thing. And those are also
have the potential to participate in regional conflicts. So yeah, you could have scenarios
where the US and Russia exchange a few dozen nukes and back off at some point. Again, the
escalation spiral says that that's very risky, but it's all as possible. You've got Israel, of course,
is probably the number four in terms of number of weapons, even though they don't acknowledge it.
You've got England and France both have significant arsenals. You've got India, Pakistan is the one
that people have been looking at in particular. So you do have these nations that are out there
that have the few dozens to 100 scenario. There you get into, again, the prompt effects,
obviously tremendous loss of life. You get a lot of material ejected into the stratosphere.
You're talking cooling of, you know, maybe five to 10 degrees. You're talking about changing northern
hemisphere growing patterns. You're talking about radioactive hotspots. And one of the things that
you've got to be careful with, a lot of the studies are assuming the old way of targeting
with nuclear weapons where you're trying to maximize structure blast damage, more modern weapons,
and in counter force scenarios, you're actually detonating the device at the surface. And I realize
that may sound technical, but it's important because a surface detonation, the fireball,
is vaporizing material and throwing it into the atmosphere. So that throwing it into the stratosphere.
That's very different. So I've seen studies that are trying to use wildfire analogies.
For instance, the big wildfires in Siberia, and there are people saying, oh, well, that's the
equivalent of a few dozen nuclear weapons. And I actually know it isn't, because with modern
targeting and the way that these various nations intend on using their weapons, that material
wouldn't be in the troposphere, low altitude, it would be ejected into the stratosphere,
which causes a lot more of the cooling scenarios. So again, back to the focus on the point is,
you're talking about changing growing seasons. We see what happens when we've got problems with
supply chain. We'll imagine a 30, 40% reduction in the amount of food that was growing in the
northern hemisphere over two or three years. That wouldn't, that would be ugly. Radiation
hotspots, again, those are going to be a factor scattered, a few dozen of those around the world.
So it's even a small quote unquote exchange has planetary consequences. And there, as you just,
as we just said, the number of players expands from just the big three to 10. Plus, there's a
few countries that are, if not ours, in one case that I'm not going to name, are months to years
away from joining the nuclear club. And so that's where the diplomacy comes in.
So here's a tangential question to the focus of today's conversation, which we're going to get to,
which is how to avoid a near term nuclear exchange. But I'm just wondering, with more and more people,
and I'm happy about this part of it, becoming aware of the externalities of humanity functioning
as a heat engine on climate change in the future. There's a lot of people who now and in the future
are concerned that we're on a runaway greenhouse gas pathway and understanding the cooling effect
of a couple of nukes. Is it possible that that becomes some sort of a geoengineering path for
crazy people or rational people in the future? What are these people missing? Can you speak to that?
Or am I just, is that implausible? I've actually heard that in some discussions before,
so I don't think I'm totally off base. No, and it's from people that don't understand the secondary
and tertiary effects, to be just brutally honest. If they hear, oh, cooling, all right, well, okay,
what about radiation? What about particulate fallout? It's just an insane idea. There's
geoengineering plans that don't involve vaporizing and killing millions of people.
If you want to go down the geoengineering route, this isn't the way to do it. And I know there's
people who look at it from population control or unintentional geoengineering. And I've seen
those discussions and I would call them the more fringe environmental movement. And even from some
people that I respect that, I have to say, whoa, stop, have you ever thought about radiation? Have
you thought about the fact that you're likely, even with a small exchange, I saw there was a
cartoon of these dolphins watching a nuclear bomb and they're like, hey, yay, we're free of the
humans. It wouldn't work like that because, again, you start changing the chemistry of the oceans and
collapse the ocean food chain. Who's going to go first? It's going to be the dolphins because that's
their dinner being grown out there. So it's just an insane thing, but it shows how little people
today really understand about the consequences and impacts of nuclear war and why the first part
of our discussion was so vital before we get to the second part is you've got to understand just
how different nukes are. Well, why is that though? I mean, I'm a smart guy. I know a lot of smart
people. I don't know crap about this situation until the last few months. We talked about this
before that it's risk homeostasis, things never happened. So we just kind of adjust our behaviors
to include the things that we shouldn't be doing. But how can the average person be aware of this?
There's so few people that are as knowledgeable as you are. Well, a lot of it boils down to what
happened with the collapse of the Soviet Union because when the Soviet Union collapsed, the US
was left as the dominant unipolar force in the world. So there was really, China was not yet
a major power. They were still at the very beginning of their economic boom and expansion.
You had the Soviet Union broke up. The nukes all went back to Russia, but Russia was consumed with
its internal economic issues and its political stability. So at that time, there was who was
going to watch a nuke at us? Where was the scenario? There was some talk after the 2000s,
well, of a terrorist, but a single terrorist bomb. It's like, oh, that's bad. It kills people in this
one city. But clearly, you're not discussing for one or even two or three devices. You're not talking
about the kinds of consequences we are now with a few dozen or much less hundreds of thousands.
So for a generation or longer, for 30 years, we have had a world where there weren't any real
rational public scenarios to use where the public would, before the Ukraine conflict,
when did people really talk about there being a nuclear war? And it just wasn't,
it's something that people talked about because there weren't any viable scenarios that they saw.
So two things happened. It dropped off the public radar. But the other thing that happened was
the change in our weapons mix that makes nuclear weapons more usable. So those two things happened
completely out of the public perception. Here's the next question. Why do we need nuclear weapons
at all? That's an interesting question. First off, it's the kind of thing that once they were
developed, then it develops an internal logic and an internal self-sufficiency. So I think that the
talk about banning nuclear weapons, I have sympathy for it. It's very idealistic. It's completely
utterly impractical. You know, we have them, we need to learn how to live with them and manage them
because it's just not going to happen to get rid of them. So as we talked earlier about history,
we can see how they got developed. And yeah, it made sense at the time in the 40s, we didn't really
understand radiation and secondary and tertiary. We didn't really understand thermal effects.
That was something that didn't really start to develop until we actually did testing with
nuclear bombs. So we backed into it. We stumbled into a world with nuclear weapons. And so once we
were there, then the logic of the Cold War took over and put air quotes around logic. And so we ended
up with these tens of thousands. And so we hashed through that. Where we are now, and there's a
narrow technical case to be made for them. And you'll see things like, well, you know, they have
military utilization. And I have a real problem with the military utilization because of the
escalation spiral. I would ask two key questions for people that believe that there is a first use
case for nuclear weapons, which is, first off, what's the moral case for using a nuclear weapon
against a non-nuclear adversary? Again, the destruction, the secondary effects. How do you
justify using a nuclear weapon? I've never seen a good ethical argument. Forget international law.
It would also be illegal international law, but that doesn't stop country. So what's the use case
where it makes sense to use them against a non-nuclear adversary? Against a nuclear adversary,
the problem is, well, how do you avoid an escalation spiral? And so it's almost like nuclear weapons
are not usable as long as you have them. And so that seems to be where we're at with we need them
because we have them. And because it's almost impossible for everyone to agree to get rid of them,
then we need to figure out how to reduce the risks and manage them
rather than try to figure out how to get rid of them because it's not going to happen.
But militarily, are there reasons that are budget related or effectiveness related where a
nuclear, small nuclear, tactical nuke is the correct military option? Or I don't even understand
how to praise the question. No, no, that's actually the correct. Is there an operational
application where a nuclear weapon has a unique role that no other weapon can perform?
Today, the answer to that is very different to what it was 10 years ago, much less 20 years ago.
And so I'm going to skip over all that history. If anybody cares, we can discuss that or go through,
ask me a question on the blog and I'm happy to go into it. Today, the range of applications is
extremely narrow. And what the main thing that you get from a nuclear weapon right now is the
fireball, which can vaporize even the most hardened target. So if you've got a missile silo with
a reinforced concrete shell that a normal bomb would not penetrate and you want to disable,
there's a nuclear weapon in that silo or missile in that silo that you want to make sure can't be
launched, you could fire a nuclear weapon at that, vaporize that silo and disable it.
That's still... Dumb question. Dumb question. When you do that, does that detonate the opposing
nuclear weapon simultaneously or not? Generally not. Nukes are designed in a way that it's hard
to make them go off accidentally. There's a lot of technical reasons that I won't go into on that,
but they're intentionally and just by the physics of it, a lot of things have to go right for a
nuke to go off. And we've dropped nukes before. There's actually a nuclear bomb sitting in the
ocean probably five miles from where I'm sitting. Nobody knows where it is. It accidentally dropped
in a collision. Yeah, in the collision, there was an exercise and there was a nuclear bomb on the
aircraft and it was a mid-air collision and it's somewhere off the coast of Tidey. But anyway.
It's armed, but no one's going to detonate it because they don't know where it is.
Well, and plus, whether it's had the pit or not, the paperwork's not clear, which is in itself
is scary. But yeah, there've been live bombs drop and they don't go off. It's hard to make
it go off accidentally. So the answer to your question is no. What are the social and geopolitical
risks or interactions currently that increase the risk of a nuclear exchange? You can talk about
Russia and the US and NATO and Ukraine, but just generally, what is the situation? Maybe you could
just briefly describe what is the first use doctrine and how has it been used and start there?
That's a great point, Nate. And it's one that I would bet most Americans don't realize that
we are the only country in the world that has never had any kind of a no first use.
And in fact, we say that we can use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear adversaries.
We've said that we can, the last, there's the nuclear posture review is currently going on. It's
the classified version's been released. Hopefully the public version will be out here in a few weeks.
Basically, the one that's currently enforced says that we would use a nuclear weapon in
response to a cyber attack that took down our electrical grid. I mean, literally that is US
policy. Biden people are hopefully going to change that and rethink it. But we've said that we'll do
it for biological warfare attacks for all kinds of non-nuclear. And again, to me, that's irrational
for all the reasons we've just gone through because nukes are different. Yeah, it's US policy.
Oh, if there's a major terrorist attack, we'll nuk your country. We're the only country in the
world with those. Is this because we want to scare people into doing what we want? Or does
this just piss people off? I mean, internationally, I know nothing about this. Why is it that we're
the only country that's not in that club that says we're not going to do first use?
And it's arrogance. And we've already used them, hubris, I would say, rather than
arrogance to be really pedantic. But you know, there is that fear factor. It's like strategic
ambiguity is a concept. And I mentioned that word before. But just to be clear, what that means is
if you don't, in game theory, if you don't know exactly what I'm going to do and you think I might
do something crazy, it's going to limit your actions. That's the simplest kind of phrase.
Well, the problem is you're talking about strategic ambiguity around an issue that
has the potential to end civilization on this planet. I don't think that's a place where you
want to have ambiguity because ambiguity works both ways. You're saying, maybe I will,
maybe I won't. Well, the other side may go, okay, I'm going to roll the dice that maybe you won't.
So, I think that's an incredibly dangerous thing. It may work for some kinds of conventional
scenarios. And I can see where it is useful. You look at the whole, like, Taiwan issue,
the ambiguity may have been beneficial because it gives both sides some room to maneuver. But
when it comes to nuclear weapons use, I think you need very bright lines that says,
here is where we will use them. And in effect, that's pretty much what Russia has done. It's
certainly what China has done. Russia has been modifying their nuclear use doctrine. And you
get into these chicken and egg arguments, but largely based on our changes. So we've escalated
and put nuclear weapons into Europe that under INF were actually previously banned. And so now
Russia has said, well, we're going to respond in turn. And so you get into this, again, we've been
in a soft escalation spiral probably since the mid 2000s, 2005 or so. It got worse after 2014.
And now we're in a very dangerous place in that spiral. How does using a small nuke
automatically or likely lead to using big nukes? In other words, how do things escalate like that?
Well, first off, you run the accident. I'm going to say accidental. As we discussed earlier,
let's say that you have decided to use a nuclear weapon to disable. So you've got Russian, let's
use this scenario, you've got big Russian formations and swept through Ukraine. They're on the Polish
border. You're afraid they're going to cross the border and you want to stop it. And you know that
NATO conventional forces aren't sufficient to the job. Well, maybe you say, well, we will use
tactical nuclear weapons to break up those formations. So you launch, you know, you activate,
you launch weapons against that way. Well, obviously, Russia is going to say, well, we want to stop,
we want to disable the storage sites for those nuclear weapons to stop you from using them again
or in the first place. So that takes a... Now, Russia's got some additional flexibility because
of their hypersonic weapons. But if we used a nuke on them, it would be very logical for them to
respond by hitting those air bases. Well, now you're starting to get cases where there's going
to be secondary effects. What you have a nuke go off, there's going to be fallout, you're going to
have civilian casualties. The time to respond gets shorter and shorter because you're using missiles
with five minute flight times or aircraft with 15 to 30 minute flight times. And so
you see activity and you start shooting at it and you start to get where there's an exchange,
then you get popular pressure of, wow, we've just lost now two or three million civilians
from a limited nuclear exchange. Maybe we need to go ahead and I can... Maybe we should go ahead
and do a counter-force strike, the technical term saying, we're worried the other side's going to
launch their strategic weapons or their city destroying weapons. Let's hit them first.
So if there's a missile that goes across a country's border, like between Russia and Germany or,
I don't know, pick your destination, how do people know that it's not just a conventional
bomb or it has a nuclear war? Right now, for ballistic missiles, only nuclear weapons are on
ballistic missiles, the long range, like submarine launch. Now, there are theater ballistic missiles
that... We use cruise missiles mostly, but there are tactical ballistic missiles that are conventional,
but generally, like a submarine launch missile or an ICBM, those are all nuclear because it's an
expensive piece of hardware. You're not going to put... So if there's a submarine launched
missile somewhere, the actors involved can assume it has a nuclear warhead. Right. And what you
don't know is how big that warhead is and you don't know... Initially, you know the general area
it's going. Right now, you... But does it matter? I mean, does it matter, seriously? Does it matter
if it's at the lower end of the dial yield or all the way on the higher end? You know, it depends
on who you are. If I'm the decision maker, I may look at it and decide to ride it out
and then respond once I know... If I know my force is survivable, maybe I decide to let it ride to
see what actually happens and then use other means. And this is another thing where you get into
deterrence and the reason why I think Russia is not likely to be used first, it's not their doctrine
to use first except in an existential threat to the Russian nation. But the other reason is
they've got so much moral authority on this, they've never used a nuclear weapon. The U.S.,
we've used nukes. You know, we're the bad guys. And in the international community, that carries
quite a bit of weight. People don't trust the U.S. to not use a nuclear weapon because we've
demonstrated the ability. And you look at all the arguments now, people say, yeah, we were right to
do the Hiroshima Nagasaki blasts. But there's a pretty big body of literature which says
wasn't really necessary. But just to be clear, I think it was probably the right thing to do
at the time because we know a lot more now than we knew then. But still, just from a credibility
standpoint, again, we have a explicit first use doctrine which outlines all kinds of things.
There are people right now saying, well, we need to fire a nuke at Russia to show them we're serious.
I mean, my God, you're saying use a nuclear weapon to make a point?
But you hear those discussions, I'm sure you've seen in Reddit, some of them by
members of our Senate. So it's crazy. So there's dozens of additional things we could talk about
here. Let's first acknowledge that the world would be better off with no nuclear weapons,
but also that realistically, that's not going to happen anytime soon. There are long-term
solutions. There are transition solutions. But given the stakes that we face, and I think
both explicitly and implicitly in this conversation, you have articulated how freaking
dangerous even small nukes because of the escalation potential are to our civilization,
our biosphere, our oceans, et cetera. And don't forget the effects of even
water weapons. Again, as we've discussed, even a few weapons, even one, you're creating
Chernobyl-type radioactive hotspots. So nuclear weapons are even small, quote-unquote weapons,
are such a leap in effect. Conventional war is bad enough, and I know I've been in a few,
and you can't imagine the horrors of places like Beirut or Sarajevo. I mean,
I'll get checked up over it even just thinking about stuff. But that's nothing compared to what
one nuclear weapon can do. And when you start to look at the secondary effects, so that's why I
keep telling people, yeah, you can get overwhelmed by the big nuclear exchange, but we've got to
make sure that not even one of these things gets used. I think you've made that clear. So the rest
of this discussion, I would like to talk not about the long term and the transition, but specifically
in the short term, how can we as a world, as a nation, and even as individuals minimize
the risk of horrible outcomes in the coming months or year.
So let's unpack this. First of all, what could we do at an international level? I know you have
some suggestions. Well, and I actually like to start with what individuals can do. And the first
thing, and I- Yeah, what can individuals do? And I gotta say, and, you know, we talk in social
movements and different things to talk about, well, awareness. Okay, you're taking the first
step. If you're listening to this podcast, and if you're thinking it through and saying, yeah,
you know, these guys have a point, this is scary, I need to do something. Okay, that's step zero.
Because if you don't, if you're not aware of the problem, and as we've just discussed,
haven't been a problem for 30 years. So it's not, there's no blame to go around to say
why you don't know. But okay, now you know, now you got to do something about it. So
there are things that the US can do immediately to reduce the risk of a nuclear war. And some of
them are terribly popular with some people within the military complex and within the decision
making. But you know, that's what there's a lot of actions that politicians are encouraged to take,
because people tell them, no, you're not going to do this bad thing in our name. So I would start with
this. We need a clear nuclear use doctrine. I have not seen the current NPR, the Nuclear
Posture Review, but I am not expecting from what I've heard that there's going to be
significant changes in that risk regard. We need to have a very clear no first use policy.
We need to have a very clear deterrence policy of saying, here's where we will be willing to use a
and make it very clear that our force posture, know what the weapons we have fits that doctrine.
Part of the problem right now is we like to sign UN declarations saying that we don't want to be,
you know, that nuclear weapons should never be used. But then we develop these weapon systems
that make it easier for them to use. So that would be my first point, we need to have a solid,
publicly known nuclear use doctrine. If that was created, if the US did that,
would that minimize the risk of other countries actually cheating on first use? And would that
like lower the temperature on this whole thing? I think so, because if you, you know, right now,
it is ambiguous. And so the potential adversaries may say, well, maybe we need to get the first
lick in. Well, if you've said, we're not going to use them this way, and you've changed your
weapons mix to make it clear that it's a retaliatory force, not a first use force. I think it is
tremendously stabilizing, which brings me to the second point. There's no military reason for the
W76-2. That's the submarine launched missile, the submarine launched small nuclear platform.
It's just insane. It's destabilizing. It's pissed off the Chinese and the Russians. And, you know,
it's just, militarily, it makes very little sense for a lot of reasons, happy to go to technical
details at some point. I think the third thing is we can de-escalate by reducing, and we started
this modernization program. I think we do need to modernize our so-called land-based deterrent,
the ballistic missiles. I do think we need to make sure our nuclear deterrent is solid, but making
more tactical nuclear weapons that are easier to use in a lower threshold, we could stop that.
President Biden could stop that tomorrow. As soon as he hears this podcast, he could sign the
executive order saying, I'm going to withdraw the W76s, and we're going to suspend the B61 upgrades,
pull the tactical-yield weapons out of Europe. You do that. It does two things. It hasn't really
hurt us that much from a military flexibility standpoint. The second thing it does is sends a
very clear message to Russia that, okay, we may be willing to fight you conventionally. We will
fight you with nuclear weapons if we have to, but it isn't going to be a first resort. And so that
cools things off. And given how bloody, messy, and slow conventional wars are, people really don't
want conventional wars. And so even Russia, all the demonization talk about Russia, I think is
it's helpful rhetoric if you're trying to gen up support for a policy. But I know the Russians,
I know some of these people, they don't want this war anymore than we do. They just feel painted into
a corner. And so that's where diplomacy comes in. One of the things that I've said to a couple of
people lately is the only thing worse than not recognizing the next Hitler is calling somebody
the next Hitler when they're not. And unfortunately, I feel like that's where we all with Russia that
and we're bordering on that with China as well, that you demonize people, you can't talk to them.
And if you look at what happened in the 80s, Reagan said horrible things about communism and
about the Soviet regime. But when it came down to it, he did business with them, trust, but verify
all those things that came out of the 80s. And if a hard nose cold warrior, you know,
rabid anti communist like Ronald Reagan can step forward, shake the man's hand and do the INF
treaty. Well, you know, we can do that with Vladimir Putin. So your three ideas are number one,
a crystal clear, no first use doctrine that kind of rejects the escalate to deescalate
theme. Secondly is discontinue the W76 dash to program, which are these missiles launched from
subs with dialy yields. And then the third and presumably more controversial advice would be
to remove the small tactical nukes from the arsenal, which don't have any realistic use
anyways. How would at least the first two of those things be initiated? What's the path to
making those happen? The technical path is the president signs an executive order and it happens.
Now, obviously, it's a little more complex than that. But basically, that's just political will
on the part of the senior leadership of the country. Now, the way it happens in the real world
is people listening to this podcast, contact their congressman and their senators and say,
look, we've got this huge problem. We need you to deescalate. We need you to listen to us that
we are afraid of a potential nuclear war. We need you to become informed because I've had
conversations with elected officials, and they don't know any more about dialy yield than you
did three weeks ago. And that's kind of scary. And but it's also understandable because it hasn't
been at the forefront for 30 years. So the way it starts is the public tells their elected leadership,
hey, we need to deal with this. And then the pressure builds and hopefully it causes them
to reevaluate where things are. And if they don't, well, you look at what happened in the 80s,
you had protests in the streets over it. You had the nuclear freeze movement in Europe.
But again, the first step is contact our elected officials and push them to study this problem
and to make sure they get multiple opinions, not just from those that are in the
nuclear establishment that is so invested in all kinds of these weapons. And again,
I don't object to nuclear weapons as a deterrent force. I think it's actually an important part
of our weapons mix. I just think we need to be very clear how we're going to use them and then
have of the weapons systems mix that is not going to be more dangerous than not having them.
So if we were to sign a no first use doctrine and discontinue the W76 missiles, how would that
impact our military ability to still do our objectives? And how would that be perceived
in the international community? How it would affect it in concrete terms is absolutely not at all.
It would have absolutely zero impact. You would get some people that would argue
around the fringes, but I would be more than happy to have that debate,
particularly if we could have it in a room with no windows and lead lining where it would be overheard
classified information reasons. I'd be happy to have that discussion. But so I would argue
there is no that would cause no harm. Now the second point is kind of interesting because
that's where it gets more into diplomacy, international law, US credibility, all those kinds
of things. I think it would be a positive because we can go out and say, look, we're being responsible
here. We recognize there's a problem. Our past policies may have made things a little bit worse.
So we are now saying we're going to step back and now it is up to you, Russia and China. We want
a new INF treaty. And that's really my third point is more on the negotiation side is we want to,
we can then have the credibility to go to the international community to work within these
institutions and say, hey, we want treaties. We want verification. We pulled out of open skies.
We pulled out of a number of these verification treaties that were in place during the Cold War,
which is another thing I think the majority of people may not realize. So those are things we
can do. And I think that taking those initial steps unilaterally, first of all, it doesn't really
hurt us much if at all from a military capacity standpoint, but it gives us enormous leverage
to go to the international community and to put other countries like Russia and China on the spot
and say, look, we want to deescalate here. We want to make sure that we do that in a way where you
don't take advantage of the situation, but also that we're not playing games with the end of the
world. So you and I often talk about systemic risks to our system and we look at what might happen
and worst case things. There may be a silver lining, and of course, I'm being kind of utopian
here, but there may be a silver lining in the Ukraine-Russia situation in that it may de facto
act as a modern, proud profit if things get scary and the rhetoric, and it accelerates
conversations of the type that you just advised and suggested that it refreshes our memory of
the dangers and the long-term permanent dangers to our planet and our civilization from
an exchange of nukes and gives us a chance of grasping towards wisdom instead of
this cleverness dopamine power feedback loop that seems to have been ongoing for the last couple
decades. Do you have any thoughts on that? Yeah, and in fact, you just reminded me of what I think
is a very important point. People say, oh, well, Ukraine, if we don't draw the line here, if we're
not strong, then Putin's going to take over Europe or whatever. But remember during the Cold War,
and of course, you don't, is before my time, too. You think of Czechoslovakia, you think of
the Prague Spring and the Soviets going and using military force invading, taking over. You look at
Afghanistan, the multi-year war in Afghanistan, the multi-year wars in Vietnam. We had wars where
Americans and Soviets were shooting at each other, yet we managed to avoid a nuclear war.
Part of the reason for that is we were aware of the risks and consequences, and we took deliberate
steps to de-escalate. So there's a track road here, there's nothing new. And guess what? The
Soviets didn't take over Europe because they knew the risks, we knew the risks, we made it clear.
So I don't buy these arguments that say that, oh, we have to act strong, we have to engage in
brinksmanship in order to prevent Russian aggression. That's just history shows otherwise,
and I think that's just posturing. So to get to your point, I think that we can be rational about
this. We can look at it in a hardness way and not lose our humanity, and we have to. The stakes are
too high not to. I agree with that. Simultaneously, I wonder, especially in your case, how can a human
being study this subject and be an expert and discuss it calmly? It's just so fricking overwhelming
and frightening. It is interesting, and I kind of look at myself sometimes. I backed into this in
a way, ended up in this world. And what's interesting is I, of course, study my main
research area as natural disasters, although lately it seems like humans have been competing with
Mother Nature for that. And so when I got started, it was emergency management was known as civil
defense. And so the thinking was, hey, we can get blown up by nuclear bomb today. It's a good day. So
you had a very relaxed attitude about hurricanes and tornadoes. And you learn pretty quickly in
all of these fields that you have to shut your humanity off, or else you can't think rationally.
The problem is, if you do shut your humanity off, then you have to, then you end up going down
these rabbit holes where you're doing target planning and looking at overpressures and
fireball heights and all of these things that go into it. And it's a fascinating technical problem.
So somehow every few minutes, you have to remember that you're talking about human beings, you're
talking about the natural world. And it's a hard problem. And it's a frightening bit of our nature
that you've talked about in biological terms that our brains are wired this way, that we're
fascinated by the problem and lose sight of what should be this humanity. And it scares me. It
really terrifies me how my brain works and how the brains of people I know and respect end up going
down these same kind of rabbit holes. And I think that in my case, what I won't say snapped me out
of it, but put me into perspective was going to places like Beirut and seeing the horror of even
a little war and realizing this is nothing, this is trivial compared to what a nuclear exchange could
be. So I in seven minutes have to do a lecture to a hundred college students on ecological
economics. So I'm going to need to shift gears in a couple minutes. But based on what you just
said, I'm thinking ahead to this lecture, one of the slides I have is I talk about supernormal
stimuli and that the dollar is the biggest supernormal stimuli. In other words, a modern
invention that hijacks our brain in a deleterious, maladaptive way relative to our ancestral
environment. And I've always said that the dollar is the biggest supernormal stimuli there is. And
now after talking to you, I actually think it's nuclear weapons are the biggest supernormal stimuli.
It's something that, you know, it's not a spear or a knife from our ancestral time because it's
many, many orders of magnitude larger in impact and scale than weaponry in our tribal past.
You know, the power is intoxicating in the sense that, you know, I know things about,
I mean, I know how to configure a W or, you know, a B 61 to destroy a city block or a city. I mean,
there, you talk about the dopamine and the adrenaline in the testosterone hit from having
that kind of power and awareness. It's why young men and women now go off to war because
they think they're invincible and they can get the other guy without the other guy getting them,
but you don't have to look him in the face. That's what worries me the most is in the moment,
we've never had this happen in our lifetimes. And it's just almost a matter of time before
something escalates. And that's why I think your work and thank you for
sharing your wisdom on this, because I have no idea what to do, but at least you've given us a
framework for how to think about it and to get people involved because we have a lot of these
things that are real pressing risks to our futures and our presence. So thank you for your concern
and patriotism and knowledge and expertise on this. Do you have any closing thoughts, Chuck?
I'll say it with feeling where Scrooge said it, joking about humanity is not Scrooge, but
humanity is my business. And you think of, you know, you said patriotism. Patriotism is
so important. And the most patriotic thing you can do is making sure your country doesn't
do something wrong or get wiped out and call shirts. The senator very famously said,
my country right or wrong, if she be right, I stand by her. If she be wrong, I set her right.
And so that's kind of how I see this. And people want to talk about, oh, Russia did this, Russia
did that. Yeah, I'm not a citizen of the Russian Federation, I'm a citizen of the United States.
I want to make sure we're doing what's right. We can deal with Russia and deal with them on their
terms. But we got to take care of ourselves and do the right thing first. Thank you, my friend.
Always a pleasure. I always learn a lot. I always leave a little shaken up. But I appreciate you
and your wisdom. Thanks. And I hope that people don't get scared by this, but get stimulated
and start thinking about it and start asking questions because that's how this is going to
end up being resolved. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
