Hello. I want to welcome you to this course on how to think like an economist. My name's
Randy Bartlett. I'm currently professor of economics at Smith College in Northampton,
Massachusetts. For longer than I really cared to admit, I've been teaching economics at
colleges and universities throughout the nation. And during that time, it's occurred to me
that there's a certain essence, a core, of what it means to think like an economist.
And over the course of the next 12 lectures, I'm going to try to share that thinking with you.
We're going to pay some special attention to the concept of rationality and decision making,
and whether you're making personal business or policy choices.
The New York Times nonfiction bestseller list has really been extraordinary for economists in recent years.
Oh, there have been the normal stories of surviving mountaineering disasters.
There have been the tales of hoard crimes and the hardworking journalists, detectives and lawyers
who all solve them. There have been books about the newest diets and the celebrities who adhere to them.
But what's been most unusual about this is there have been a number of books about how economists think.
Economic thinking volumes on the bestseller list, some for months at a time.
Not since 1848 when Thomas Carlisle first dubbed economics the dismal science.
Economics books enjoyed that kind of popularity. These aren't books about success in business.
They're not books about investing for wealth.
Generally, economics books are like discrete mathematics textbooks.
They're interesting to a few, but not likely to achieve topseller status.
Yet there they are. Stephen Levitt and Stephen Rubner's Freakonomics.
Tim Harford's The Logic of Life. Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein's Book Nudge, among others.
Except in the economics textbook market, bestselling economics book has been kind of an oxymoron.
Students, of course, buy them because they have to.
Adults buy them only when they choose to.
And at first glance, it seems strange that so many seemingly rational people have made that choice.
Or is it?
Perhaps it's that the authors have finally been able to communicate the power of thinking like an economist.
When I've covered a particularly difficult task in economics sometimes,
I joke with my students and say, you know, economics is really the art of making common sense incomprehensible.
But these books seem to be evidence that when it's made comprehensible,
people get to see how incredibly powerful and useful it can be in understanding the world,
in making personal decisions, in formulating business strategies, or choosing national policy.
Developing your ability to do all that more effectively is the ultimate objective of this course.
Last summer, I had one of those rare moments in the Pacific Northwest.
It was a beautiful, clear night and the sun was setting behind the Olympic Mountains.
It was one of those truly magical moments.
But for just a second, I was struck by the realization that if I had a geologist on one side of me
and an artist on the other looking at the exact same scene,
they would literally see different things than I saw or than each other saw.
We all see the world through particular lenses.
We all have a particular perspective, a way that helps us understand the raw data that we confront.
Indeed, I think professional training in any field forever changes what you see in the world.
Indeed, that's what it means to become a professional.
If confronted with facts about global warming, a lawyer is going to say, this is legal issues,
but non-lawyers will not see them.
Biologists will immediately be drawn to impacts invisible to the rest of us on life forms.
Political scientists will immediately see that this is a question of interest group politics and treaty enforcement.
There's a term in common usage now that has to do with revisioning the world, seeing it as a different place.
And that term is paradigm shift.
I think Thomas Kuhn was perhaps the first to use that term, paradigm shift,
in his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
For Kuhn, a paradigm is a shared explanation and understanding of the world.
To be inducted into a community of scientists is to accept its paradigm.
And once there, practitioners truly live in a different world.
Economists are no different.
To become an economist is to see the world through a particular lens.
It shapes what you see, it focuses your attention, it illuminates particular solutions to complex problems.
And once you learn to think like an economist, you will never be quite the same again.
Mostly I think that's a good thing.
In this series of lectures, I hope to give you an entree into the economist's paradigm
so that you can see and understand the world as economists do and perhaps even behave differently within it.
So let's begin with what I'm going to call the six foundation principles of economic thinking.
These precepts are so fully melded into an economist's mind that they're not even aware of thinking about them many times.
There's no reason to defend or articulate them.
They're just part of reality.
They define the world in which economists live.
And then in the next lecture, we'll talk about three core concepts.
Marginal analysis, rationality, and optimization, which is sometimes also called constrained maximization.
And when we have all that combined, we're really going to have pretty much the complete basic toolkit of thinking like an economist.
And then with these six principles plus the three concepts, economists believe they're incredibly well equipped to predict and to explain human behavior.
And more.
They also think they have ways to prescribe ways to make our decisions more efficient.
And then that's about it.
We'll have all the basic tools.
And what we'll do is we'll apply those tools in different contexts in ever more complex variations.
So let's turn now to these foundation principles.
Anyone who's taken physics knows that Sir Isaac Newton was able to take the three fundamental laws of motion,
express them simply and elegantly, and contain a tremendous amount of truth.
Now, our principles are going to be less mathematically precise than Newton's, perhaps less quantifiable,
but they too are very much at the heart of what it means.
Dress them up, apply them in fancy contexts, give them different names.
But to think like an economist is to view the world from the foundation of these principles.
So principle number one, people respond to incentives.
No premise is more central.
If you reward a behavior, people will do more of it and more intensely.
Penalize an act and they'll do less of it.
If you tax cigarettes more, people will smoke less.
If you offer free breakfast, as Denny's did the morning after Super Bowl 43, people will line up around the block.
If you urge people to retire their gas guzzlers, well, some will do so.
But if you create a cash for clunkers program, as the government did,
700,000 cars get turned in in one month.
If you make people wait in a gas line for two hours to get gas, as so many of us had to do in the 1970s,
public transit ridership will go up.
If you make the proportion of classes that have more than 50 students in them a negative factor
in the formula for U.S. news and world reports ranking of colleges,
some colleges will suddenly start capping all their classes at 49.
Policymakers think like economists sometimes when they're making policy,
and when they do, they should take time to consider the incentives.
If you subsidize home ownership, as the IRS code does through the mortgage interest deduction and the property tax deduction,
you will get more home ownership.
If you tax anything, whether we're talking about payrolls or health care premiums or capital gains,
you're going to get less of it.
If you ask an economist, tell me about criminal activity,
she will not tell you anything about breakdowns and social mores.
She instead is going to focus her attention on the payoffs that come from honest effort compared to the payoffs that come from crime.
She'll talk about the penalties, the costs of crime.
She'll talk about the probabilities of arrest and conviction.
But because she is thinking like an economist when she looks at criminal behavior,
she's going to see crime as a response to incentives to potential criminals face.
If you ask an economist about the development of new vaccines,
there'll be almost no conversation over the molecular structure of viruses.
No, there'll be instead a substantial discussion of the costs of doing research,
the probabilities of successful discovery, the terms of patent protection,
the questions of potential liability.
What's going to be the rate of innovation?
That's going to depend upon the incentives that pharmaceutical companies, their competitors, and their potential customers face.
Principle one is, human behavior is not random.
Intentionally or unintentionally, it's strategic.
People respond to incentives.
If you change the incentives, behavior will respond.
Now, thinking like an economist doesn't mean just thinking about our own optimal response to our own incentives.
It also means we need to think ahead and anticipate how our decisions
and how our actions affect the incentives that other people will face
and what kind of reactions we will get as a result.
These stories may be apocryphal, but they're certainly fun to listen to.
They're stories that were told about the kind of wasteful production that took place in the old Soviet Union
when it was still a planned economy.
And the Central Planning Authority would issue directives to the managers of plants telling them what to produce.
And their stories of how ill-designed incentives led to ridiculous outcomes.
If they told the manager he'd be rewarded for the tons of nails that he produced,
then you can imagine what will happen.
You got the biggest, heaviest nails possible being produced.
If you told the manager we're going to give you rewards based on the number of nails you produced,
you can again imagine the consequence.
They'll produce the tiniest little nails they can in order to produce as many as possible.
People respond to incentives.
Principle number one.
Principle number two, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
Sounds silly, but that captures a lot of economic thought.
If you go to any introductory textbook, it probably has a subtitle.
Economics, the science of choice.
When economists look at the world, they see an unavoidable imbalance
between the wants we have on one hand and the limited resources we have on the other.
One of the first lessons that any infant must learn is that Mick Jagger was right when he sang,
you can't always get what you want.
That's true for individuals.
That's true for organizations.
It's true for nations.
Now, I don't know whether that wisdom came to Mick Jagger because of his life experience
or perhaps even from his years studying at the London School of Economics.
But whatever the source, a fundamental reality in the economic, in the economist's world
is that there is always going to be some kind of scarcity.
The consequence of scarcity is that means there's always going to be a cost.
My wife and I, like many Americans, subscribe to Netflix.
And that means that our queue moves along and there's always two or three DVDs waiting on the counter
for an evening when there's nothing better to do.
Not long ago, we took one that it arrived, we both claimed the other one must have ordered it,
and we watched it all the way through.
And I'll be honest with you, it was awful.
We should have turned it off, but no, we watched it all the way through.
And at the end, my wife, who is a terrific and brilliant physician but not well-trained in economics,
said, well, at least we didn't have to pay for it.
Au contraire, I said, exhausting all of my working knowledge of French.
You and I both spent two hours of our limited lives watching that, and we can never get them back.
We paid.
Other options, things we could have done with that time, are now forever gone to us.
Now, a generalizable characteristic of the no-free lunch world is this fact of scarcity,
means that any use of time or limited resources for one purpose is an opportunity forever gone to use them for another.
More, if anything, always means less of something else.
And it's that lost option.
It's what you had to give up, that is the real or what economists call opportunity cost.
Cost is never money.
Money is an abstract unit we can use to quantify things.
But the real cost is always the lost opportunity.
If you buy the car, you have to forgo the boat.
If you spend your vacation skiing, the cost is that you can't spend your vacation at the beach.
You spend four years in medical school.
It means you're not going to be in art school, or I suppose driving a garbage truck.
The older I get, the more I appreciate the harsh reality in the query, how are you spending your time?
Even when no money changes hands, we're always incurring some very real costs.
Now, economists always recognize this.
Others often think of cost in terms of money spent, cash laid out.
I remember back in the 1980s when short-term interest rates were over 20%.
And I was having a conversation with the manager of one of the local lumber yards.
And I said to him, interest rates that high, they must be hammering you.
Oh, not at all, he said.
We sell finance.
We don't have to borrow for inventory.
These interest rates are really costing us nothing.
Now, you and I can see the flaw in his thinking.
Interest rates at that level means that every $100 he has tied up an inventory
meant he had to be giving up the opportunity to earn more than $20 a year by lending that money out.
Assing up receiving a gain in the world of rational decision-making is the same as paying it out.
Now, both are costs.
An accountant's going to think of money out.
An economist will always see a cost in giving up an opportunity.
Money that does not come in, value that is not gained.
More and more Americans these days are being asked to decide what to do with their 401k investment accounts.
And an astonishing number of young workers, decades away from retirement,
are deciding to put all of their funds into a safe money market account.
You can't call. You can't lose.
But of course you can.
There's an opportunity cost.
By investing conservatively in their youth,
they're probably giving up tens of thousands of dollars in lost appreciation.
The security they're getting, like the apparently free lunch, isn't really free at all.
Principle number three.
No thing is just one thing.
There are always at least two sides to every interaction.
Economics, after all, is one of the social sciences.
It likes to call itself the queen of the social sciences.
Most people don't, but economists like to do that.
And when people interact, there's always more than one side to the interaction.
For example, not long ago in our local newspaper there was a letter to the editor talking about climate change.
And the author said, we are never going to solve the problem of global warming
until we have all sold our big fuel-gulping SUVs and bought fuel-efficient automobiles.
Good sentiment. Bad reasoning.
Because we cannot sell our SUVs unless someone else buys our SUVs.
And in that case, all that happens is the big cars change driveways.
The world as a whole is unaffected.
I also recently read a column that was arguing that was unethical
for those of us who had jobs in a period of economic difficulty.
It was unethical for us to continue spending when others are unemployed.
In solidarity, we should forgo our purchases, the column said, until the economic crisis is solved.
But the result of that, of course, if you think about it is,
that that would let more people have experience with unemployment firsthand.
Because every single dollar of my expenditure on the other side is a dollar of income coming in.
If there's less total spending, there is also by definition less total income.
No thing is just one thing.
Every sale is also a purchase, every dollar of spending is also a dollar of income,
every import is an export.
A change in the incentives for one person is a change in the incentives for someone else.
The fourth principle I like to call the law of unanticipated influences.
But it arises from something out of chaos theory called the butterfly effect.
Now, in chaos theory, hypothetically, a butterfly on one side of the world can flap its wings
and through a chain of causation that's totally unanticipatable,
it'll result in a hurricane on the opposite side of the world.
Now, I know in economics it's true, because no event ever takes place in a bubble.
A change in any one part of an economic system is going to have ripple effects often in far removed places.
In 1979, the student radicals took over the embassy in Tehran, Iran,
and the result was that dental costs in the United States were pushed higher.
Now, I think you're probably asking yourself, how does that happen?
Well, it goes like this.
There was a lot of political uncertainty in the world and there was fear that there might be war in the Middle East.
The consequence of that would be that financial markets would be disrupted
and there was uncertainty in financial markets and a flight to gold and silver as a hedge against this uncertainty.
Now, gold and silver are financial assets, but they're also used in crowns and teeth,
silver is used in fillings, and silver is the most expensive component of X-ray film.
I tell you, it's a rare manager in a human resources department who, reading the news that day,
knew that that distant crisis on the far side of the world would be the thing that would explode his benefits budget in the coming year.
But it did.
In the American Civil War, the Union forces adopted a strategy they called the Anaconda strategy.
They put a blockade around the southern ports and the consequence of that was that rents far away in Birmingham, England,
were driven down and land prices in Egypt were driven up.
Cut off from supplies of raw cotton, the Birmingham mills cut back on their employment,
the wages for the workers fell, with their lower incomes,
they had less demand for housing and had to have lower rents.
Meanwhile, the suppliers were looking for substitute sources of raw cotton
and Egypt has a favorable climate for cotton growing.
So the demand for land in Egypt went up, the price for land in Egypt went up,
and forever that North African economy has been reshaped.
In the California housing market collapse in 2008,
the foreclosures in the Central Valley of California caused English cities to cut back on their police patrols.
How does that happen?
The British towns have been keeping their funds in Icelandic banks because they were paying higher interest rates.
The banks in turn were using those funds to invest in derivatives, something called collateralized debt obligations,
that were based on subprime U.S. mortgages.
And when the housing prices in California fell, the collateralized debt obligations become unsalable,
the Icelandic banks failed, and the British cities lost the money in their accounts
and had to reduce public services including police patrols in Birmingham.
Butterfly effects are real.
We will often be impacted by things we cannot anticipate and cannot control.
Be ever vigilant.
Trust no one when they tell you that they've accounted for all eventualities for no one ever has.
The fifth principle is one that I'm going to call the law of unintended consequences.
Not only is it impossible for us to anticipate all the things that will affect us from the outside,
in our interconnected world our actions are also always going to have multiple consequences.
Economic thinking can help you perhaps anticipate them.
A number of cities have installed what they call red light cameras,
where they take a photograph of the license plate of any car that enters an intersection after the light has turned red.
Citations are mailed to the owners, and the intended purpose, of course,
was to try and reduce the number of intersection accidents, and they did.
But they also increased the number of rear end accidents,
an unintended consequence of people slamming on their brakes to try and avoid the red light cameras.
In 2008, Nebraska passed a safe haven statute.
Its purpose was to prevent the all too common tragedy of a desperate teen
becoming pregnant, delivering a baby, panicking, and doing harm to her newborn infant.
Nebraska's safe haven law said that any child dropped off at a hospital,
or a police station, or a fire station would be accepted, no questions asked.
But the language said child, not infant.
And the result was that a number of the parents of troubled teens,
when they'd run out of patience, dropped their kids off at a hospital and drove away.
There were even cases of people coming from out of state
to drive away from their problem as the teenagers stood on the hospital steps.
There was carelessness when they were failing to consider
how what they were doing might affect the decisions of others
and lead to an outcome that was both unintended and, in many senses, tragic.
Certainly, businesses are not exempt from this.
As an exercise, let's strike thinking like economists about a recent case study.
Some of the airlines citing difficult market conditions
decided that they were going to charge checked baggage fees.
Now, if you think like an economist, the first result is obvious.
That means some people will simply choose another airline.
But that's pretty easy. The next step is easy too,
but I'm not sure it was taken by the airlines themselves.
What about the people who continue to fly in the airline?
They've now been given an incentive to carry on as much luggage as possible.
In effect, the airline says, we'll pay you $25 to carry your luggage down that jetway.
But there's no increase in bin capacity, and it leads to interesting possibilities.
I had a friend who took a trip right after these charges were introduced,
and she reported that this was the following.
They boarded by group, as we often do in jetways.
And at the end of group two's boarding, the ground crew came out and said,
I'm sorry, all of the overhead bins are completely full,
and everyone else will have to gate check their luggage on the jetway
one at a time before boarding.
The passengers were upset, as you can imagine,
so to assuage them, the ground crew said,
but we won't charge you the baggage fee.
And one by one, the bags were tagged and hand-carried down the stairs.
There was a 45-minute delay.
They did not collect any fees on most of the luggage that did get checked.
The passengers who paid the checking fee were angry because they had to pay.
The gate-checked people were angry because they didn't have the convenience of carry on.
Everyone experienced a 45-minute delay.
There was an angry load of passengers as they went across the way.
Now, it must have seemed like a good idea at the time,
but it's only because no one at the airline
apparently thought through to work all the incentive changes
and how they could have such obvious but I'm sure unintended consequences.
And the last principle.
Finally, given all of the above, assuming it's true,
no one is and no one ever can be in complete control.
It's not rocket science.
That's what we say when we want to put a problem in context.
We want to say, it's not that difficult.
But what we've said above says that thinking like an economist
may sometimes actually be harder than doing rocket science
because in physics, if you apply a given force in a given direction to a given mass,
the outcome is pretty much always the same.
But if you apply an incentive to some subset of 6 billion
complexly interrelated people whose interactions are totally unforeseeable,
whose actions have unintended consequences and then try to predict
what's the final result that would be monumental.
To go further and try to control that outcome would be utterly impossible.
In the final analysis, no one is in control.
So in conclusion, if we sum this all up,
when an economist approaches any problem,
he or she is grounded in a paradigm,
a world vision defined by these six principles.
At face value, they're pretty simple.
People respond to incentives.
People respond to incentives.
To think like an economist, you always have to consider how.
In a world of scarcity, there is no free lunch.
There will always be an opportunity cost to be paid.
There are no real free lunches.
You can never do just one thing.
Each interaction has at least two sides.
Nothing is ever just one thing.
Everything is so interconnected
that there will always be unanticipated influences and impacts.
Things will come to affect us that we cannot even begin to imagine.
The fifth one is that our actions will sometimes have unintended consequences,
and of that we need to be aware.
When all of that is said and done,
when all of that is struck, no one is truly in control.
These principles define what it means to think like an economist.
There really isn't much more to it than that.
Perhaps you'd like to have known that before you signed on for the whole course.
Nevertheless, these principles are about it.
But they can be applied in so many different contexts.
And the richness comes not from the complexity of the vision,
but from its adaptability to so many different situations.
Next time, we'll add to these principles three core concepts,
and then our basic toolkit will be nearly complete.
And the fun is going to be in learning how to use these tools in so many different ways.
