Welcome back for the second lecture in our series on how to think like an economist.
If you recall in the last lecture we talked about six foundation principles, fundamental
premises that all economists accept about humans and their social interactions.
The first of course was that people respond to their incentives.
The second was that in a world of scarcity there is no free lunch, there's always going
to be an opportunity cost to be paid.
The third was that you can never do just one thing, every interaction has at least two
sides.
The fourth was that everything is interconnected, there can be unanticipated influences.
The fifth was that actions are going to have unintended consequences.
And the last was that no one is ever truly in control.
Together these define the boundaries of the world in which economists live.
Thinking, deciding, acting like an economist means starting with that foundation.
Today we're going to complete the basic economist toolkit by developing three core analytic
concepts, rationality, marginal analysis, and optimization that we sometimes also call
constrained maximization.
If you were to do a word search on a substantive economic article I would expect the three
most commonly recurring terms would be rational, marginal, and optimal.
Economists throw those words around like teenagers throw around the word like.
A working understanding of these three concepts and how economists use them is the goal for
getting us through the lecture today.
And then we're going to be equipped to talk about any issue and think like an economist
about it.
First of all, economists believe in rationality.
They build extraordinarily complex models on the assumption that humans are fundamentally
rational in their behavior.
That means that they're going to choose strategically rather than randomly.
They may sometimes stray, but strategic rationality is a strong working approximation of human
behavior.
But it's important to remember that economist concept of rationality is much narrower than
that of philosophers.
We make no judgments about the wisdom of your final objectives.
We make no judgments about the goals.
Each person gets to decide what he or she really wants.
What economists concern themselves with is the decision processes that people use when
they're trying to obtain those objectives.
Economic rationality refers to the process of decision making, not to its objective.
People can rationally pursue ends that to others seem absolutely absurd.
Every winter where we live, we drive past a frozen Oxbow Lake along the Connecticut River.
It's often covered with fishermen even on the coldest of days.
They're sitting on stools exposed out on the ice.
There they sit, staring into a hole in the ice at a monofilament line for hours on end.
My wife, who grew up in Arizona and has not been truly warm since we moved into New England,
thinks they are crazy.
What rational person would ever choose to do that, she asks.
As an economist, I have to say any person who for whatever reason derives real pleasure
from the experience should do that.
If for whatever incomprehensible reason it brings them pleasure, it would be irrational
for them not to be sitting there.
For my wife, however, it would be absurd and irrational.
Both the fishermen and my wife can make rational choices.
What differs for them is their personal assessment of the experience.
It's how we decide, not what we decide, that marks rationality in the economist's view
of the world.
This can go to extraordinary extremes.
If you were a true believer as a suicide bomber and you thought that God's will really required
that you commit this unspeakable act, if you thought it would really bring immeasurable
and eternal rewards and paradise, it could be rational in the economist's use of the
term to push that detonator button.
To me, as a human, that would be tragically mistaken, unquestionably immoral and unspeakably
evil, but it would not in formal terms be irrational.
In principle, then, making rational decisions is easy.
Just follow four simple steps.
First, clarify the objective or the goal.
Economic thinking, as I've said, is not much help here.
It's going to be more helpful when we go to the second and third and fourth steps.
The second stage in making a rational decision, once you know the objective, is to identify
all possible alternative paths to help you get there.
If you don't know your options, it's hard to systematically choose the best one.
The third step is then to evaluate carefully the payoffs from each of those alternatives,
and that's where economic thinking can help a lot, and we're going to develop some tools
through the course of these lectures that will help you with understanding how to put
some value on some difficult things.
And then finally, you have to actually, of course, select the best one and implement
your decision.
To determine the best course and then willfully choose another one would be to act irrationally,
and economists don't like it when people do that.
You remember that in our world of scarcity, the world of the six principles, evaluating
opportunities or alternatives is all about valuing the opportunity costs.
What is not chosen is the real cost of what you do choose.
The cost of any choice is really the value of what you gave up, the choice that was not
taken.
So, for rationality says that you should always choose the option with the highest net payoff
to knowingly choose anything worse would be irrational.
Now again, in teenagers' language, that would be kind of a duh conclusion, but it's a very
powerful and very valuable predictor of behavior, that concept of rationality.
Now the presumption of rationality works two ways, of course.
It helps us with the prediction and the description of behavior, but it also gives us a way to
evaluate ex-post after the fact to draw some conclusions about values.
So if I observe you choosing one alternative over another and believing as I do in rationality,
I think you have thereby revealed to me your true preference.
I know what you value.
I may not agree with your preference.
That doesn't matter.
Clearly, you valued it.
You valued the chosen alternative over the other options.
Thus, because I perceive the world in rationality terms, I know that those ice fishermen value
the afternoon on the frozen lake more highly than any other option.
They could have spent the afternoon under a cozy quilt sipping herbal tea, but they
freely chose instead to sit out there on that frozen lake.
That proves to me that it was in their evaluation the best attainable alternative.
For them, that was a rational choice.
For my wife to make that choice would be unimaginably insane, and I have every confidence in the
world she will never do that.
This concept of strategic decision making and rationality as both an objective for
and a description of human behavior is fundamental to economic thinking.
It's the first of our core concepts.
Now I'm going to tell you flat out, economists are marginal thinkers, but that doesn't mean
what you think it means.
That's not a comment about the quality of their thought.
It's a comment about the focus of their thought.
Economists tend to look carefully at sequences of small changes made on the margin, because
most of the choices we make in life are not all or nothing decisions.
Most of them are how many more or how much less decisions.
In opportunity cost terms, most of our choices involve marginal trade-offs, a little more
of this.
It inevitably means a little bit less of that.
I recently saw a bumper sticker, and you're going to be struck through the course that
I often seem to find economic principles in bumper stickers and letters to the editor
and other strange places, but I guess that's a mark of thinking like an economist.
The bumper sticker I saw said, housing is a right, not a privilege.
The empathetic human in me said how true, how true.
But the economist in me said that bumper sticker makes no sense.
Why not?
It doesn't make sense until we specify how much housing each of us has a right to.
Do we have a right to a refrigerator box, to a 1,000 square foot bungalow, to a 20,000
square foot mansion with a pool and a tennis court?
How much health care or education or Caribbean vacations must be foregone to provide it?
What would be the opportunity cost?
When does having a little more housing reach the line of meeting the right?
When is it enough?
And when does it cross the line into too much?
In a moment we'll talk about those principles somewhat, but first I want to have fun with
a little puzzle that's solvable by marginal thinking.
So watch closely as I do this because you can amaze your friends and you'll be able
to illustrate the fundamental process of marginal analysis.
So imagine with me, you have a salt shaker, you have a pepper shaker.
For reasons that totally escape me, you decide that you're going to dip a teaspoon into the
pepper shaker, take it over, dump it in the salt shaker, put the lid on and shake it up.
So now I've got a teaspoon of pepper in with a mostly salt.
Now I don't know why I want to do this, but suppose now I take the same teaspoon, I dip
it into the one that has a lot of salt and a little bit of pepper, I come over, I dump
it into the pepper shaker and shake that one up.
Now here's the puzzle.
After I'm done, is there more pepper in the salt shaker or more salt in the pepper shaker?
It sounds tricky doesn't it?
But the answer is simple.
The answer is no, there's not more in either one.
With marginal analysis, I think it's going to be easy to see that the amount of the added
spice is going to be exactly the same in both situations.
And the key to doing that is not to focus on the shakers, but to focus on the teaspoons.
Follow the sequence of changes in order to understand the effects on the total.
So watch the first move.
Here's the teaspoon.
It's going into the pepper.
It's coming out and there's one teaspoon of pepper in it and that's the amount that
I dump into the salt.
That was easy.
Now it gets more interesting.
The second time I do this and I dip the teaspoon in, it's going to come out mostly salt mixed
with a little bit of pepper.
How much?
A quarter teaspoon, a sixteenth, one two hundred and thirty fourth, I have no idea.
But let's call it X teaspoons of pepper.
So X teaspoons of pepper have come out of the salt shaker.
How much is left?
Well, one minus X.
Now watch the spoon as it's moving toward the other shaker.
If X teaspoon is the amount of pepper that's in this teaspoon, how much salt must be in
it?
The answer, of course, is one minus X.
It's mostly salt, but it also contains X teaspoons.
And when I add that over here, each container ends up with exactly one minus X teaspoons
of the other no matter what the value of X.
By focusing our attention on a sequence of changes, the outcome for the whole becomes
crystal clear.
We solved this using marginal analysis.
The end result for the total is always determined by the changes on the margin.
Marital analysis is key to many economic insights.
This can be applied in many contexts.
For example, I know you've all seen this during a campaign, there's a TV screen, there's
an evil looking mugshot of a convicted violent criminal, and a voiceover says, last year crime
cost our city five hundred million dollars, yet the incumbent mayor budgeted a mere seventy
five million for the police.
Now what's the implication?
Obviously, the mayor is spending far too little on crime.
Or is he?
An economist will say that statement tells us nothing of value.
Yes, it's true, the total cost of crime, five hundred million, is greater than the amount
spent to fight crime, seventy five million, but those numbers measure what's happening
in the shakers.
The wisdom of changing, of increasing the police budget depends on the teaspoons, on
the changes, not on the shakers, which are just the current totals.
Think like an economist for a moment about the statement that was in that television
ad.
Yes, the total costs of crime are five hundred and seventy five million dollars, five hundred
direct crime costs, seventy five million prevention costs, but a change is justified
only if it reduces that total and you evaluate that by looking at the teaspoons.
That the changes, that the effects on the total of increasing or decreasing the amount
that's budgeted.
If a marginal, an additional one million dollars is spent for the police, but it reduces crime
by a mere one hundred thousand, then the marginal gain, the teaspoon, is less than the marginal
cost and the total cost of crime is actually increasing, not decreasing.
Only if an additional spending is going to reduce the total cost of crime by more than
million dollars, two and a half million say, then the expenditure would make sense.
The key point from this is the wisdom of any change in policy or any change in behavior
can only be determined by looking at its net impacts on the margin.
Comparing totals tells you very little indeed, understand that and you're thinking like an
economist.
Now there's one more important aspect.
The marginal value of anything is not fixed, it changes as we have more or less of it.
Ever since economists became marginal thinkers in the nineteenth century, that postulate
has given them answers to problems that had confounded classical economists for generations.
One of those puzzles was what was called the water diamond paradox and the question was
why would rational people pay so much for something so unnecessary like a diamond?
And why would people willingly sell so cheaply something that should be so very dear without
which life is impossible, water?
With margin analysis, the way out of this conundrum was obvious because they shifted
attention from the salt shakers to the teaspoons.
It's never how much water is worth in the abstract, it's always how much is one more
pint of water worth.
And of course, that depends on how much you already have.
It's all seen in the cliche cartoon, there's a traveler crawling across the harsh desert,
they're impatient, vultures circling overhead, he's completely without water and life itself
is in the balance.
And if I ask you what would be the increase in his welfare from the first pint of water,
and the answer is that would be incalculable.
The single pint, that marginal pint would easily be worth a whole bag of diamonds to
that thirst-stricken traveler at that moment.
The second would be almost as valuable, but at some point the gain from one more marginal
pint of water becomes less and less and we say that diminishing returns on the margin
have set in.
Additional pints are still adding to welfare, they're just not adding as much as they did
before.
Welfare is rising at a decreasing rate, it's up, but by less and less.
The marginal value can become negative.
If there was a thunderstorm and a desert flash flood, the traveler would be better off with
less water.
But the point is that value is always marginal and always situation, it's hard to grasp
but it's an important and powerful concept.
You can apply it in lots of different contexts.
So, for example, if you're a runner and you make a commitment, your resolution, that you're
going to shave 30 seconds off your time for the mile, how expensive that's going to be
probably depends on what your personal best currently is.
It probably takes less effort to get a 30 second improvement if your best time is 20
minutes.
It'll take quite a bit more if your best time is 7 minutes and the cost of achieving that
may be infinite and impossible if it's 5 minutes.
The marginal cost of a 30 second improvement increases as the current record is lowered.
Total time keeps falling, but the marginal cost of achieving each improvement keeps rising.
Let's have a pop quiz.
One of the courses I teach is an urban economics course.
Not long ago I asked some students a question, I want to see how you would answer it.
The question was, if we woke up tomorrow and gas prices in the U.S. had doubled, how would
that affect automobile usage?
One student started with an assertion, said at that price, no one would ever drive their
car.
That's a bad start for an economics class.
Not that good a start for an English class since no one is singular and there is plural
but I'm going to overlook that for a moment.
Because the question about driving is, it's not an all or nothing decision.
It's a more or less decision and how much more and how much less.
At high gas prices, some trips on the margin would not be worth it, but others certainly
still would be.
And thinking like an economist means we always reject claims that say that a change in price
is going to make things stop altogether.
You know that even if most people did stop driving, that would mean the freeways would
be empty, there would be easy parking everywhere and surely that should be enough to cover
the pain at the pump for some drivers, some of the time.
Some level of driving still makes sense, it will be less but it won't be zero.
People adjust on the margin until the value of the last trip taken reflects the new higher
costs of driving.
So that's two of our principles, our core concepts that we want to talk about today.
The third one is about optimization and something called the equimarginal principle.
But before going on to the third concept, let's just summarize where we are for a moment.
We're economists, so we're thinking about things on the margin.
We're looking at strategically rational decisions.
We're talking about scarcity and trade offs, opportunity costs, more of one thing, less
of another.
And as the marginal value changes, more of something makes the marginal value fall, less
of something makes the marginal value rise.
So given this, what's the best attainable allocation, the best balance, the best optimal
outcome, the maximum achievable given the constraints?
Can you use these principles we've devised to optimize?
And the answer is yes, by using something that economists call the equimarginal principle.
And that's the last of our three core concepts.
So I want to approach this doing a thought experiment.
And I'm going to bet that intuitively, you're going to apply the equimarginal principle.
Unselfconsciously, you're going to end up at the optimal solution, but without really
resorting to all the fancy mathematics we use to determine optimum points in economic
model.
So here we are.
Imagine yourself on a new TV reality show.
You come with just the clothes on your back.
You're flown by a helicopter deep into the wilderness.
You're given a special number of chits that you get to exchange at a special trading post.
Four items that are going to aid in your survival.
Each chit can buy one unit of food or one unit of shelter.
Now the host, before he's flown back to his comfortable and very well-stocked trailer,
is going to voice over, welcome to wilderness camp.
Winter's on the way and you have nothing.
You must choose wisely how to spend your chits.
Choose unwisely and you may not survive until spring.
You must now decide whether food or shelter is the best choice.
Then he gets on his helicopter.
He flies away.
But if you think like an economist or really any rational human being, I'm sure you're
going to just immediately reject his fundamental premise.
Survival and I think survival is part of an optimal outcome.
Survival is not about either food or shelter.
It's about the best attainable combination of the two and what exactly is best?
The gorge on food while freezing to death is not a good strategy.
Being in warmth and comfort while starving to death, not a good strategy either.
The optimal is to find the balance between food and shelter that of course will bring
the marginal value of each of them to be equal, hence the name the equal marginal principle.
The contribution on the margin is the same for each.
So let's work this through a little bit.
So just consider, foolishly you've decided to spend all of your chips on shelter and
none for food, so you've got lots of shelter, no food.
That last unit of shelter, it's probably nice, but the marginal value, the addition
that it added to your welfare is very low indeed.
You're pretty well sheltered, but you're facing starvation.
The first meal because you have no food would have a very high marginal value.
The meal foregone is the opportunity cost of the last bit of shelter, and it's much
higher than the benefit.
That was an irrational choice.
Every time you trade off one less shelter for one more food, there's a huge net gain.
And you should make that trade in that situation.
It will be rational, but it's not always rational to trade shelter for food, why not?
Suppose you started instead with all food and no shelter.
Then because you had so much food, the marginal value of food would be low and the marginal
value of shelter would be high.
In that situation, rationality would say trade food, which you have a lot of, for shelter.
But no matter which end of this bargain you start with, as you give up more and more of
the abundant good, its marginal value, though starting low, is ever rising.
As you acquire more and more of the scarce good, its marginal value, though starting
high, will be ever falling.
And when they meet, when they are equal, you've arrived at the optimum combination.
You cannot gain even the tiniest amount by trading one for the other.
You're at the pinnacle.
You've maximized subject to the constraint.
You've gotten as much welfare as possible from the allocation you were given.
You've optimized.
And you've done it subconsciously by applying the equimarginal principle.
There you have it.
Apply the concepts of rationality, marginality, and constrained optimization in a world prescribed
by the six foundation principles, and you're thinking like an economist.
We can dress this all up in fancy mathematics, we often do.
We can use complex econometric models to test empirically hypotheses about the parameters
of the functions in the real world.
We often do.
But the real essence of learning to think like an economist is to be comfortable with
this basic toolkit.
After we add efficiency next time, you'll have it all.
But we have a few minutes left.
So what I'd like to do is just talk about a couple of these principles, a couple of
interesting contexts, and think like economists about what would be a rational response to
incentives in the following real world situations.
Back in the days of the old Soviet Union, they were very concerned about their world
image.
And one of the things they did in order to incentivize their athletes was to pay them
a cash bonus any time one of them set a new world record, even if they were breaking their
own world record.
Now think with me for a moment about what kind of incentives that created.
Now I'm absolutely sure that their athletes were extremely competitive, but I think they
were probably responding rationally to that particular bonus that was going to be available.
Athletes would want to break any world record they possibly could, but perhaps they had
an incentive to break it by as little as possible so it would be easier to break again.
Sergei Bubka set the pole vault record for the first time in 1983.
Over the next decade, he broke his own outdoor record 16 times and his own indoor record
17 times.
And he often broke it by a nearest of margins, a centimeter or less, and then he would quit
for the day.
Instead of pushing to see how high he could make it, he was satisfied to have broken the
record.
His incentive apparently was not to set the record as high as he possibly could on any
given day, but to set it as often as he could.
I think any connoisseur would predict that if the size of the bonus had been dependent
on the size of the increase in the record height, history of modern pole vaulting might
have been quite different.
No one who's read both Charles Dickens and Ernest Hemingway will ever confuse one with
the other, as artists their styles were reflections of themselves and reflections of the times
in which they wrote.
Perhaps also in some small measure at least, they were reflections of the way in which
they were paid.
Most of Dickens' novels were serialized, usually in about 20 parts, and he would receive
a contract payment every time he filled up 32 pages of printed text.
He wasn't exactly paid by the word, but wordiness certainly helped him to stretch his stories
out to the full contracted length.
Now Hemingway, of course, got paid by the completed manuscript.
There was no financial incentive for him to modify his sparse style of writing.
If Hemingway and Dickens had been paid by identical formula, you still would have been
able to tell them apart.
Their styles would have been different.
They would have been distinct, but it doesn't mean that their compensation formula had no
impact at all on their writing.
So what does this all mean for you?
What do you want to take away from this?
It means that whether you're writing a book like Hemingway and Dickens, whether you're
striving to set a world record like Sergei Bubka, whether you're looking at the compensation
formula for your employees, considering how your financial advisor is paid, or examining
the terms of a seasonal contract with your snow plower, thinking like an economist means
being ever cognizant of the incentives you face, and perhaps more importantly, the incentives
those around you face.
It means anticipating what's strategically rational for them and how that will affect
your options.
It means focusing on the margin, on trade-offs, and on adjustments to find the optimal balance.
The question is always going to be how much of which.
Next time, we're going to step back just a bit and widen our economic perspective to
consider one last concept, the concept of economic efficiency.
What is it that economists mean when they use that term?
How does it relate to rationality?
How does it fit into this paradigm that defines economic thinking?
When lots of us as individuals respond strategically to the incentives we personally face, can
we be certain that the outcome will be socially efficient?
Just as economists, think about that a lot.
Next time, so will we.
