Hello, I want to welcome you back for the fourth lecture in this series on how to think
like an economist.
The last time we came upon, for the very first time, a peculiar situation where individuals
were making rational choices, but it ended up making them all worse off in the end.
Today, what I want to do is extend that thinking a little bit and focus on some of the ways
in which rules and rights create incentives that can make rational decision makers make
more intelligent decisions.
I don't want to start out with a story from the high seas.
Scientists and fishers agree.
The world's fisheries are on the verge of collapse.
Overfishing is depleting the populations of fish and at the rate at which we're catching
them, those catches are unsustainable.
At this pace, virtually all of the commercial fishers in the world are going to be out of
business in a few decades.
And one of the premier sources of protein for a growing human population will be gone.
You don't have to be an economist to conclude that that's a very undesirable outcome.
But if everyone sees that overfishing is going on, why does overfishing continue unabated?
For economists, the answer is this is the prisoner's dilemma, but it's being played
out on the open ocean.
Commercial fishers are the prisoners, at least in the game theoretic context.
What it makes sense for each of them to do individually is really creating a disaster
for all of them and probably for all of us down the road as well.
So I suppose theoretically all the fishers could get together and they could agree that
they'd catch less.
But long term, that would make them all better off, but agreements like that with thousands
of participants are really impossible to negotiate.
They're very, very difficult to enforce and invariably they break down.
If you consider the idea of a payoff matrix that we talked about last time, the payoff
matrix for each boat.
If everyone else is restricting their catch, then my best option is to take as much as
I really can because my large catch will have no real harm on the environment but a substantial
gain for myself.
And if no one else is restricting, then there's really no environmental benefit to my holding
back.
I'd best take all I can while I can.
And there's not really any kind of a voluntary agreement among thousands of fishers that's
going to be able to withstand that kind of an individual calculus.
So they're going to have to be some kind of effective limit, some kind of controls put
on that'll have to be compulsory and enforceable.
But in what kind of a form?
The current controls, the current regulations have proven wholly inadequate.
Here's what happens now.
People catch fish, we shorten the legal season in order to limit the total catch, but fish
populations keep getting lower and lower.
So we make the season shorter and shorter and that just makes the incentives for individual
fishers even more intense.
By now it's gotten to the point that it's sort of like the 1888 Oklahoma land rush.
You remember in that case they opened land in Oklahoma to settlement, the authorities
fired a starting pistol and people raced in a mad scramble across the countryside to be
the first one to get to the best land.
Cheaters of course came in sooner than the rest and created a nickname for Oklahomans
even today.
But in the ocean version there's this frantic race to fish when the season opens you've got
to get to the fish fastest, take as much as you possibly can and do it in the absolute
shortest time.
So what incentives does that create?
It says buy a faster boat, buy more gear, get more expensive electronics so that you
can catch more and more fish in a shorter and shorter amount of time.
It says go out no matter how dangerous the weather.
And the result?
More and more efficient boats fishing ever more intensively in dangerous conditions who
still catch so much that the population remains threatened.
So next year we have to shorten the season once again and all the boats are stuck in
that game theory prison.
By the mid-1990s the season for Alaskan halibut was down to three days out of the entire year
and yet the population still remained threatened.
And worse than that because all the boats went fishing at the exact same time and returned
at the end of those three days there'd be a temporary glut.
The price of the halibut would go down.
The cost and the danger of fishing was up, the price of fish was down, the fishery was
near collapse.
Each boat was acting rationally and in the process they were destroying their collective
livelihood.
Well something has to be done and who are you going to call in a crisis like that?
Obviously an economist.
Economist would tell you that the way to address this is to find some way to change the individual
incentives and that will change behavior and that will change the social outcome.
Can you redesign the incentives so the behavior of individual fishers becomes consistent with
the preservation of fisheries rather than with their destruction?
Iceland was the first place to try this simple economic thinking solution and here's how
it works.
First biologists determine what is the total allowable catch for the entire fleet and then
they break it into pieces and they assign individual tradable quotas a right in perpetuity
to a share of the total catch and they assign that to each boat.
So for example, if the allowable catch is 100 million pounds, a boat with an individual
tradable quota of 1% is entitled to catch up to 1 million pounds that year.
Can fish this week, can fish next week, can fish next month, can wait for good weather,
wait for better conditions or wait for the price to rise.
No matter how good the equipment, if it's the best in the fleet, there's no gain from
getting to the sea faster than the others.
There's no advantage to fishing more fish per hour because no matter how or when that
boat fishes, its catch cannot exceed 1 million pounds.
It reaches that level, it's done.
Now there's another piece to this and this is where some of the real economics comes
in.
The right for that boat is permanent, it continues into the future and it's tradable.
So if the fish population grows over time, each boat's permitted catch is going to grow
with it.
If next year the total allowable catch becomes 120 million pounds, that boat with the individual
tradable quota is entitled to 1.2 million pounds.
But if the allowable catch falls to 80 million pounds, no matter how much effort he puts
forth, no matter how much he invests in his equipment, his catch next year will not be
allowed to exceed 800,000 pounds.
Having the fishery recover now guarantees each boat an individual future gain.
Individual rights become more valuable as the fishery recovers.
Each captain has a personal incentive to preserve and improve the health of the fishery.
What about the tradability portion of this?
That promotes some efficiency in the fleet.
Before the quota system, if a boat had mechanical problems, inferior gear, it had a shortage
of skilled crew or any other problem, it had a single incentive, go to sea anyway or lose
all.
Before the quota system, if a boat had superior equipment or crew, it had an incentive to
try and catch as many fish as it possibly could, thereby threatening in reality its
own and everyone else's future in pursuit of a very short term gain.
With individual tradable rights, a superior boat can still catch more, but only by buying
quota.
An inferior boat, one with problems or a lazy captain, can sell share and still have some
income without risking life-limb out on the high sea.
Both parties are made better off by the trade, but that's only possible because they're
well-established rights, it's Pareto-efficient.
Defining is controlled, the prisoner's dilemma is solved, the prisoners have been paroled,
all because someone had the wisdom to think about this problem like an economist.
Defining ownership rights, redefined incentives and altered behavior.
After Iceland's success with this, other places have dried it.
In Alaska now, they're using it for halibut and crab, and the Alaskan halibut season that
I said was once down to a very intense danger three days has now grown back to a full eight
months.
According to the Economist magazine, as a result, the total value of the halibut catch
has increased by two-thirds, there's 70% fewer emergency search and rescue missions,
there's 15% fewer deaths associated with halibut fishing.
This individual tradable quota system is just clear evidence of how having effective rights
can make rational individual decisions become efficient and wise social outcomes.
In this case, it took someone to consciously step in, redefine these rights for the explicit
purpose of redefining incentives.
Sometimes efficient rules just evolve by custom rather than by conscious design.
Near my house, there's an auto repair shop, and I noticed that every morning, two panel
trucks arrive and they sit in the parking lot for maybe a half hour or so.
The first one offers coffee and donuts and snacks, and it's pretty easy to see why.
The mechanics are clearly hungry and thirsty, and they can save time by not having to go
out to get their morning coffee break, food and drink come to them.
The caterer makes money from the business.
The mechanics and the employer save time.
It's an efficient solution.
All parties are made better off.
But the second truck that comes and parks there is doing something unusual.
It's selling sockets and ratchets and screwdrivers and other hand tools, but it's selling them
to the individual mechanics.
And when you first look at it, that seems a little strange.
I mean, these are hourly employees.
Why are they buying the tools?
They don't pay for the electricity or the heat.
They don't buy the hydraulic lifts or the computer diagnostic equipment.
The employer typically pays for those.
Office workers aren't asked to buy their own pens and printer ink.
So how do you explain this peculiar custom of having mechanics but not the employer
buy the hand tools?
An economist is going to look for the answer to that question in incentives and in efficiency.
Hand tools, of course, are pretty easily lost or misappropriated or misplaced.
And while the cost of each individual socket or ratchet is not that high, the cumulative
costs can pretty quickly mount.
And a key tool that's missing in the middle of a job causes lots of delay, lost production,
higher labor costs.
Are there rights or rules that can control the loss of tools at a minimum cost to the
employer and make the whole business more efficient?
Well, there are different ways you could do this.
One possibility was that the employer is just going to pay for the tools and provide
them.
So whenever one's lost or broken or misplaced, the employer goes out and buys another one.
After all, employees are paid by the hour.
They don't have a lot of incentive to care carefully for the tools.
It doesn't cost them much if the tools lost or broken.
But the employer has to pay the costs of taking constant inventory, and then he has to find
out and replace tools that are lost or broken.
It's the mechanics who determine the care with which tools are used.
But it's not the mechanics who pay the costs of carelessness.
So perhaps an employer will have to find some way to change the mechanics incentives to
make it rational for them to be more careful with what are perhaps his tools.
One possibility, some factories run a central system where employees check out tools and
at the end of the day they check them in and they're inspected, and then they get docked
if the tool is not returned or the tool is misused.
But there's a lot of effort and expense incurred in monitoring and enforcing such a system,
and particularly so if there's lots of little parts as there would be in a socket system.
So the employer has to trade high administrative costs in order to get lower tool costs.
Here's another option.
Those an employer offer a higher wage to mechanics if they would agree to provide their own tools.
I mean, after all, it's the mechanics who are in a situation where they can reduce
the tool loss and damage.
And if they're the ones who bear the costs of loss or damage, now they have an incentive
to use those tools with extra care.
And as long as the wage premium is less than the employer would have to pay in administrative
costs, and it's also more than a careful mechanic would have to pay to keep his costs, his tools
available and operating, both parties are better off.
That's a very common rule that I think has evolved really by practice and custom.
I doubt if there was ever a time when they sat down and carefully negotiated that system,
but it recognizes the role of incentives.
And economists looking at that see it through a lens that says that is Pareto efficient.
And it's efficiency that I think explains why mechanics and carpenters and plumbers and
other tradesmen own their own tools, why in top quality restaurants the chefs own their
own knives.
It's just one more aspect of how Smith's invisible hand is pointing to an efficient
destination.
When you think like an economist, you're going to recognize that rights and rules define
incentives.
They affect behavior.
It's true in the most complex of negotiations, and it can be true in very simple things in
everyday life.
I have a friend whose daughter recently went to college, and my friend said, just send
me the bill for your textbooks, I'll pay for them.
As happened to all of us who sent kids off to college, she was utterly stunned when the
bill for several hundred dollars for a single semester's books showed up in her mailbox.
Brand new texts cost a hundred dollars easily, then there's the supplemental readings, etc.
So the mother who's an economist thought about the role of incentives.
So next semester, she altered the terms of the deal.
She sent her daughter a fixed dollar amount that was quite a bit less than had been spent
last semester, but she said to the daughter, you can keep any residual that's left over
after your textbooks are acquired.
The rules had been changed, used books looked much more attractive, library reserves seemed
much less burdensome, sharing a text with a friend seemed like a very wise idea.
At the end, both she and her mother made money because they had a new set of rules.
Rationality isn't just relevant in how you play a game, it's an integral part of designing
a game as well.
Without clear rights and rules, incentives are ambiguous and confusion reigns.
Mutually beneficial options remain untaken, money is left on the table.
Clearly defined rights mean clear incentives, and then we're able to make rational decisions
that are going to allow us to pick up some of that money.
I'm sure all of you at some point came across Robert Frost's famous poem, where one of
his neighbors asserted of over a rock wall that good fences make good neighbors, each
keeping to his own side.
In the modern world, there's lots of conflicts among neighbors that can reach across even
well maintained stone walls.
One such example comes from California, where there have been a number of conflicts over
sunlight and shade.
As energy prices rise and environmental concerns increase, number of people have been converting
to try to use more renewable and fewer fossil fuels.
But what if you install an array of photoelectric panels on your roof and then find that for
several hours your neighbor's trees are keeping those panels in deep shadow?
Do you have the right to direct sunlight that he's obligated to respect?
Does he have the right to plant any trees in his yard he wishes?
Does it matter which came first?
If we don't have clarity as to the rights, no neighbor has any clarity about their own
incentives about the gains in the cost.
California tried to solve this in 1978 by passing a statute that was called the Solar
Shade Control Act.
And so the legislature set certain minimum setbacks to find what solar collectors were,
put maximum heights for shade trees, and tried to define how many hours of shade per
day and at what times would constitute interference.
So after this whole law was passed, it would seem that the issue was statutorily settled.
In 1986, there was a case, though, where the owner of a passive solar home asked Santa
Clara County to use that statute to require his neighbor to trim or to remove the trees
on his lawn.
Now the homeowner didn't have active solar collection equipment.
What he had was a long exposed southern bank of windows and a large south facing concrete
patio that would serve as a solar heat sink.
But the neighbor's trees had reached such a height that by midday they were casting
shadow on his passive solar home.
What's the answer, of course?
This is America.
They went to court.
And in the court, the court decided that a passive solar home did not fit into the details
of that statutory definition of a solar collector.
The neighbor's trees were not, therefore, in violation of the law.
Case closed, story over.
Or perhaps not.
Now that the lawyers are through, an economist might have something more to say, especially
if that economist was named Ronald Coase.
Coase won a Nobel Prize in Economics in 1991, mostly for what comes next.
If you ask lawyers, they probably misperceive what it is that their role is, Coase would
say.
He says they'll believe they're deciding whether trees will stand or houses will be
in the sun.
But Coase says, if you think like an economist, that probably isn't quite true.
The lawyers haven't ended the drama.
They've merely opened the curtains for Pareto to enter the stage.
Now that they both know who is entitled to what, the question is, can both of them be
made better off by having the winner trade away the right that the court just clarified
for him?
So suppose this is the case.
The neighbor says, I will gladly trim those trees for $2,000.
And the homeowner thinks to himself, I would gladly pay up to $5,000 for an unobstructed
sight line to the sun.
So any negotiated contract that pays between $2,000 and $5,000 to have the neighbor voluntarily
trim the trees is really going to make both of them better off.
The owner of the trees does not have to trim them, but he can if he wants to.
The owner of the home can't force the neighbor to trim the trees, but he can pay him to do
so.
And in this case, a negotiated settlement becomes an efficient outcome.
And what was the obstacle to this happening before?
The obstacle was that there was a lack of clarity as to the rights.
So neither party knew what they could negotiate, how they could negotiate.
Once that obstacle was overcome, efficiency could prevail.
And when efficiency prevails, economists are happier.
How about an old pop quiz at this point?
Think like an economist about the contract that those two parties are going to enter
into.
The wording is going to be very important.
Why?
Because the contract isn't just determining the outcome at this point.
The contract is going to define incentives for the future as well.
And if it's not carefully worded, you might create a way for your neighbor to generate
a very steady stream of income by just keeping on planting more and more fast growing trees
on his property.
So you have to just keep paying him to keep cutting them down.
Thinking about the future consequences of incentives is important as well.
Economists look for these connections between rights and rules and efficiency everywhere.
In fact, we've even devoted a subfield in economics to the topic.
It goes by the name of law and economics.
And in that field, the practitioners ask, what are the efficiency consequences of legal
rules?
And they happily find that a lot of rules established by common law precedent with judges
and by legislatures really have created incentives that have the result of creating efficient
outcomes.
Let's take one example, contract law.
Contracts are based on voluntary mutual exchanges, and of course that's the very foundation definition
of efficiency.
And the contract law defines which practices are enforceable, defines the consequences
of breaking those laws, and though technically it's resolving past conflicts, most importantly
what it's doing is establishing incentives and guidelines for future behavior.
Law and economics looks for efficiency in those incentives that arise from the law.
So let's take a couple of examples.
First one.
The law is only going to enforce bargains that are voluntarily agreed to by all parties.
Every signer to a contract must voluntarily and willingly participate.
They have to accept all the terms.
That fits closely with the presumption of rationality, that the parties who enter a
contract must expect their participation to make them better off.
Pareto optimality has been the standard in contract law since before Pareto himself
was born.
Another example.
Once the contract has been made, both parties really expect the promises to be kept, and
that's consistent with what my mom taught me.
She said a promise is a promise.
You keep your word.
The law agrees with that most of the time, but occasionally there are rules involving
breach where the law actually encourages broken promises.
Now that might be morally wrong, but sometimes it's economically efficient.
Let's take a hypothetical.
This could be fun.
Let's go back out into the Gulf of Alaska, we'll get on a crab fishing boat, and just
before leaving port, the captain's going to meet with the owner of the largest cannery.
The cannery has a large order that has to be fulfilled in 10 days.
So the cannery owner makes an offer to the captain.
If you will return to port three days before my orders do, I guarantee to pay you two dollars
a pound for your entire catch.
Both parties are better off.
The captain of the ship has a fixed price and a ready market.
The cannery knows there'll be a boat there in time to meet its order.
But now it gets interesting.
The day before our boat is supposed to return, a number of others come into port with a very
high catch.
And the sudden increase in supply causes the price to fall, let's say to $1.80.
And the cannery decides to jump in and take advantage.
That's less than the two dollars it had promised.
The cannery's clearly better off, it's got a lower price.
The captain from whom it buys is better off.
But our captain, a party to the original contract, is going to be surprised.
He's going to be disappointed.
And he's probably going to be pretty angry when he makes port tomorrow to find out that
the cannery has breached on the contract, has reneged on its promise.
My mother's rule would have compelled the cannery to wait, fulfill its promise.
But the law's more pragmatic.
Because doing that would have left some money on the table.
Our captain was harmed by the breach, no question about it.
But he could be made whole, he could achieve the expectation he had by having the cannery
pay damages.
And what's the standard of damages?
Well, the captain is entitled to the gain he expected when he signed the contract, when
he made the bargain.
Nothing less than that.
But also nothing more.
So if the spot price had risen to $1.90 when our captain pulled into port, the breach by
the cannery just cost him 10 cents a pound.
And when the cannery pays the damages, its net cost also becomes $1.90 a pound, 10 cents
less than the $2 contract price it had established.
With the damages, our captain receives the $2 he expected.
The cannery is made better off by the breach because it gets the crab cheaper, our captain
is not harmed, the breach is Pareto optimal, each party has an incentive to contract again.
Breach got at least what they expected.
Let's make this more interesting.
Our captain is a man of high emotion.
This isn't a business decision for him, this is a personal insult.
Gentlemen do not do business that way.
So in order to protest the moral wrong that he has incurred, he anchors just off the dock
of the cannery.
And he vows to stay until the contract is fulfilled till they buy his crab for the full $2 a pound.
Well the cannery doesn't need the crab anymore, its order has been fulfilled.
And so while he's anchored there, the crabs die, they lose all market value, but our captain
has stood his moral ground.
And the horrid smell emanating from his hold is testament to his insistence that promises
must be kept.
He stands awaiting the promised payment, the fulfillment of the contract.
He was probably morally right, the cannery was maybe morally wrong, but when the captain
goes to court demanding that he be made whole, that the cannery perform, and that they buy
his crab at $2 a pound, what he expected when he signed the contract, he's going to be very
disappointed.
Because for centuries, judges have imposed a duty on the non-breaching party to mitigate
damages.
It's childish, worse it's inefficient to make things worse just out of spite.
Those crabs still had value when he reached port, someone would have paid him much more
than zero, though perhaps less than $2 a pound.
The captain created most of the real damage by willfully destroying his own catch.
He should not be rewarded for that, and under law his compensation is going to be limited
to the harm that was caused by the cannery, the difference between the contract price
and the spot price at the time of breach.
Judges probably won't admit it, they often speak in language of justice and fairness,
but when you look carefully at it, the evidence is really clear.
They seem to know implicitly that when they're resolving past conflicts, they're really
defining incentives, and by doing that they're determining future behavior.
More often than not, they've made economic efficiency a foundation for the law.
So where are we now?
Today we've been using this toolkit of ours to examine the way in which rules and rights
can be used to shape the incentives and determine the optimal choices of the participants.
In some cases, as with the fisheries, getting the incentives right required some kind of
external government redefinition of rights.
In other situations, as with the ownership of the mechanics tools, the rights and the
rules just seem to have evolved as an ongoing game has played out over time.
We've seen how well-defined rights, as with the shade trees and the solar collectors,
can open the way to negotiated settlements that will make all the parties involved better
off.
And we've even seen how the law, resolving disputes about the past, is really more importantly
defining incentives that are going to guide future decisions and future behavior.
What does all this mean for you?
It means that if you're going to think like an economist, you need to ask yourself, am
I in a situation where the rules and the rights are creating some kind of a prisoner's dilemma,
establishing incentives that are going to cause each of the participants to make rational
decisions that are ultimately going to harm us all?
That's what decades old fishing regulations were doing.
We're going to ask, can the rules or the rights that we have be designed or negotiated
to induce individuals to reach better decisions?
Whether we're talking about creating individual quotas for the fishers, about having mechanics
on their own tools, or about having college students share in the benefits of textbook
cost reduction.
Rights and rules do define incentives.
When we set rights and rules now, we're also determining future decisions and future behavior,
anticipating how is a large part of what it means to think like an economist.
So the next time, what we're going to do is we're going to begin to consider what happens
when some of the incentives that are guiding our choices are really lies in the sense that
the prices we pay don't accurately reflect all of the costs we inflict or the costs
we incur.
It's pretty easy to make mistakes in decisions when we have incomplete or distorted information
about the consequences of our actions.
Sometimes hard to know what to do when we face inescapable risks.
What we're going to be able to do is use these tools we've developed.
In the next few lectures, we'll use them to address these challenging questions as well.
And the next time, we'll begin to do precisely that.
