So, we're back again for the fifth in our lecture series on how to think like an economist.
We've got a toolkit, six foundation principles, we've got three core concepts, and we've
developed this central conclusion that even though nobody's really in control, individual
rational decisions can lead to socially efficient outcomes.
But the big question, are they always going to do that?
Behind that central conclusion, there are a whole lot of ifs, ands, or buts.
And the last time we talked about the importance of having well-defined rights and rules if
we're going to have effective and efficient outcomes.
But today I want to turn to another if.
This time a really big if, and if it's so big and so broad that it's going to lead
us to one of the fundamental questions of the modern era, and that is simply this.
Would rational people ever destroy their own planet?
Well, what if the incentives that people are using to guide these choices are lies?
What if they don't tell the truth about costs and benefits?
What if they're not considering all of the consequences that our actions have on others?
Or what if the incentives are simply inaccurate?
There's one kind of inaccuracy that economists spend a lot of time talking about, and that's
called an externality.
Any time I take an action that creates a benefit for somebody else, or impose a cost on somebody
else, but no payment has to be made, I don't have to be paid for it, I don't have to pay
them for the cost.
When externalities exist, then rational individual decisions can lead to inefficient outcomes
in two distinct ways.
And the first one is that the false incentives may cause us to make decisions that are really
causing significant real harm to other people that's avoidable, but we don't consider it.
And the other is that sometimes externalities will prevent us from making decisions, making
choices that are really going to cause benefit, but we don't consider that.
And I think I'm going to tell you about this, we can see both of these at play, and what
I'm going to call for one of a better word, a tale of two fires.
So here we are, you're the dispatcher for the emergency services in Cleveland, Ohio,
when you get a call.
The Cuyahuga River's on fire.
Now of course you're a little bit puzzled by this, you want to know more details, do
you mean the brush along the river is on fire?
Do you mean some of the buildings along the river are on fire?
But the improbable truth is the river itself was on fire.
Some smoker walking across a bridge took a last puff, flicked it into the river, instead
of going out, the river went poosh and caught fire.
The truth is that so many factories had been using that river as a dump for volatile chemicals
that the liquid that was flowing north toward Lake Erie couldn't really be called water
at all, and the flames that were leaping from the surface gave certain proof of that.
Now I honestly don't know how they ultimately extinguished that fire, they certainly didn't
just get the pumps out and spray more river water onto it, but the flammability of that
river and the subsequent fire were the unfortunate results of behavior.
Behavior that was probably irresponsible, I know it was harmful, but it wasn't in the
economist's strict sense irrational.
And I want to think economically for a moment or two about the kind of incentives that the
polluters of that river faced.
And the fire, like some other disasters, was ultimately inevitable given the incentives
that they all faced.
The invisible hand was at work and it was given that river a pretty bad beating.
It's an example of what Garrett Hardin in his classic 1968 article in the journal Science
called The Tragedy of the Commons.
A commons is something that we all get to use collectively and no one is directly responsible
for.
Boston Common was a pastor that everyone shared.
The air, oceans, outer space and rivers are really owned by no one and thus they're available
to all of us without any real cost.
The presumption is that we'll all use the commons responsibly, but the incentives for
each user of a commons, a commons like the Cuyahuga River, really work against that hope
because this is the prisoner's dilemma all over again.
Each potential polluter, each person along the side of that river had two options.
The first option was to incur substantial costs to capture and treat and carefully dispose
of all its chemical waste.
And the second option was pay nothing and dump it in the river.
The first option had high costs.
For the polluter, the second one had none.
So even if I believe it's wrong to dump into the river, I probably had little choice.
And here's why.
Because if my competitors on the river are dumping and I don't, I'm at a significant
cost disadvantage.
I go broke, my competitors thrive, the river's polluted anyway, and in short harsh terms,
if others pollute, the game theory incentives are I should either pollute also or I'm going
to go broke.
What if everyone else stops polluting?
Then if I continue, I'm going to be at a major cost advantage.
My competitors will suffer, I'll thrive, the river will be much cleaner, and they will
have paid all the cost.
In short harsh terms, if others don't do the polluting, I'll do better by polluting.
So what's the payoff matrix?
If they pollute, my best strategy is to continue polluting.
If they don't pollute, my best strategy is to continue polluting.
No matter what course others may take, pollute is the best individual strategy.
Rational individuals are all made decisions that led them to be collectively worse off.
They did what the incentives said they should do, but they and the river all got burned.
There's something extra here.
There's something different about this.
You remember our original version of the prisoner's dilemma and people engaged in selfish, strategic
behavior that ended up harming them both?
Here it's different because much of the cost from that fire was borne by innocent bystanders,
by people whose lives are negatively affected by all of this.
They're exposed to toxic chemicals, they live near a burning river, they didn't participate
in the decisions, they didn't decide to pollute, but they're feeling the weight of the consequences.
Apparently Adam Smith's invisible hand can push bystanders over a cliff.
The response to the individual incentives assured harm rather than social gain.
What to an economist had gone so horribly wrong?
Moral failings?
Undoubtedly.
Callous air responsibility?
Certainly.
But more than that, the incentives that the polluters faced were wrong.
They didn't reflect the costs of the actions actually being taken.
There were costs external to the decision makers, but they had no need to consider those.
If you remember the foundation principle we had, principle number two, there's no such
thing as a free lunch.
There's no such thing as a free river either.
When they used that river as a chemical dump, they were giving up the opportunity for it
to be used for other valued purposes.
It could not be home for fish.
It could not be used as a swimming hole in a hot summer day.
It could not be drinking water for a city in need.
That as long as we're living near a city like that, a number of opportunities for
healthful living and long life were forever gone.
There was a price to be paid for using that as a chemical dump, but the price wasn't paid
by the people making the decision.
The price that the polluters had to pay was a lie.
Jared Hardin's choice of terms in his decision was apt.
The outcome in Cleveland was truly tragic, and it was the result of false incentives.
The second fire.
Let's travel.
22 years later, we'll go 2,000 miles away, and on a single afternoon there was a fire
raging in the Oakland Hills above the San Francisco Bay.
For years, drought had accumulated a tremendous amount of tinder dry brush on the hillsides,
and thousands of homes perched on the pinnacles were in great peril.
They awaited simply a single spark and a windy day.
Now they would have been much better off if there was some way to get that danger away,
but there it was, year after year, adding fuel and making it more and more dangerous.
Everyone who lived in that community would have been better off if that brush had been
removed.
But it was in no one's, no one person's interest to go to the effort to remove it.
Because that fire protection is what economists tend to call a public good or a non-excludable
good.
Fire prevention?
Fire prevention is something that either everyone has it or no one has it.
It's an all or nothing proposition.
There's no way that we can protect every other house on a street from a raging fire.
Either we protect all or we protect none.
Now here's the other side of this.
If other people will pay the costs, go to the effort to clear the brush, I get protected
and I don't have to do a thing.
I can be what economists call a free rider.
I'll go along without picking up the tab.
But if lots of other people don't decide to engage in protection, then that danger is
going to be there no matter how much I clear the brush around my house, the fire will spread.
There's no reason for me to incur those costs alone.
There's an economist by the name of Mansor Olson and he wrote an interesting book talking
about the intractability of this free rider problem.
And he says that this is going to increase and become more difficult as the size of the
group gets bigger and bigger.
I think I mentioned last time Robert Frost's famous poem about the neighbors who meet once
a year to repair the rock wall.
I bring it up because I don't really know that many poems, so I'll have to come back
to the same one twice.
But what they were doing is the two of them were joining and putting a boundary between
their properties.
And it was pretty obvious with just two people, if one of them hadn't showed up.
If one had tried to ride free, the endeavor to fix the wall and likely the wall itself
would have collapsed.
If you don't have the participation of both, then the benefit would have been available
to neither one.
But that was a group of two.
And free riding is hard to pull off in a group that small.
But in the Oakland Hills above the San Francisco Bay on that October afternoon, there were
thousands and thousands of people, all of whom were going to be affected by the ability
to eliminate the fire danger.
Every cooperation is exponentially harder to attain when every person is so small relative
to it that neither his participation or his non-participation is going to have any impact
at all on the outcome.
So there are two results.
Two results.
The first is, I have an incentive to free ride.
And the second is, I know that other people have an incentive to free ride as well.
And I certainly don't want to be the one standing here paying their fare.
So the result is, none of us are really prevented from facing that fire danger because we could
not get together in order to clean it out.
Now, everyone in the Oakland Hills was aware of this danger, but it was no one's job to
clear the brush.
It was no one's job to organize others to do so.
And on that one October afternoon, 3,000 homes on the top of those hills all went up in smoke.
Alliance on several thousand people to all have to get together and agree to provide that
public good didn't work out here.
There were simply too many people, each of whom was too small compared to the result,
to have individually rational decisions lead to acceptably good outcomes.
Now, with public goods, there are two practical ways that we've come up with to try and overcome
this free rider problem.
The first one's fairly obvious, compulsory participation.
Governments will make you pay through tax funded programs or sometimes an organization
will have a neighborhood will have a mandatory neighborhood association fee.
But there's another way that some groups use.
If you can link the public good to a desirable private good, you can get people to participate.
Here's an example.
I promise you that AARP, the American Association of Retired Persons, could never support its
very extensive political lobbying effort, which is a clear public good.
You can ride for free on it without participating.
They could never support that simply from voluntary contributions.
Give us money and we'll lobby for interest for the elderly.
It succeeds by linking its memberships to private individual benefits.
So if you want the health insurance, you want the travel discounts, you want the other
private benefits of AARP, you must become a member and that provides them with the funds
for their political activities.
So now let's broaden our horizons even a little bit more.
Let's talk about the tragedy of the commons on a global scale.
The problem that we face of individuals trying to optimize but facing false incentives leads
to social tragedies not just in burning rivers and burnt out neighborhoods.
UN scientists have told us we face this on a grander scale in the entire globe.
Climate change, they report, quote, is a threat to humanity as a whole.
Now you don't have to be an economist to think that the extinction of the human species
is probably an undesirable and even inefficient outcome.
Now of course there's still a good deal of debate about how much human responsibility
there is for global climate change and I won't try to resolve the science for you today.
But economics with its emphasis on incentives says that there really are strong forces for
all of us to use this earth atmosphere as a free-for-all dump for greenhouse gases.
It's the Cuyahuga River all over again, but this time writ large.
This is the problem, the tragedy of the commons, on a truly global scale.
And any solution to this is going to have to be a public good of mammoth proportions,
six billion people, all of whom have an incentive to try to ride for free.
And yet here we are, we're lifers in this global prison.
It makes any possible disaster from climate change a problem I think we should think about
and I think we can think about it as economists do.
So let's try that.
If the problem is that the incentives people are using to make decisions are false, what
does economic theory tell us about making them true?
Well, the first thing thinking like an economist does, it helps us define how much our behavior
ought to change.
What's the optimal amount of change?
And second, it gives us some guidance on what kind of policies we could use to make it happen.
So let's consider each of these in turn.
So the first question is, how much of a reduction in greenhouse gases makes sense?
Well, you know where an economist is going to go on this one.
If you want to answer a question about optimality, you go to the margin.
And of course we think that the marginal value or the marginal cost of having one more or
one less always depends on how much of it you already have.
Some rain is beneficial.
Too much can be catastrophic.
Just ask Noah.
Similarly, some CO2 in the atmosphere is natural.
It's something that we expect.
Nature requires it.
Policy and practical choice is not, shall there be CO2 or shall there be no CO2?
The question is always with economists, should it be how much of it would be optimal?
So think like an economist for a moment about that principle.
Remember, we talk about the optimal level of emissions, and that's going to depend on
the cost and benefits on the margin.
We could get rid of climate change by exterminating all human activity, but I don't think that's
a very good idea.
Or we could completely ignore climate change and risk exterminating all human life, but
I don't think that's a particularly good idea either.
So we're looking for something in the middle, an optimal level of emissions that should
be our target.
And of course, for an economist, that means balancing the marginal cost of CO2 with the
marginal cost of reducing it.
Now as emissions are reduced, the harm done by the last ton, the amount of the marginal
harm done is getting smaller.
So as we have less and less emissions, the marginal cost is going down.
But as we push our technology and try and get rid of more and more emissions, the marginal
cost of getting rid of that last, that next ton of CO2 emissions is going up.
So we're back at Econ 101.
When the gain from reducing another emissions has fallen down to meet the rising cost of
doing it, you stop.
Where are we?
We fit the equal marginal principle, my friends.
We've satisfied that.
The solution is efficient.
We have optimized.
Now I'm going to have to leave it to scientists to figure out what the actual measures are
of costs, particularly those with environmental terms.
But economic thinking helps us understand that standard of finding this balance.
Now once that's been done, there's a second question.
And this is one where economists have perhaps more value to offer.
How do you go about getting to that level?
And of course the answer is simple.
If the problem is caused by the fact that the price is wrong, change the price.
Let's see how.
If we were to put a price on pollution, we set a price say $100 per ton, then every time
you admit a ton, you had to pay a real cost.
It would be part of your calculations.
You'd have to consider those emissions every time you did something in the business world.
If you can reduce your emissions at a cost of less than $100 a ton, economic logic alone
says do it.
You don't need detailed regulations.
You just need your accountants to show you the money going in versus the money being
saved.
If we can develop new technologies so we could reduce emissions, economic logic says well
do that.
You'll save money by doing it.
You don't need a mandate.
It's the invisible hand.
It's direct benefits that come from reducing emissions as long as the cost is below the
price.
The individual hand is going to be enough punishment for those who don't look for cost effective
ways to reduce emissions.
Now this sounds morally wrong.
It says that people in effect can pay and continue emitting greenhouse gases.
But remember the goal of this whole thing?
It's a good result.
We want sustainable global levels of greenhouse emissions.
A good result.
Not good behavior per se.
Economists logic.
That's the way they think about these things.
That if price is going to be the cheapest way to reduce emissions, all we have to do
is put a price on emitting.
Economists started making this argument I think back in the 1960s.
And when they first espoused it, everybody said that's a crazy idea.
Economists have the nuttiest point of view in the world.
But now, 40, 50 years later, that whole idea of putting a price on pollution is being embraced
by policymakers all over the world.
It seems to be the most plausible and most effective hope for any real impact on global
climate change.
Who would have imagined that?
Well, there are additional practical advantages to pricing pollution rather than just regulating
and restricting.
For example, if we get new evidence that says the target is too high or too low, we don't
have to rewrite volumes of regulations.
We don't have to put in different metering equipment.
All you do is adjust the price and then individuals are going to make their own adjustments of
their behavior at the margin.
Now let's talk more about how we go about doing this.
Economists agree almost to a person that some price for emissions is the most efficient and
effective solution.
When and if, governments decide that something must be done.
Economists don't agree on a lot, but they do agree that a price is the best solution for
this externality problem.
Now, they differ somewhat on what kind of a price.
There are some who would like a direct, wide-based carbon tax where every user of energy, households,
transportation, industry all pay a carbon tax.
But others kind of like that fishery solution we talked about last time.
The idea of putting a total limit on and allowing people to trade within that.
So they call that a cap and trade system.
And the idea would be that scientists somehow would agree on a total global cap, the total
amount of emissions that the environment can really sustain.
And then it would issue permits to emitters allowing them to admit up to some amount as
long as the total of the permits was less than the total cap.
So that's the cap, part of cap and trade.
But economists like the other part too, the part that says trade.
If there isn't any trade, then for permit holders, the price of polluting is zero up
to the permit.
But it's infinite for others.
They can emit nothing at all.
No matter how easy it would be for a permit holder to reduce emissions, they have no incentive
to do that.
Non-holders would have to shut down.
So you do reach the cap limit, but there's no price to respond to, and that seems both
inefficient and unfair.
But if the holders of the permits were able to sell their permits, then if they had a
way to reduce emissions inexpensively, they could make money by reducing their emissions
and selling the permit to someone else.
It would be a better off solution for both the seller and the buyer.
If non-users find that they cannot reduce emissions very well, they could buy that from someone
else.
And what this price does is it makes you recognize the opportunity cost.
Selling carbon dioxide has a real cost in the market, and not taking advantage of reductions
is leaving something economists don't like, leaving money on the table.
The reductions in this case are always made by the emitters who can do it most cheaply.
And who figures out who can do that most cheaply?
The individual players do, and the market moves those permits to where they can do the
most good.
All the trades are mutually beneficial and socially beneficial.
The global reduction in emissions is done at the lowest possible total social cost.
Pareto is happy, economists are satisfied, that's the good news.
The true price for using the atmosphere could save the planet from devastating climate change.
Unfortunately, there's some bad news as well, because now that we economists know what ought
to happen, policymakers are going to have to be the ones who actually make it happen.
They're going to have to reach some consensus on the details of how to go about doing this.
And as policymakers often say, the devil is in the details.
So let's think like economists for a moment about the processes of making collective policy
decisions as opposed to those individual rational decisions that we've talked about before.
And when we think about policy making, implementing either of those solutions on a worldwide basis
is going to be very, very difficult.
Remember economists?
We think in our fundamental principles that people behave strategically, not just when
we're shopping, but when we're making policy as well.
And when we begin to talk about charging people to use something like the environment that's
always before been absolutely free of charge, not costless, mind you, but free of charge,
we're unquestionably now in the world of politics.
And believe me, policy making is not a process of voluntary Pareto trades.
It has winners.
It has losers.
And rational people pretty much always want to be in the winner's circle, very seldom do
they prefer to be in the loser's circle.
In the invisible hand, that persistent drive to respond to incentives that can make people
work together, that can make us cooperate in mutual exchanges where both of us win,
can lead to conflict and paralysis in the political arena where gains and losses are
distributed and redistributed.
Over 50 years ago, an economist named Anthony Downs wrote a classic book called An Economic
Theory of Democracy.
He took our basic tool kit and he used it to look at electoral politics and policy making.
And he started with a simple premise.
Politicians, like all the rest of us, respond to incentives.
And if they want to continue being politicians, they're going to have to adopt their policy
positions to maximize their votes.
In essence, it's this.
If like Henry Clay, they'd really rather be right than president, they almost always
get their wish.
If they truly want to be president or senator or representative or even mayor, they'd better
be ready to do what's politic.
Now, I know that's cynical, but it's the logical application of economic thinking to political
behavior.
In our next lecture, we're going to see how this can lead to some very troubling conclusions
about electoral processes.
But for now, consider for a moment, just trying to implement either one of these policies
regarding climate change.
Any time we're going to put a price on emissions or establish a system of tradable permits,
that's a new set of direct cash on the barrel head out of my pocket costs paid by people
who up until now haven't had to pay a cent to use the atmosphere.
And each of those people, or probably I should say each of us people, also knows that their
own behavior is so insignificant in terms of the global outcome that what I do won't
really have an impact on global warming.
So each of us is going to be better off if we can ride for free, if we can somehow get
somebody else to pay the cost of reduced emissions.
If I can get on that save the earth train without a ticket, then each of us is likely
to turn to the political system and see if they can do that without having to buy the
ticket.
And even if I am individually willing to pay my fair share, I don't know that I want to
be the one to pay for everybody else's free ride.
I want a system where they're picking up as much of the tab as possible.
So in principle, we can all agree that a price would have to be paid to stop climate change,
but we also can disagree about who should pay that price.
Who's going to get those emission permits?
Are they going to be issued free of charge to current emitters?
Isn't that some way to reward people's past behavior?
Maybe we should auction them off, but if we do that, aren't family firms, smaller firms
going to be priced out of the market?
Aren't their vote conscious representatives going to stand in Congress and say we cannot
adopt the policy that punishes the small American business person?
Each of us prefers a pricing solution for this that's paid by somebody else's constituents.
Remember how hard it was for the residents of Oakland to save their neighborhood by cooperating
and getting rid of all that built-up fuel that was accumulating on the slopes?
If they'd done so, they might have saved their homes, but it just didn't happen.
Well, compare that to trying to address global warming, and that problem seems like a trivial
event indeed.
The benefits from being a free rider in that scale are much too great.
It's true for individuals and it's true for nations.
If the U.S. can get China or Brazil or Europe to restrict their emissions, then we don't
have to so much, because it's the same atmosphere, it's the same commons.
India, China, and other developing nations argue, perhaps with validity, that the West
industrialized for two centuries helped this build-up of greenhouse gases, and now it seems
unfair to ask India and China to slow their growth, freeze the relative wealth after the
damage has been done.
They argue that the West caused the harm, the East should not be asked to bear the burden
of fixing it.
If Downs is correct, and I think he is, then the obstacles to a solution here are pretty
great.
The politicians in each nation have no choice but to respond to the interests back home.
They know they're going to be punished if they take a large share of the costs.
And they know they'll be rewarded if we can make the rest of the world ride free.
But without enough paying passengers, this train is not going to leave the station.
And that outcome would be both individually rational and collectively tragic.
So what are we going to take away from all this?
Well first of course, understanding how economists think about really crucial policy problems
like global climate change is part of being a good citizen.
It's something I think everyone should know.
But on a smaller scale, when you're asked or faced with any issue, to think like an
economist is to think, are there real consequences to a choice that is somehow not being paid
for, that are not accounted for in the incentives facing this decider?
And how are the false incentives distorting the outcome?
Are there mechanisms we can employ to be sure that the consequences are going to be effectively
priced?
Are there free rider problems here that are preventing our cooperation that would make
many of us better off?
Could we overcome them doing something like the AARP does?
In the next three lectures, we'll think in some more detail about the economics, particularly
of information, because how can we make intelligent choices if we don't have good information?
And we'll see how that relates to rational decision making and to the consequences of
doing that.
