Welcome back. This is going to be the ninth lecture in our series on how to think like
an economist. We've really done a lot in the last few sessions. We developed an important
toolkit of economic ideas that we can use. We've applied it in many different situations.
We've talked about the importance of having well-defined rights and rules. We've spent
a lot of time talking about information and ignorance, and about uncertainty and about
risk. But there's one more important topic we need to cover, and it's about time. Literally.
Today, we're going to think like economists about time itself.
And I want to begin with a true story. In 1965, there was a 47-year-old French lawyer,
and he entered into a contract with then 90-year-old Madame Jean Calmet. She was a widow. She had
no living heirs, and so he offered her $500 every month for the rest of her life if she
would give to him, titled her Paris apartment when she died. Now, in expected value terms,
this looked like a pretty good deal for both of them. For her, she would be financially
secure, she'd have a steady source of income. For him, he was likely to get a Paris apartment
in the not-too-distant future and likely at a real bargain price. However, defying all
odds and I guarantee you the expectations of both of them, Madame Calmet lived to be
122. Michel Rafferty had died of cancer by then in his 70s. His widow was contractually
obligated to continue the payments until 1997, when finally Madame Calmet and titled her
apartment both finally passed on. This tale is useful to us for two reasons. First, it
gives us a chance to review the idea, the concepts of expected value, and the concepts
of risk that we developed in the last lecture. Life expectancies are really good predictors
of what's going to happen on average, but in individual cases, outcomes can be quite
quite different from the average. It was a rational decision for Monsieur Rafferty at
the time he made it, but it's probably an important lesson to remember that being rational
doesn't protect you from uncertain and unfavorable future outcomes. When you maximize expected
value, it doesn't guarantee that you're going to win every time, but it's the best bet you
can make in an uncertain world. I suspect that was small consolation to the poor lawyer.
The second lesson that we're going to talk about is that this story introduces the important
concept of rationality over time. When things happen, matters a great deal. The wisdom of
an agreement to trade a substantial amount of money for title of an apartment depends
on the timing of those things. If they happen at the same moment, that's a very, very different
transaction than if I pay you now and have to wait 32 years to take possession. Rational
decision makers, like lawyers when they write contracts, should always include the clause,
time is of the essence. Economic thinking, as we know, is focused on how people will
and should respond to their incentives, to the benefits and costs of their decisions.
But an awful lot of the benefits and the costs that we face from decisions we make now don't
occur until some time into the future. How does the timing affect the value of the incentives
today? We face decisions like that all the time. Should I pay cash for a new car or should
I finance it over 72 months? What's going to be the effect of waiting a few years if
I begin building my retirement account? Personally, I keep hoping to have to face this decision.
When I hold a winning $1 million lottery ticket and it says on it in the fine print, payable
is $50,000 a year for 20 years, do I take it that way or do I take it as a lump sum
all up front, even though it's going to be worth perhaps two-thirds that amount? How
much is it going to take my children or grandchildren to get through four years of college in the
future? How much saving is necessary today to ensure that they can? Our lives and the
consequences of our choices are spread over time. If we're going to think rationally,
if we're going to think like economists, we need to have our decisions reflect that.
So how do economists think about choices? When we have to decide today, but the consequences
will only occur at some point into the future. When we add time, it's going to bring two
important new elements, two important decisions to rational decision making. The first is,
we have to talk about the value of money itself. What's the real value? And the second is,
we're going to have to talk how to value now, today, in the present, events that won't
occur until sometime in the future, sometimes the distant future. So we have two terms we're
going to understand today, the real value of money and the time value of money. And we're
going to consider each of those in turn. Economics isn't really focused on money any
more than physics is the science of kilograms. Money and kilograms are abstract units. We
can use them to measure all kinds of much more important underlying things. But money,
the thing we use in financial decisions, is a really strange yardstick. Suppose we were
planning to build a bridge, you and I, and I gave you a piece of elastic cord, and I
said, I want you to use this as the measuring rod when you're constructing all the parts
that are going to go on our bridge. I expect that when the final product was finally put
together, we'd find that those parts didn't work so well together. That would be nuts.
Use a piece of elastic as a measuring rod. And yet, money, the yardstick that we do use
to measure so many important elements, is really a very highly elastic unit of measure.
Philosophically, nor economically, is money what life is all about, not even to an economist.
If your primary goal was to acquire as much money as possible, perhaps you should have
moved to Zimbabwe. In the year 2008, the legislature in Zimbabwe passed a minimum wage
statute that raised the minimum wage in that country to $100 billion a month. That's more
dollars than I'm going to make in my entire lifetime, even if, like Madame Calme, I lived
to be 122. You know there's a catch. What's the catch? The catch, of course, is that it
was $100 billion Zimbabwe dollars, which at the time had a U.S. equivalence of about $13
billion. The money in Zimbabwe literally wasn't worth the paper it was printed on.
Now I certainly hope that you and I don't ever face that kind of hyperinflation. That's
a disruption that throws all kinds of things into chaos. But it's a clear reminder that
anytime there's a change in price, anytime there's inflation, it changes the underlying
purchasing power of money and alters what we economists call its real value. Though
anytime you say something and use a major dollars, the first thing an economist is going
to ask you, which dollars are you using? Real dollars or nominal dollars? Dollars fixed
in value or dollars allowed to stretch or shrink as changes in price level take place?
If we're really going to make rational decisions, then we need to think about the incentives,
we need to think about the benefits, we need to think about the costs in the future in
real terms, in fixed value dollar terms. It's never, ever a matter of how many dollars
are involved. It's always a question of what's the equivalent of those dollars, what can
the dollars buy? If my grandfather had retired with a million dollars in a retirement account
he would have done very well indeed. If I do so, I'll probably get by comfortably. If
my children do, it's possible they may barely be getting by. Any change in the value of
a currency changes the consequences of our actions. We need to be conscious and aware
of that at all times. Well, how do you measure inflation? How do you know how much inflation
there is? Well, fortunately the government probably is going to do that for you. They
measure inflation using something called a price index, and the most commonly used of
that is something called the consumer price index. Here's how it's constructed. They
take a market basket of goods, a conceptual market basket of goods, and say that's what
a typical household is going to buy, that's what it needs to live for a year. Then it
picks a base year, doesn't matter what year, let's say 1995, and it says how many dollars
would it take to buy that basket of goods in 1995, and they set the cost of living in
that base year, 1995 equals 100. If we come back in 2005 and it takes 50% more dollars
to buy the same stuff, the price index for 2005 is going to be 150. Each dollar buys
two thirds of what it did. It takes 50% more dollars to buy the same stuff. A 2005 dollar
is the equivalent of 67 cents in terms of $19.95. Now, you can and in some situations clearly
should take the time to convert nominal dollars to real dollars. So let's compare them, let
us see what the consequence is over time. How about an example? I like to call this
one my in-laws big investment. My in-laws raised, educated, sent through college, five
children, and a couple of cousins. After they'd done all that, they had very little money
to put into a retirement fund until late in life, and mostly they retired on the value
that they'd accumulated in their beautiful old house. They bought a lovely house in Central
Phoenix, Arizona in 1955, and I think they paid something like $20,000 for it. When they
finally moved out in 2001, they sold the exact same house for $400,000. They took out 20
times more dollars than they put in. That seems incredibly profitable. But what's the
question they need to ask? Are those nominal dollars or are those real dollars? A 2001
dollar was worth only about what 15 cents was worth in 1955. They did take out 20 times
more dollars, but each dollar was worth about one-sixth of the dollars in its starting value.
They had a real return. They made a profit off it. The increase in real value was about
three times, though, not 20 times. That's okay, but it's nowhere near as spectacular
as it first appeared. Not to consider the effects of inflation on the value of money
can lead us to make grievous mistakes. At even a modest inflation rate, three percent
a year, a dollar is going to lose a quarter of its value in ten years. In the 1980s, when
we had double-digit inflation in the United States, we were experiencing the dollar losing
about three-quarters of its value over a decade. You need to know real or nominal values.
Now, it's one thing to know that you should anticipate inflation. It's another to figure
out what the rate is likely to be. Wouldn't it be nice if you had a crystal ball? What
is the inflation rate going to be in the future? Well, the answer to that question is the same
as it is to all complex questions. It depends. And it depends on lots of things. Important
decisions are, however, going to have to be made with incomplete information. There's
no perfect predictor of future inflation. Wait a minute. We talked earlier in one of
these lectures about the wisdom of the crowd. Remember back in lecture six, where James
Sir Wiki had this book, and he said, if we can somehow find a way to get an estimator
where we take all the diverse knowledge and pack it together, independent predictions
or estimates, they might converge on the correct answer. No expert could tell us where the
lost submarine was going to be, but the average of the expert's estimates brought us awfully
close. Is there any equivalent to this? Anything like the Iowa electronic markets that we talked
about before, a place where all the information from all the disparate players in the game
gets aggregated and averaged? Many economists think there is. After the very dismal experience
in the United States in the 1970s and 80s with inflation, in the 1990s, the federal government
decided to create a new kind of financial asset. They called them Treasury Inflation
Protected Securities, or TIPS for short. They're just like regular U.S. bonds. The default
risk is absolutely minimal. They enjoy the full faith and credit of the United States.
But unlike regular bonds, the principle when it's returned is going to get adjusted using
the consumer price index. The nominal return, the percent interest depends on changes in
the value of the dollar, but the real return is going to be guaranteed. So here's what
happens. The government auctions off regular bonds, and it offers off auctions off TIPS
bonds, and the difference between those two is the crowd's best estimate of future inflation,
all of the players in the financial game. If 10-year unprotected bonds are returning
5% and 10-year TIPS bonds are returning 2%, what's the market's best estimate of future
inflation? About 3% a year, 5 minus 2%. Even if you don't know and don't buy government
bonds, it's probably a good thing to know what inflation is likely to be, because it
affects so many of the decisions that you make. And remember that 3% is not a guarantee.
It's only the best collective estimate. As Michelle Rafferty found out, sometimes even
the very best estimates can turn out to be off by quite a lot.
The second thing we need to talk about is the time value of money and of everything else.
When matters, not only because inflation changes the value of a dollar, there's a more subtle
reason as well. Let me see if I can try this on you. I'm going to offer you a Caribbean
vacation today, or the same vacation in five years. Which would you prefer? It's the same
trip. Why does it matter when? Or alternatively, how about a root canal this afternoon or in
10 years? It's the same procedure. Why would you care when? Apparently though, you cared
and psychologists tell us that most people care. We don't really have reasons why, but
the evidence is strong. Humans almost always prefer to have good things happen sooner and
bad things happen later. Economists call that pure time preference. And if when matters
to you, then when is an important element in rational decision making. And if the value
of the incentives guiding your choices is going to be affected by when, we need to know
how events now compare to events later. For economists who have ways of seem to have ways
of attaching dollar values to everything, the answer lies in what we call the time value
of money and its two constituent parts, present value and future value. So let's talk about
present value, valuing the future today. If you stand on the shore and watch a ship sail
toward the horizon, to your eye, it's getting smaller and smaller and smaller the farther
way it is. Now objectively, you know it's always the same size. It's the perspective
that changes. From the shore, the ship seems to be shrinking. The time value of money in
both economic and financial terms is pretty much like that. To receive a thousand dollars
is to receive a thousand dollars. But the date at which that happens matters. And when
the time you receive the money gets farther and farther into the future, just like a ship
on the horizon, it appears to us standing here that it's present, in the present, its
value is shrinking. So here's a simple example. To perhaps give some precision to our concepts
of present and future value, I'm going to offer you a choice. You want a thousand dollars
today or a thousand dollars a year from today? Which? Well, both financially and psychologically
those are not equivalent events. When matters. Besides simply liking it to happen sooner,
money today can earn interest. So if I have the thousand dollars today and I put it in
an interest bearing account at five percent, when I open that up a year from now, there'll
be more than a thousand dollars in it. At five percent, there'll be a thousand fifty
dollars in it. Financially, those are the two options that are equivalent events. One thousand
dollars today, ten fifteen a year. If I put those on a metaphorical balance scale, they
just match. Ten fifty is the one year future value, the future equivalent of having one
thousand dollars today. Now the concept of present value uses the same metaphorical balance
scale as just starting from this side. It's looking from the perspective of the ship rather
than the shore. If I'm going to have ten fifty in a year, what do I need to have now to get
there? What's the present value I need to be equivalent? And the answer is a thousand
dollars today. Is the present value equivalent of ten fifty a year from today? So that's
going to affect our economic thinking. Let's go back to my unfortunately unrealized fantasy.
The day I'm going to have that one million dollar lottery ticket where it says payable
as fifty thousand dollars a year for twenty years. If you add that up, twenty payments
of fifty thousand, it adds up to a million. But that's not the same thing as getting a
million dollars today. I mean if you think about it for a minute, they're very very different.
If I had the million today and I put it in a bank and I could earn five percent, that
would throw off fifty thousand dollars each year, not for twenty years, for eternity. And
at every moment I would also still have a full one million dollars in the bank. Those are
not equivalent events. They do not have the same value. When things happen matters. And
if you do all the fancy math, and I'm not going to do it today, but if you do all the
fancy math, fifty thousand dollars a year for twenty years at five percent, the present
value of that stream is about six hundred and twenty three thousand dollars. If you
started with that in the bank, and you took out fifty thousand a year using up the interest,
eating into the principal, the account would slowly fall down and hit zero. When? Right
at the end of year twenty. Six hundred and twenty three thousand one hundred and ten
dollars today. And fifty thousand dollars a year for twenty years are the equivalent
events. The lump sum at the front is what we call the discounted present value of that
stream of payments. An annuity of course is kind of a mirror image of winning the lottery.
Instead of receiving a lump sum, you pay a bunch up front and you buy a stream of payments
into the future. In essence that's what Madame Calmay did. You remember she traded the title
to her apartment for a lifetime stream of payments. That worked out pretty well for
her. Unfortunately you can't always count on beating the actuarial odds the way she
did. I want to add another wrinkle to this. Once we started talking about future value
and the way in which money can grow over time, the time value of money, I want to talk a
little bit about the magic of compounding. It's extraordinary. When each of our three
children graduated from high school, their mother and I gave them one million dollars.
Potentially. Because we're not that rich. But if it fulfills that potential, it won't
be because we were generous. It'll be because of the timing and the conditions of our gift.
And our children coming to understand the magical power of compounding. Here's how it
works. What we really gave them was a mutual fund worth about three thousand dollars each
when they turned 18. And then their mom and I said, we'll add one hundred dollars each
month to that account until the day you withdraw the first penny. Take out a dime. We're done.
And even if we're compelled to stop when we reach retirement age, if they leave it there
until they reach their retirement age, a million dollars in that account is not out of the question.
How does so little become so much? And the answer is time. Remember the choice I offered
a few minutes ago? A thousand now or a thousand in a year. That thousand now at five percent
turned into ten fifty in a year. And in the second year, I'd be earning interest not just
on the original thousand, but on the fifty dollars of first year interest. And as time
goes on with the magic of compounding, you're earning interest on interest on interest, plus
of course the original principal. After ten years, the thousand dollars at five percent
would have grown to almost sixteen hundred. After thirty years, it would have grown to
more than forty three hundred. After fifty years, it would have grown to almost twelve
thousand. As the interest accumulates, the original principal becomes less and less important.
It becomes less significant because mostly we're earning interest on past interest. The
better the return, the more spectacular the results. At a ten percent rate of return,
which is the neighborhood of what the stock market has returned in nominal terms over
a long period of time, thousand dollars in thirty years would become seventeen thousand.
And after fifty years, one hundred and seventeen thousand. Three thousand dollars plus that
monthly one hundred dollar add in their mom and I promise. By the time our kids age sixty
five, if those conditions all hold, there will be more than one million dollars in each
of their accounts. The longer the time involved, the more spectacular the results. Ben Franklin
understood that. At his death, he willed five hundred dollars to the city of Boston, but
with a condition. He prohibited the city from drawing on that for two hundred years. He
wanted the power of compounding to work for two full centuries. And when finally the city
of Boston was able to get into that account and open it up, there was not five hundred
dollars in there anymore. It was worth over six point five million dollars. I don't think
I can reasonably ask my kids to wait quite that long to use their gift. But if they're
patient, as we've asked them to be, they're going to do very well with it. That's a lesson
that's probably best learned young. In recent years, Smith College, where I teach, has instituted
a number of non-credit courses on basic financial literacy. Before we cast the students out
into the real world. When we began a few years ago, we got lots of national press on this
to today's show from NBC sent a crew so that they could show a piece on their morning TV
broadcast. And they happened to come the day I was talking about the importance of giving
compounding time to work on your savings. The 20 year old students seemed to be sitting
there with a, hmm, that's kind of interesting attitude. When I looked at the camera crew,
most of whom seem to be in their late forties, there were tears trickling down their cheeks.
And after we were done, they lamented to me, why didn't anyone tell me this when I was
their age? The real graduation gift to our children isn't the money, though I'm sure
they're going to appreciate that. It was an opportunity to understand at a young age the
power of compounding and how that depends on time. And the future value literally grows
exponentially. The longer compounding has to work, the more spectacular the result. Time
is of the essence for economists as well as for contract lawyers. And time is of the essence
for you as well. When you're making rational decisions, when thinking about decisions always
consider the economic consequences of when teacher children or your grandchildren to think
like that as well. Make sure they know that the time to assure a comfortable retirement
is in your youth. Your fifties is not the time to start planning for retirement. Something
almost all of us discover when we reach our fifties. It's my hope that our million dollar
gift to our children is going to make it clear to them. I want to end with a fun story and
kind of capture some of the concepts we've been talking about today. As the year 2000
was approaching on the horizon, the Economist magazine published a fantasy tale. They imagined
a young girl born in the year 1900 and they gave her a name. They called her Felicity
Foresight and they endowed her with two things, one dollar and perfect information about the
future. And then on December 31 of each year, she would move all of her accumulated wealth
into the asset class that was poised on the brink of doing the absolute best in the coming
year. One year it would be U.S. stocks, another European bonds, a third gold futures, etc.
And they let that magic work for a full century. And so their hypothetical young woman grew
to maturity and even to old age and they let that wealth compound year after year until
she reached her 100th birthday. And as the new millennium dawned, they calculated that
her one dollar birthday gift would have grown to be greater than $9.6 quintillion. Let me
say that again. $9.6 quintillion. The compounded rate of return was about 55%. I spect a large
share of it probably would have gone for lawyer's fees because they didn't include taxes when
they were doing the calculations and she seems to have dodged paying brokerage fees. But even
if we had included those, her performance would have been nothing short of remarkable.
We can use her story to try out our new economist's vocabulary. When we put this, put her performance
on our metaphorical balance scale, what's the present value today of $9.6 quintillion?
100 years into the future? Well, using a discount rate of 55%, it's just a dollar. What's the
future value of a dollar today if we could invest it with an annual return of 55%? Why
it would only be $9.6 quintillion? That leaves us with two pressing questions. First, suppose
Madame Calmay had at 100 as much as Felicity did. In the mere 22 years she had left to
spend it, could she have spent it all? And the answer of course is absolutely not. On
that amount of money, the interest alone would be several trillion dollars a day. And secondly
and probably more subtle, what's the first thing an economist says when he hears that
story? Are you talking nominal dollars or real dollars? After all, $9.6 quintillion doesn't
buy what it used to. What should you take away from this lecture? Well, first, we always
need to distinguish between nominal and real measures of costs and benefits of our actions.
It's never a matter of just how many dollars are involved, but also the purchasing power
of each dollar when prices change over time. We have to consider that. We have to be aware
of that. How can you measure that? The best way is using price indices, such as the consumer
price index, which measures year to year changes in the purchasing power of a dollar.
How can we predict future inflation? And as a result, future declines in purchasing power.
Well, one possibility is the spread between regular U.S. Treasury bonds and special Treasury
inflation protected securities, the tips bonds. And second, we always need to recognize that
moving an event into the future reduces its equivalent present value. As interest rates
rise, the difference between the present and future values of events grows. When does
matter? We've covered quite a lot. In the next lecture, what I'd like to do is to take
several of these large themes that we've talked about and see if we can draw them together
into a couple of examples where we can practice our economic thinking skills. We'll use
all these multiple elements and we'll see if we can encounter them in a surprisingly complex
decision or two when we go shopping. It's probably the first time you've ever taken
your thinking like an economist skills to the mall. I think you're going to be surprised
at just how much fun that can actually be.
