Hello once again. Welcome back for lecture number 10 in our series on how to think like
an economist. I want to do a couple of somewhat different things today. The first thing I
want to do is I want to take you shopping with me. I want to take a look at a single
purchase that my wife and I recently made and see whether we can use some of the concepts
we've developed to determine whether or not what we decided was in truth the rational
decision. In the process of that, I want to look at a couple of shortcuts that you can
use to take some of these really somewhat sophisticated concepts and make them practical
and usable in everyday experience. And then finally, we're going to venture a little more
distantly and differently into the behavioral economics field. We're going to explore a
little bit some of how feelings about risk can and should affect our choices. So let
me start with a confession. When it comes to new technology, my wife and I are never
what you'd call early adopters. I have no idea how many years we sat and watched a bulky
old square screen TV set, had a giant picture tube and weighed about 200 pounds. But eventually
technological change is going to come to even those who resisted as much as we did. One
day not too long ago, our ancient television finally died and we were forced into the complex
world of flat screen television. So we packed up and we went to one of the giant electronic
stores and we're confronted with dozens of options, liquid crystal, plasma, rear projection.
They kept quoting initials, I have no idea what they mean, DPI, HD, more and more. We
finally picked out one based on the very sophisticated criteria and that, hey, that
picture looks pretty good to us. It wasn't one of those monster TVs, but it's a big
step up from what we've been looking at for years. As he was writing up the sale, our
sales associate, who I swear could not have been more than 19 years old, stated to us
as an obvious fact. It wasn't a question, it was a fact. And of course, you will want
the extended warranty contract, won't you sir? No thanks, I said. I think we're going
to skip that. He looked at me like that was the most irresponsible and incomprehensible
answer he'd ever heard. Wait, he said, before you decide that, you should definitely speak
to my manager. Clearly there was a script here. There was a process to be followed when
anyone was audacious enough to turn down the extended warranty. So the manager shows up.
He looked at me with an incredulous stare in his eyes and I repeated to him our decision
that we didn't think we'd buy the extended warranty. He raised one eyebrow and in seeming
shock he said to me, may I ask you why not sir? Well, he had a ready response prepared,
I think, to any possible objection anyone could raise, but he was not ready for me.
This I said is a teachable moment. Virtually everything that we've covered in this course
was relevant to his one simple question and I was not going to pass up the opportunity
to help this young man learn to think like an economist. Of course you may ask why not,
I replied. First, I guesstimated the possible repairs that might be needed over the life
of the television and the costs associated with each so that I could form expected value
calculations on repairs. And then, based on rationally imperfect information, I formed
subjective probability estimates about those repairs. So then I had a stream of expected
values for repair costs distributed over the life of the television, but some of course
would not occur till far in the future. So I had to decide which repairs would occur when.
And finally I told him I used current interest rates and I used that to discount the entire
stream of future expected values backward to get a single discounted present value for
the contract protection. And when I compared that number to the price you asked for the
contract, the rational choice obviously is to decline the extended warranty. I smiled
politely. He stared at me with an expressionless look on his face that I have never seen before
since. He clearly was scanning his memorized script trying to find the appropriate response
to that answer and he came up blank. Finally he just mumbled, okay, and walked away. There
are very few moments in life when it's just plain fun to be an economist. And when they
come along like that, you have to savor them to the absolute fullest. Now, I have to be
honest with you and confess that I really wasn't being completely honest with him. I was describing
how I thought about his offer, but I obviously did not have enough data. I did not have enough
time and I certainly didn't have the raw mathematical skill in my head to do all of that calculation
right then and there. But this economist's toolkit we've developing, this way of thinking
gave me a framework to think about this problem and I knew that this was a decision involving
many of our concepts. First, it clearly involved risk. We're talking about uncontrollable probabilistic
events. It involved uncertainty. I clearly had incomplete information and would have
to make the decision without information. It was clearly a case of extreme what Akerlof
called information asymmetry. The company knew what I needed to know if I was going to make
a wise choice, but I didn't know it. And I also knew that there was a blind data waiting,
that they were going to use the asymmetry as best they could to their strategic advantage.
That was how I thought about the decision. What I lacked was enough information to do
the kind of precise calculations I told him I'd done. Now, of course my sales associate
was trying to help me overcome my rational ignorance. He freely offered me lots of information
on repair risks. I thought it must be a little bit selective. You know, he said, that if
the main what's it goes out, that could cost several hundred dollars, not counting labor.
But if you have the warranty, it'll cost you nothing. You know you'll be glad you have
the protection. You can't really put a price on peace of mind. I've been on enough blind
dates to know that you can't trust all that free information to be unbiased or reliable.
I don't think he was lying. I just think he was using the information selectively because
he knew I had to make a subjective assessment of the risks that I faced. What I really wanted
was unbiased information on the true expected value of repairs using the real objective
probabilities. But where could I get that at a reasonable cost? I needed some shortcuts
and thinking like an economist provided me with a couple of them. One thing I could have
done I suppose was say, wait, hold everything, stay here. I'm going to go to the library
for a while. I'm going to get on the internet. I'm going to invest several days doing original
research to try and figure out what is the likelihood of repairs of a television of that
model spread over time? But that would be impractical and expensive. And opportunity
costs if not in dollars. Is there a faster way to get a handle on that? Well I think
there is if you apply the foundation principles and the core concepts. Remember, economists
think that people including those who own and manage giant electronic chains respond
to incentives. And if those managers are strategic and rational, and they already have all the
information I need, is there any way I can get them to reveal it to me? And of course
when thinking about this like an economist I realized they just had. Here's how. I know
that a company like that has very talented and sophisticated finance people at the home
office. And they're told that their job is to price the contracts so that they will make
a substantial profit on them. And I'm positive that those finance people know how to calculate
expected values. They know how to calculate present values. I know that they had all the
raw data necessary to do that. And I was confident that they'd calculated both of them. They
were under instructions to price it at a comfortable profit margin. They didn't share with me.
They didn't share with me the underlying data. They didn't share with me the calculations.
But their clear enthusiasm for trying to get me to buy that contract at the offer price
gave me confidence that they were asking a price well above the discounted present value
of the expected value of the repairs. That's what a warranty is all about. But was it so
much above their cost that it made little sense for me to buy it? After all, the price
of the television is greater than the cost of production. Businesses need to make profits
if they're going to survive. How could I tell if their offered contract price was too much
above the cost? How could I tell if it was unreasonable? I needed information on the
expected value of repairs. Well, you know, sometimes even the simplest of comparisons
based on your own experience or your friends done in your head is enough for you to gauge
the reasonableness of a contract like that. I once bought a snowblower from one of the
largest retailers in the country. I think I paid about $1,000. When it came, there was
a standard warranty for the first 12 months. Anything that went wrong, they would cover.
And as we reached the end of that period, I got a phone call and the person on the other
end was offering me, you guessed it, an extended warranty on any necessary repairs for three
more years. She said, you'll surely want to protect your investment in that fine machine.
You wouldn't want to risk having the shock of a major repair bill, would you? I said,
what does it cost? She said, well, I can extend your warranty today for only $350 a year.
Now, you don't need a lot of math skill and you don't need a lot of experience to evaluate
that offer, do you? If we're talking about expected values, over three years, the cost
of the premiums on that contract would have been more than the machine itself cost. That
would only make sense if the probability of total failure was more than one in three each
of those years. That was crazy. Either they sold me an incredibly defective machine or
that was a terribly overpriced contract. And if the machine was that bad, I wish they would
have told me about it before they sold it to me. I ultimately had more faith in the
quality of the machine than they did, so I passed. But luckily for the poor young woman
on the other end of that phone call, she didn't make the mistake of asking me why.
If we go back to the question of the television and its extended warranty, the contract price
they were asking for years two and three wasn't that high, but it was still about 15% of the
purchase price, not one-third as it had been for the snowblower. But again, think if you
will about your own experiences with televisions, your friends' experiences with television.
A ballpark estimate that there would have to be, at that price, about a one in seven
chance that the television would self-destruct sometime in years two and three. It could happen,
but my experience with televisions, my friends who complained greatly if anything goes bad
in their lives, made that seem unrealistically high. It was pretty obvious to me that there
was a substantial overestimate of the real probabilistic risk in the contract price.
What about time, the topic we covered in the last lecture, when always matters? How's
that relevant here? Remember, they were asking me to pay a premium today for protection that
would begin two or three years into the future. The premium for the insurance is a present
value, a present value for an event that doesn't occur until the future. If I'm paying it
all up front months before I'm even covered, that's what they were asking me to do. If
I'm doing that, that just makes it that much more expensive. So now what do I have? I've
got two of these back of the envelope shortcuts that I can use to evaluate a purchase like
this. The first is my own experience with products and reasonable ballpark estimates
that there's going to be a likelihood of major repairs. And I also know that they're
asking me to pay it all up front for protection that doesn't even begin until years in the
future is raising the real cost of the contract. Money has time value. They didn't seem to
think that mattered.
There's another aspect of this that's always crucial for an economist. Economists like competition.
And the extended warranty that they were offering me was offered in a context that had no competition
and no alternatives. Whenever economists think broadly about economic performance or when
economists are buying things, they really like competition. When they're selling, they're
just like everybody else and hate it. But when they're buying, they think it's important.
And whenever there's a product that the price is substantially above the actual cost, there's
a strong incentive for other people to come in, sell below the market that price, take
away the business and still make a profit. The presence of competition is always protection
for buyers.
When we walked into that store looking to buy a television set, we knew that there was a
lot of competition for the sale of televisions. In our Sunday paper, there are dozens of inserts
that lists the prices that all the retailers are going to charge. They're all promising
to match any competitor's price. I know that they're free websites where I can compare
the prices of a television at a number of competitors. So when we walked into that store, we were
protected. We were armed with clear knowledge that we had lots of options for buying TVs.
We knew what the market felt was a fair price. We knew that if they tried a hard sale on
that TV, if they offered a price out of line, we could with confidence walk out the door.
Knowledge of and access to ready alternatives is power and protection. But once that TV sale
was negotiated, the contract was a different kind of transaction. This was a one time only
opportunity to buy, single seller, fixed price, take it now or never. I already knew from
the analytical shortcuts we talked about that the contract price was probably quite
above the expected value of the repairs. And I also knew from my economic training that
without the discipline of competition, it was probably quite highly above. I'd been
in situations like this before. When my daughter graduated from college, she could no longer
be covered on our family's health insurance, the one that's paid by my employer or at least
partly paid by my employer. She needed alternative coverage, but she was young, she was healthy.
Probably she wouldn't have any need for expensive medical care. Probably. But a crisis, a medical
crisis with no insurance can be financially devastating for years to come and we dared
not leave her uncovered. The probability was small. The expected value was low. But if
that worst case scenario had played out, that would have been very bad indeed. So we were
offered a very easy option. Got a form from the insurance company that carries the employment
policy and they said, you can continue that. If you'd like, you just have to pick up the
full cost. And all it would require is check here a simple notice and her coverage can
continue just as it has before. Now they also quoted the price and the employer part plus
the individual part that would now both belong to us had a quoted price of about $5,000 per
year for coverage. It was a good policy. Had broad coverage, had minimal co-pays, virtually
no deductible. But if they had said, you must check this now or the offer will go away
forever. I don't know what I would have done with no better alternative. We probably would
have ended up purchasing that policy. But the premium seemed awfully high for a healthy
22 year old. It seemed at first like we had no choice. But fortunately, we didn't have
to check the box at that minute. We had an option to go look for other alternatives and
it took a bit of research. We found there were options. In fact, in the state where
she was living, it was possible to buy a kind of limited individual policy that had a high
$2,500 deductible each year and the premium was about $1,500 a year. Now at first glance,
you think about that, you say that sounds a little crazy. Because in a normal year, she'll
pay $1,500 for health insurance and she'll receive absolutely no dollar benefits from
that policy. Because it's pretty unlikely that a 22 year old is going to incur more
than $2,500 in medical costs. But she's covered for catastrophic events. But all her regular
care is coming out of her pocket. Is that nuts? Buy health insurance that doesn't help
pay your health costs? But think about the worst case scenario for a moment. Even if
she had to pay the full deductible plus the whole premium, the maximum she'd have to pay
is $4,000. She wasn't covered from $1, but that was better in financial terms than that
gold plate policy. The competing policy guaranteed an annual expense of $1,500 on the bottom
and $4,000 on the top. And no matter how we ran the numbers, that $5,000 policy while
it was good insurance was just irrationally expensive. But you know, we only could find
that out because we had the time, we could take the effort to seek alternatives, to find
alternate ways to do it, and that's how we found out that the price was way beyond what
was reasonable to expect. Open competition is what made it easier for us to figure out
whether the price was too high. So let's go back to that TV service contract for a
moment. Remember how that's structured? You've bought the TV and now the pressure is buy
right now, one time only, before you leave this store now or never offer. Their reluctance
to allow me an opportunity to compare alternatives to an economist's mind is an indication that
they already knew that their price was unreasonably high. That was probably wise on their part.
Study in the New York Times said that third party maintenance contracts, when you can
find them, typically sell for less than half the cost of those in the store right now got
to buy at time of purchase service contracts. Despite not having enough information to do
all the hard calculations I tried to tell the manager I'd done, thinking like an economist
had raised three red flags. The first was, from my own experience, experience alone,
I knew that the implied expected value of needing that full replacement coverage in
years two and three seemed unrealistically high. I don't think that was an accurate
estimate of the risk. Secondly, the request that they pay now for coverage we won't even
see for two years did not, to me, seem to recognize the important time value of money.
It didn't recognize that wind matters, but as an economist I know that it always does.
And finally, the structure of the offer that made it impossible for us to do comparison
shopping, to look at other alternatives, was an indication again to me the seller knew
that the offered terms would not compare favorably, and they were trying to prevent me from having
that opportunity. So when all was said and done after all this, I was pretty confident
that the price of the contract that they were offering was quite a bit above the expected
value of any future repairs. Clearly it was going to be a good deal for them, but it wasn't
clearly such a good deal for me. And all I needed to reach that conclusion was the framework
of thinking like an economist. I didn't really need all the hard data. I didn't really need
all of the careful measures. Just the framework was enough to reach that conclusion. And so,
as had been with my daughter's health insurance, it really made more sense for us to risk incurring
some repair costs than to pay a certain cost for repair insurance that was unreasonably
expensive. But what if there's that nagging doubt? What if you think you were the truly
unlucky buyer, the one outlier, the one whose TV inexplicably explodes to a certain death
the day the factory warranty expires? At that moment, won't you regret not having bought
the insurance? Well, probably momentarily you will. But if you think like an economist
in this way about all the purchases you make, then the answer even then is likely to be
no. Because if you apply this thinking to all the multiple products that you're faced
with every year that come with extended warranty offers, televisions, CD players, DVD players,
refrigerators, cars, computers, and all their peripherals, if you take the money that you
would have spent for all those contracts, you put it in a reserve account to earn little
interest. Unless you are the unluckiest person ever to walk the face of the earth, I'm going
to tell you that the funds in that account will be enough to cover all the future repairs
and will be something left over to help with your retirement party. Trust me, at least
in clear mathematical terms, buying that contract would have been irrational. The cost almost
certainly exceeded any value of the benefits. Story over, conclusion reached. That was the
rational decision. Yet, we do buy contracts like this all the time. People do it every
day. Are they all mistaken? Do they fail to understand what's involved? Worse yet, are
they being irrational? Well, in truth, we're not really like Mr. Spock. We're not hired
wired to make all our decisions on the basis of immutable logic. We are, after all, humans
who make our decisions in kind of a rich context of emotion. So I want to talk for a moment
about the cost, the uncomfort of risk itself. And this is going to take us toward the area
of behavioral economics. For many of us, risk has its own cost, or for some of us its own
reward. And recall, when we've talked about people, we've always measured their welfare.
It's their own self-evaluated quality of life. It's never about money per se. It's never
about material goods. Rationality meant choosing whatever alternative improves your self-defined
quality of life. For you to go on a rafting trip, just because you want a ticket would
be irrational if you have an intense fear of drowning, no matter what the market value
of the trip. To turn down that trip would be irrational if you have an intense love
of adventure travel. Economic thinking never tells you how you should feel about rafting
trips, the opera, or ice fishing. It cannot tell you how you should feel about risk.
And clearly, though, people do have strong feelings about risk itself. And different
people do value it differently. Some of us fear risk. Some are neutral towards it. And
there's some who seek it out. To behave rationally in the economist's sense is to respond to
one's own feelings about risk. Let me see if I can give some content to that particular
concept. So I'm going to ask you to choose between two mutually exclusive options. First,
you can have a 50% chance of winning $150 and a 50% chance of winning $50. The expected
value of that, if you'll think back to our earlier lecture, will be an expected value
of 100. So you can have that, or I'll just give you 100 up front. The expected values
of those two events are equal, but not many people see them as equal alternatives. There's
some people for whom risk itself is a cost. It makes them uncomfortable. It makes them
nervous. They dislike it. We call those people risk averse. They will always choose the $100
option. And in order to get them to choose the risky option, we'd have to make its expected
value much higher, 110, 115. They must be compensated for the discomfort, the cost of bearing risk
itself. They don't like it. For others, there's some positive value in risk. They sort of
like the gamble. After all, skydiving is not just a way to save time when deplaning. The
risk itself is part of the appeal. The small prospect of a big score makes participating
enticing. Lots of people, even if they know that the expected value of a lottery ticket
is six cents, will buy it anyway because just the rush associated with the possibility that
there might be a $50,000 payoff makes it worthwhile. Without risk seekers, state lotteries would
soon go broke. So finally, there's some people who are risk neutral. And as far as they're
concerned, those two options I gave you are equal because the expected values are equal.
But I think they're in this distinct minority. Most of us clearly dislike or occasionally
enjoy risk. It matters to us. So there's one last piece to this protection against future
possible, future losses puzzle. If you're risk averse, if you're the kind of person who
won't enjoy that new TV, if you're going to lie awake every night trembling with fear
that someday in the future it may require a large repair bill, you're not going to enjoy
your new TV. And you probably should be willing to pay something, not to protect the TV, but
to protect yourself from the discomfort of risk. Even though the price of protection
is greater than the present value of the expected value of the repairs, it could make you better
off. But then you're buying psychological comfort, not financial security. Risk aversion
does make it more likely that a person could be made better off by buying protection. But
that doesn't mean he or she should be indifferent to the cost of their comfort. Remember, this
is economics. Cheap peace of mind is always preferable to expensive peace of mind. And
when it gets too expensive, you have actually bought, and I know this sounds crazy, too
much peace of mind. So let's look at our conclusions. Let's review for a moment what we've done
today. I took you shopping with me, we went to the mall, and we had to decide whether
it made sense to buy an extended warranty on a television. And that served two purposes
for us. First, it was a composite of virtually all the economic concepts we developed in
the past. And it gave us just a small entree, a bridge into a new topic, behavioral economics
that we're going to explore in the next lecture. And what you should take away from this lecture,
however, is this. Even when there's full data rich analysis of a decision and it can't
be made, it's not possible because it requires too much. Thinking like an economist gives
us a framework to shape our decisions. It can give us some shortcuts to evaluate the
rationality of choices. In the example of the warranty offer, it was economic thinking
that told us we needed to consider. What does our experience tell us about the expected
value of future events? It says, what's the role information asymmetry and incentives
for blind dates are created in a situation like that? It reminds us that the timing of
costs and the payoffs matter when always matters. And it says the significance of competition
or the lack of competition is a discipline on players in the game. When we used all that
information at our disposal, we could evaluate the elements as an essential first step in
making a rational choice. We've got a framework for thinking rationally, even when we don't
have all the hard information necessary to make all the hard calculations. Economic thinking
isn't really about providing fixed answers. Economic thinking is about knowing what are
the essential questions. In the next lecture, we're going to turn to one last topic, behavioral
economics. We're going to see how some new research on how emotions and perceptions can
create obstacles to our own rational decision making. I think you're going to find that
very interesting.
