And so here we are, one last time.
Today we're going to have the final lecture in our course on how to think like an economist.
By now I expect you know that economists think like economists about virtually everything
that they see.
It helps them make sense of changes in interest rates, it helps them understand what happens
to the price of oil, certainly helps them understand income tax revenues.
But you should also see that by now economists think their thinking helps them make sense
of crime, commitments to their own future physical fitness, and questions like traffic
congestion.
To think like an economist is to exceed to a particular paradigm shift that forever
changes the world in which you live.
You'll always see the world as a different place once you've adopted this particular
lens.
In this lecture, what I want to do is first take out these tools one last time, we can
sharpen them up just a little bit, and then just to make sure that we're comfortable
with them, we'll see how they work in a few distinct contexts.
And then after today, you're going to have to apply them on your own, because once you
graduate from this course, I'm not going with you, but I think you're well equipped
by now to do the economic thinking all on your own.
So what's the first step in our last journey here?
The first step is to do an inventory.
Let's take all our tools out, make sure they're at the ready.
And then I'm going to post you a few questions, a final exam of sorts to see whether you're
comfortable or not in using these tools.
So you recall, back at the beginning, we started with six foundation principles, they're really
very simple, and they're really pretty much self-evident to anybody who looks for them.
But together, they're really quite profound.
Many many mistakes and many bad decisions result from failing to remember these six
things.
First, people respond to incentives.
You change incentives, behavior will respond.
Second, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
In a world of scarcity, life is about opportunity costs and making trade-offs.
The third principle, there are at least two sides to every interaction, and wisdom requires
that you be able to see the incentives on all sides for all participants.
The next principle is that everything affects everything else.
There are always going to be unanticipated impacts coming at us from all directions.
The fifth principle, for any action, there's the danger of significant unintended consequences.
And then finally, in this world of complex interrelationships, no one is really in control.
And then with those principles in mind, we developed three core concepts to give those
principles context.
And the first one was that economists think in terms of rationality.
Economic thinking doesn't really tell you what's a good objective, it just tells you
how to make choices to achieve the objectives you have.
Rational decisions are decisions made strategically, consciously choosing better alternatives
in terms of self-defined welfare over worse alternatives.
The second concept was that economists tend to focus their attention on marginal analysis.
Our lives are made up of sequences of small changes, their decisions made on the margin
in small pieces.
Insights come, if you think back to my silly example, insights come from focusing on the
teaspoons going back and forth rather than the salt and pepper shakers.
You never decide what you're going to do with the rest of your life.
You may think you are, but in fact, mostly what you're doing is choosing what to do
with the next small piece of it.
Life is the uncontrolled sum of all those smaller choices.
And the third concept we talked about was optimization.
The process of making small adjustments on the margin, trading a little bit of this for
a little bit of that, until we've squeezed as much as we possibly can.
We've optimized, we've maximized subject to constraints.
And finally, we reached this central conclusion that individual rational decisions can, if
conditions are just right, lead to results that are socially efficient.
Any time there's a better alternative, a change, a move, an interaction that's an unambiguous
gain for a decider, our rationality principle says they should choose it.
It also says rational individuals will interact, they'll trade, they'll contract, they'll cooperate,
only if it makes all of them better off.
And so when there are no unambiguous moves left to take, when there are no mutually beneficial
adjustments on the margin, when there's no money left on the table, the outcome is efficient.
It's not unambiguously perfect.
It's not necessarily in any meaningful philosophical sense just, but it is efficient.
And that's the lens through which economists view the world.
In the first lecture, I postulated that if I'd had an artist and a geologist looking
with me at a mountain in the Pacific Northwest, we would all literally see different things.
When an economist looks at the mountain or at anything else, all of what we've just
talked about is what he or she is seeing.
Now we also had to realize that much in the world falls short of the conditions.
Conditions aren't always just right to lead to efficiency.
We may not have enough information, and because information itself is costly, it would be
irrational and inefficient for us to try and acquire it all.
We face problems with unavoidable probabilistic risk.
We know that there can be distortions created for us when others use information strategically.
And in the last lecture, we spoke at some length, how behavioral economists tell us
that even when we could act rationally and could act efficiently, inexplicably, often
we do not.
The tools are imperfect.
There is distortion in the lens.
But those of us who are committed to the discipline, to the paradigm, are persuaded
that the vision provided by thinking like an economist helps to make clear what would
otherwise be, in many cases, a confusing fog.
Alright, the tools are out, they're ready, it's time for the final exam.
Three multi-part questions to see if you can think like an economist about some real-world
issues.
Question number one is going to be an essay question about the economics of crime.
How can you think like an economist about crime?
Let me propose a question to you.
If you were late for a very important appointment, you only saw one parking space and it was
in a tow zone, would you park there?
What if the chance of being towed was 50 percent?
Ten percent?
Two percent?
What if you knew that the tow truck drivers were on strike?
If the decision you make is dependent upon those probabilities of being towed, I welcome
you to the world of rational crime.
Because after all, the violation of the law was the same in each case.
The benefit to you was the same in each case.
The only difference was the expected cost of the punishment.
If your decision to abide by the law depends on the costs and benefits rather than some
inviolable moral imperative, then you have demonstrated two things.
First, even potential criminals can think like economists from time to time, and perhaps
maybe rational economists can turn into criminals.
1992, Gary Becker won a Nobel Prize in economics in part for applying our economic tools, our
tools of economic thinking, to these questions of crime and punishment.
He had to leave aside the inexplicable evils like serial murder and crimes of passion.
But other than that, Becker argued, criminals are just like the rest of us.
Crime for many people, he said, is just a rational individual choice.
So in your essay, what kind of thing should you cover?
Well first, you'll want to talk about opportunity cost.
What's the highest legal earning?
What are you not doing if you're engaging in criminal activity?
What are you not doing that's legal?
And you'd have to compare that then to the criminal option.
And of course, the criminal option would depend on chance events like what's the expected
value of the illegal option?
And what's the expected value of the punishment?
And of course, that expected value depends both on the sentence that might be incurred
and the probability of conviction.
Now, not surprisingly, economists have studied these issues and there's evidence that in
fact, the amount of criminal activity does depend both on the certainty and the severity
of punishment.
Stephen Levitt, who's one of the co-authors of the best-selling book Freakonomics, did
a study of what happens to criminal behavior of teenagers as they start to approach that
age boundary where they're no longer covered by the relatively lenient juvenile courts
and they start to fall under the auspices of the much harsher adult criminal justice system.
And he's an economist.
He was not at all surprised to find that as the certainty and the severity of the punishment
rose, the commission of crimes fell a pace.
Changes in incentives cause changes in behavior.
For rational criminals, when crime truly does not pay, there will be much less of it.
Let's have a pop quiz.
Another part of the criminal justice question is the problem of recidivism.
Criminals seem to come back again after they've been punished for the first crime.
So let's assume that Becker's analysis is true.
Let's talk about what happens in the future.
So you've been caught, you've been convicted, that probably means you weren't that good
at crime.
So if you think like an economist about what affects that prison sentence is going to have
upon you after release, maybe that will help explain some of the high rates of recidivism.
Now, obviously there are many factors involved in this, but one is that while you're a convicted
felon, you've got lots of time to devote to learning from your fellow inmates better
more productive criminal techniques.
You've got a higher education on how to be a more productive criminal.
Secondly, once you've been released, the fact that you have a felony conviction on
your record reduces probably the legal earnings that you'll be able to acquire.
So conviction for the first crime changes the incentives, changes the relative payoffs
from committing the second, changes the calculus and the rationality of crime.
Well, having thought about that now what?
To balance that change in calculus, the criminal justice system commonly decides to increase
penalties for repeat offenders.
They're trying to come back with higher incentives in the negative sense.
Some states have even gone so far as to adopt rigid three-strikes laws, a mandatory life
sentence without parole for any third felony conviction.
Now, that raises lots of issues that involve justice and ethics, so I'm going to leave
those for someone another day, and it does raise the cost of later crimes up to a point.
But an economist looking at that incentive structure would see something very specific,
because when an economist faces an issue, where does he or she always go?
They look at the margin, and when you look at the margin, what do you see?
What incentives does that three-strikes law create for a two-time loser?
If the state does not have a death penalty, that cost of that third crime is everything.
The fourth one is free.
Get caught committing an armed robbery, the penalty is life without parole.
Kill the victim to reduce the chance of getting caught and identified, and the maximum penalty
is still life without parole.
Then kill a police officer to avoid capture, and the maximum penalty remains life without
parole.
The marginal cost of the murders is zero.
That's an inescapable economic incentive.
The economists say it behooves us to consider.
So question number two on the final exam, what's the rational response to our own irrationality?
Do you remember when we looked at behavioral economics?
We found lots of evidence that people seem systematically to make irrational decisions
about their very own futures.
So some way we could use our understanding of incentives to promote even better outcomes
for ourselves or for others in the future.
I think it's clear that virtually anyone who has access to an employer-sponsored retirement
plan where the employer will match funds that you put in would be well advised to take
advantage of that.
The match being offered is free money.
It's lying there on the table.
Old you is going to be very glad if young you makes the wise rational choice and picks
that money up.
And nevertheless, an astonishing number of people, perhaps suffering from status quo bias,
fail ever to do so.
All they have to do is go in the office, file a paper, and they pick up that great financial
advantage, a costless gain.
But apparently knowing it, it's a good idea.
It's not enough for us to take advantage of it.
So what if we redesigned the incentive structure some way?
Maybe we found a way to push them or perhaps ourselves into choices that I think we'd all
agree are better.
But somehow we just don't get around to making it.
Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein again talk about the design of choice architectures in
their very interesting book, Nudge.
They say that they're adopting a policy of libertarian paternalism.
They want everybody to be free to make his or her own decision about health care, about
retirement saving, about using credit, about organ donation.
But they say that all decision structures have a default position.
What would happen if you don't get around to making an explicit choice?
And they think maybe we should find ways to change the default positions to nudge people
to make better choices.
All retirement plans have a choice architecture.
What Thaler and Sunstein argue is that knowing this, maybe we should consciously change the
direction in which people are affected.
If they didn't behave in such irrational and puzzling ways, we wouldn't have to do that,
but now we do.
So with most retirement plans, you have to go in and sign up.
You have to take steps to participate.
You have to opt in.
You have to file the papers.
But instead, if we set up retirement plans where employees are automatically enrolled,
unless they make a conscious decision to opt out, where they have to come in and sign
the papers to withdraw, participation when those kind of systems are established is much
higher.
Nobody's forced to stay in the program.
Nobody has to make a choice they didn't want to make.
But sometimes being rational seems to require just a little bit of help.
Economists are coming to recognize that.
So what about nudging yourself?
What if there's no benevolent human resources executive who can change the incentives for
you?
Would your wise self create incentives to make your foolish self come out with better
choices?
There's a puzzle that lots of economists have examined, an awful lot of people by annual
health club memberships, and then go so infrequently that it would have been cheaper to pay by
the day.
Now, obviously at the beginning we intend, we expect, we hope that we're going to show
up and exercise a lot more than we do.
But day by day we make short term decisions that aren't consistent with our long term
desires.
So how's this for part b of question two?
Could you purposefully change your own incentive structure to alter your own future behavior?
Can you dudge yourself?
How's this for an option?
Join a health club with a friend and you and he can sign a contract and you agree that
at the end of any week when you have not gone three times you will pay him a direct
$25 fine.
Here you are cash on the barrel head.
If both of you go three or more times, no money changes hands, there's no cost to either.
If neither of you shows up, the money goes into a fund and it all goes to the first
person who shows up three times a week when the other one does not.
Our knowledge of loss aversion, our knowledge of behavioral economics says that that direct
$25 marginal cost of taking a day off is a very strong motivator.
If you behave as you both intended when you purchase the contract, it doesn't cost you
anything.
If you're diligent, your contract partner is not, the monetary gain plus the better
health will result, he might even end up paying for your membership for you.
In that case, you are both healthier and wealthier and you changed your own incentives to counter
your own irrationality.
You induced yourself to change your behavior.
You planted your own carrots, you wielded your own stick, interesting.
Perhaps some health club could market that kind of a plan to attract new members.
Do you think anyone would ever really do a thing like that?
Well, I have a friend, an economist friend of course, who did something like that to
help him cut back on his smoking.
His resolve was always strong but his craving became stronger and so he thought he should
do something to make the marginal cost of a cigarette higher so that his recalcitrant
self would start meeting the standards his resolved self wanted him to live up to.
Our offices were pretty far from any commercial source of cigarettes.
He couldn't just run down and pick up a pack of smokes.
So he'd buy one pack of cigarettes, give them to the department secretary, an instructor,
sell me cigarettes for $5 each, not a penny less, no exceptions, no matter what I beg.
The money would go to the National Cancer Society.
He did reduce his smoking because he chose to find a way to make each marginal cigarette
that much more expensive directly for himself.
The final is almost over.
Let's take a stab at just one last issue and that means we're going to spend some time
stuck in traffic.
If you started to think like an economist and you mull over some of these issues while
you're driving, you probably have plenty of time to do that.
Cities all over the world are choking in traffic.
Countless hours are lost to delay and congestion.
More and more and more cars try to drive on roads that have no greater capacity.
Estimates are that in the United States, the average commuter spends 40 hours a year in
delay on the highway.
That's an entire work week of time sitting on the highway in congested traffic.
That's nuts.
Why do we put up with it?
How can we fix it?
Those are good questions, but let's take a minute and think like economists about them.
Traffic congestion is a social outcome.
And economists think social outcomes are the result of individuals making decisions based
on the incentives that face them at the time of their choice.
And of course, the incentive for most drivers, for most travelers, is to get from here to
there at the lowest possible total cost.
Not defined by dollars paid out, where economists now remember, we want to use the true currency,
a cost as a reduction in my self-defined welfare.
Time, hassle, discomfort, noise, inconvenience in the risk of crime are all real costs.
And people make the choice of how to travel that minimizes those costs that's only rational.
Not economists and not transportation planners can tell them how they should value them.
In the 1960s, San Francisco began constructing the Bay Area Rapid Transit System, the BART
System.
It was the first time we'd tried to reimpose and build onto an automobile-age city an underground
rail system.
The designers who built that started with one crucial design assumption, and they explicitly
stated this in the plans.
Commuters' greatest concern, they said, will be the speed of travel once on board.
They could not have been more wrong.
Since that time, there have been multiple studies, and they all conclude just exactly
the opposite.
An extra 20 minutes once on the train hurts far less than an extra 20 minutes looking for
a parking place, transferring from the bus, standing on the platform waiting.
To commuters, they have now shown in study after study, hassle time costs a lot more
than pure time.
So BART's design with widely spaced stations located out on the edges of population concentrations
meant hassles a large part of each and every trip.
But a car, now that's the whole package.
It leaves from my driveway when I'm ready to go, it goes directly to my destination
and I don't have to transfer, I pick the music, I control the temperature.
That's the way to travel.
Now this probably explains why such a large share of the riders when BART opened weren't
leaving their cars to get on BART, they were switching from buses.
It was better as an alternative to the bus than it was to the car.
BART turned out to be the rational choice for far fewer commuters than the planners
had hoped.
But what about the social consequences?
If driving is the best individually rational decision, why is the social result so utterly
insane or in economic terms so inefficient?
Why does the Bay Bridge turn into a linear parking lot for hours on end?
That of course is the second part of the final exam question here.
And to answer it, we're going to dig down into our toolkit, we're going to pull out
two of the things we discussed in earlier lectures.
Marginal analysis and the tragedy of the commons.
How much delay does a marginal car cause when it enters into the highway?
The answer of course is, that always depends.
It depends on how many other cars are already on the highway.
If you're pulling onto a near empty road, no one has to slow down.
If you're pulling onto a road with lots of cars, then not only does the new car have
to slow down and be delayed while trying to merge with traffic, so are all of the other
cars behind on the road.
They must all adapt.
Traffic engineers tell us that at some point, one minute of delay for the marginal car,
the car entering the highway, causes enough backup that the total delay for all the other
cars is greater than one hour.
One minute of delay for the marginal car, one hour of delay for everybody else on the road.
Now we have the insanity.
The marginal price paid by the new car isn't equal to the true marginal cost.
Driving, often alone, does make sense for each of us individually, but not for us collectively.
The price we pay is a lie.
Logo Possum was right when he said, we've met the enemy and he's us.
It's our own rationality and the decisions based on it that lead to our collective inefficiency
because the price, because the incentive, does not reflect the true cost.
How about an extra credit pop quiz?
Before I talk for a minute about the solutions to all this, let's talk about something, a
case in the real world.
Mexico City has world-class congestion and some of the worst urban air in the world.
According to the world health standards, pollution in Mexico City exceeds the minimum standards
over 90% of the time.
Something needs to be done.
In 1989, the Mexican government thought it had a plan.
It put in a rolling ban on driving based on license plate numbers.
So on Mondays, any car whose license plate ended in a five or six could not legally be
driven between 5 a.m. and 10 p.m.
Other days of the week, other numerals dominated.
So in theory, that should have reduced the number of cars on the roads of Mexico City
by almost half a million each day.
In theory.
But now you're a pretty sophisticated economist.
That change in policy changed incentives.
It probably had unintended consequences.
Do you have any ideas what you might predict?
Well, clearly not being able to drive your car is a major inconvenience.
You can grumble, stay at home, adapt.
You might be able to find some way around it.
You might ride the bus or you might buy a second car.
A car with a license plate with a different numeral.
So you'd have your Tuesday car or you'd have your Friday car.
And apparently a lot of the citizens of Mexico City did that.
There was no measurable improvement in the measured air quality.
There was an increase in the registered cars in the metropolitan area.
And of course, most of those cars were older, less efficient used cars.
And they worked against the proponents who were trying to use that as a clean air system.
When the government imposed the ban, they were thinking like lawyers.
They were trying to dictate the change in behavior rather than like economists trying
to figure out how to induce one.
That's the last part of the last question.
How would an economist solve the overuse of roads?
Well, that's right down to the basics.
You want to change people's behavior?
Change their incentives.
Change the price.
There have been some experiments in various cities in the world using congestion pricing.
In 2003, London established a system of congestion pricing in the core of the city.
It charged a daily price to enter this designated congestion zone.
And it wasn't a trivial price.
It's about $15 per entry.
And you have to pay it before you enter the zone.
So you have to plan ahead.
You can pay it by computer.
You can pay it by cell phone.
And cameras record the license plates of everybody entering that zone.
And if you drive in it without first ahead of time paying the fee, you'll be fined about
$200.
Now, trust me, that is a change in cost.
That is a change in incentives.
And not surprisingly for economists, that meant a change in driving decisions.
And traffic delays and congestion in the core of London have been significantly impacted
by that.
Now, most economists say that's a good start.
But that's a blunt tool because actually the congestion changes dramatically from one
day to the next.
What it is on Tuesday won't be exactly what it's going to be on Wednesday.
So their optimal economic policy would be to vary the congestion price.
They'd like to have an efficient guide to efficient decisions so the price should change
hour to hour, day to day, condition to condition, so that it reflects the specific cost of a
particular trip.
Sounds like science fiction.
But not really.
All you really need is some kind of a variant of a GPS monitor.
And then you can see on the screen what's the variable congestion charge in real time.
Be like a taxi meter.
And you'd say, if I take this trip, it will cost me $2.40.
That would be an inconvenience.
It would be an aggravation when we find that we're having to alter some of our plans for
our low value trips.
But oh, my friends, it would be a blessing when we could take our high value trips on
much less congested roads.
And so we've come to the end of this course.
And I hope that by now you have a clear understanding of what it means to think like an economist.
I know that you have the tools you need to do just that whenever it seems really appropriate.
Thinking like an economist does not mean that you have well-defined, memorized rules and
answers to any question that can arise.
What thinking like an economist means is that you have a framework, a framework that can
provide you with the questions necessary to think your way through, analyze, and reason
your way to an important decision.
It's all about seeing the world in a particular way and perhaps sometimes improving the rationality
of the decisions you make in that world.
And despite what I said at the beginning about this lecture being the final exam, that's
not really true.
The final test of your ability to think like an economist is going to be what you do with
these tools as you confront the many personal business and policy decisions in your life.
And I do sincerely hope that you do well on that exam because that's the only one that
really matters.
