Most of us are creatures of our own times, much more than we sometimes like to recognize.
We're used to the kinds of economic transactions that are around us and they seem reasonable
to us, in part because they're the ones we know about.
Transactions that aren't around us seem unreasonable to us.
But history teaches an uncomfortable lesson that a lot of us, maybe not all of us, but
a lot of us, just accept the transactions that are around us without much deeper thought.
History teaches about a number of economic transactions that used to be widely viewed
as socially acceptable, at least in the United States and most other countries around the
world, but are no longer viewed as acceptable.
For example, slavery certainly seemed reasonable to a lot of people for generations.
For example, dowry and bride price traditions seemed reasonable for a long time, and while
that's no longer true in the United States, it's still very much true in parts of South
and Eastern Asia.
For example, having a draft for the armed forces seemed normal and sensible in the United
States, but we sort of stopped the United States feeling that way in the 1960s and there's
no real prospect now for restarting a draft.
Going further back in time, in the late 18th and early 19th century in the United States,
it was common to have what were called commutation and substitution when drafted.
Commutation was you could pay money and thus not be drafted.
Substitution was if you were drafted, you could hire a substitute and that person could
go in your place.
These were perfectly acceptable and expected practices in the late 18th and into the early
19th century, but by the end of the 19th century, these practices became socially unacceptable.
There began to be a social stigma if you dodged the draft for any but the most ironclad of
reasons.
Conversely, there's some economic transactions that used to be prohibited, but now are widespread.
For example, prohibition on sales of alcohol from 1920 to 1933 happened in the United States
as part of an amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
It banned the sale, manufacture and transportation of alcohol.
At the time, prohibition was thought of as the noble experiment.
Now it's thought of as an example of how overreaching government can lead to unwanted consequences
like the rise of organized crime and making lots of otherwise ordinary law abiding people
into criminals.
Throughout much of U.S. history, there was a prohibition on state lotteries and more
generally on lots of forms of gambling.
This started to be overturned in the 1960s, now most states have lotteries and gambling
has spread through the court rulings that allow Native Americans to run casinos on their
own land.
Many other transactions that used to be banned but now are allowed.
Back in the 1870s, birth control was banned.
It was illegal to ship birth control devices across state lines.
In fact, in many places, this was true up through the early 1900s and there have been
a set of legal battles about that through much of the 20th century.
In the famous 1965 U.S. Supreme Court case, Griswold v. Connecticut, the state of Connecticut
had made it illegal to use birth control in your home and the Supreme Court ruled that
that was against the constitutional right to privacy.
What are some other transactions?
Amateur sports used to be that you had to be an amateur to play in tennis tournaments.
The U.S. used to have to be an amateur to be in the Olympics.
Now there's ways for people to get paid for all of those and we wonder now will we move
the line again that college sports are outside of money but at some point will we start paying
those athletes?
In this lecture, we're going to focus on three examples of economic transactions that once
were banned but now seem either partly or completely ordinary to many of us.
Then in the next lecture, I'll focus on some examples of transactions that are not yet
common or widely accepted.
In particular, I'll focus on a monetary payment for donating a kidney and I'll explain why
I think economic pressures will eventually make some of these choices broadly acceptable
to the public.
As a first example of a transaction that used to be banned but is no longer banned, let's
talk about usury that is payment of interest on loan.
Back in the Middle Ages, around the 13th or 14th century here, there were rules forbidding
usury which was then generally interpreted as repaying a loan with any amount that exceeded
the amount that had actually been loaned in the first place.
However, you can imagine that if people who loan money don't get anything extra back,
they're not very eager to loan and practical pressures gradually eroded this point of view.
Unless people could get some sort of return for lending money, lending wouldn't happen.
Why not just bury the money in your backyard?
And as a result, expansion of commercial and trading ventures became difficult.
However, at that time there was a big loophole in the rules.
You couldn't charge interest, but it was allowed to charge a late fee if the loan wasn't
repaid in full on time.
So there could be actually agreements to repay a little bit late, in which case charging
the fee was alright.
Our modern word interest, in fact, derives from the medieval Latin word interest.
The Oxford English Dictionary explains that interest originally referred to this late
payment where you could have a penalty for late payment that was acceptable under the
law of the time.
But then over many decades, indeed a couple of centuries, the idea of interest shifted
from being a term that described the fee for a late payment and became a generic term for
the legitimate accepted interest payments on all loans.
By the 17th century, writers like Francis Bacon and John Locke are taking it as a given
that interest will be paid.
When it's interesting, they don't just assume that interest will be paid, they also assume
that the government will determine what that rate of interest should be.
For example, Francis Bacon in 1601 proposed a lower interest rate of 5% for most loans
and a higher interest rate of 9% for loans to merchants in large business centers.
John Locke wrote an essay in 1691 where he goes back and forth over the arguments for
how the interest rate should be 4% instead of 6% and discusses practical issues of how
whatever rule you set is going to be evaded.
By the time we get to Adam Smith, that is the Adam Smith, the founder of economics in
the second half of the 18th century, this is the common view.
Adam Smith also believed in the payment of interest, but Adam Smith, we think of as the
champion of free markets, also believed in a government's ceiling on interest rates.
He doesn't say exactly what it is, but the number he seems to suggest is about 8%.
He says, if you let interest rates get too high, the only ones who will borrow money
will be Ponzi schemers and spend thrifts and inventors who are way too over-optimistic
about whether their invention is going to bear fruit.
Jeremy Bentham, the father of utilitarian philosophy, who also did some writing on economics,
in 1787 wrote an essay against Adam Smith called Defense of Usury.
Bentham made the modern argument, if people were going to waste money in one way or another,
he said, they're going to do it regardless of whether they can pay interest or not pay
interest.
If people are going to get taken advantage of in markets, said Bentham, it was going
to happen regardless of whether there was a prohibition on interest payments.
Further, Bentham argued, money isn't going to get loaned to charlatans and cheaters and
over-promissors because those people aren't likely to pay it back, so the lenders aren't
going to be willing to lend in the first place to those sorts of folks.
Back in the early Middle Ages, there wasn't just a prohibition on payment of interest,
but there was a sort of just price or fair price for everything.
Bentham pointed out, no one thought that anymore, he said it's time for interest just to be
a price like other prices.
Today, there are still usury laws in many states, but they're typically set at very,
very high rates of interest, like more than 30% a year, and so they're not relevant to
most transactions.
But it's interesting, we also have credit card fees, bank overdraft fees, and in a way,
those operate as very, very high rates of interest for those who don't pay back on schedule,
just like that original concept of interest in back in the Middle Ages.
For modernized, it's maybe hard to imagine what an enormous social change happened when
you could pay interest for money.
In this area, we've already had our shift from thinking of an economic transaction as
always wrong to this transaction as being right to thinking of it as just a normal part
of the market.
But it's worth remembering that in some parts of the world today, for example, in Islamic
law, the payment of interest is still technically forbidden.
Now when I say technically forbidden, I use that term on purpose.
There's a friend of mine who worked for a mortgage lending company, and when people
came in, if someone came in and said, hi, I'm Muslim, I want to buy a house, but I can't
pay interest, he said actually he could just reach into his desk drawer, go into the back
and there was a set of folders, he'd pull out the contract for Islamic folks.
From the bank's point of view, it was a contract and it involved the same payments over time
as any standard mortgage contract.
From the buyer's point of view, the word interest did not appear anywhere in the document, it
was just a contract for gradual payment for a house at a certain price with regular payments,
and so it was compliant with religious law.
In fact, lots of the Islamic world just pays interest, and even where it doesn't technically
pay interest, they've been using contracts with alternative language that have the form
of interest for centuries now.
As a second example of a transaction that was once socially unacceptable, but is now
acceptable, I want to talk about the case of life insurance and how that evolved in
the 19th century, and here I should say I'm drawing on the work of Viviana Zalizer, an
economic sociologist who's based at Princeton University.
In the late 18th century, the death of a head of household was dealt with mainly by neighbors
and friends.
They had to figure out what to do with the body and where to bury it and how to support
the widows and orphans.
There were a few neighborhood bereavement societies, but death was in some sense fundamentally
a private issue and a community issue.
By the early 19th century, life insurance begins to enter the picture.
Death has started to become something where you hire a funeral director, you buy a casket
with money, you're buried in a particular place like a cemetery.
Looking after widows and orphans has become something of a business.
There's an economic interaction involved here.
There's a real shift that's happening.
Death had been thought of as a non-market event and it was gradually moving into the
market.
In the early 19th century, people bought all kinds of insurance.
They bought fire insurance, marine insurance.
They dealt with the new banks and savings and loans that were being created, legislatures
passed laws so that you could have a life insurance company, states granted charters
to companies based on those laws, but people just didn't buy life insurance.
By the 1840s, there's hardly any life insurance sold in the United States.
But by the 1870s, life insurance is widespread.
What happened in those 30 years?
At the start of that period, the prevailing view was that life insurance was gambling
on life.
First, you set a price on your life and then you gamble on your death and you only win this
gamble if you die.
The widow, of course, would get a big check, but that was viewed as like winning at gambling,
which wasn't really approved of either.
People at the time said life insurance turns a man into an article of merchandise.
It turns death into a commercial transaction.
There's also a streak of popular belief, which said it was up to God to care for widows
and orphans, and life insurance was in a way putting yourself above God.
Some believed that if you insured your life, you would die sooner because you were tempting
death or displeasing God in some way.
At this time, the idea of saving up for family was fine and prudent, but buying life insurance
was viewed as gambling against God.
So the marketing companies that tried to sell life insurance decided they would try to sell
it as an altruistic self-denying gift, and they began to market life insurance almost
in quasi-religious terms.
Life insurance was to be a protective shield over the dying.
It was to be a consolation that was almost like a religious consolation.
Some life insurance advertisements circa about 1860 said, it, referring to life insurance,
can alleviate the pangs of the bereaved, cheer the heart of the widow, and dry the orphans'
tears.
Yes, it will shed the halo of glory around the memory of him who has been gathered to
the bosom of his father and God.
The prominent congregationalist preacher, the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher, said in 1870,
once the question was, can a Christian man rightfully seek life insurance?
Life insurance is what he's talking about.
Beecher said, that day has passed.
Now the question is, can a Christian man justify himself in neglecting such a duty?
Life insurance became, in effect, the right way to die.
Sociologists sometimes talk about in different cultures what constitutes a good death.
By about 1870, a good death meant you left behind life insurance.
It was part of the conduct of your life.
Instead of life insurance maybe leading to an early death, if you displease the spirits,
life insurance was marketed as being a kind of after death immortality.
It was continuing to help and support and be head of the household even after you died.
And there was widespread, heavy personal solicitation.
Now life insurance all across the country often mixed together with religious and church
feelings.
Interestingly, life insurance became semi-sacred too.
It became the way of showing that you care for your family.
It was a way of dealing with grief when someone died.
Think about it.
What do you think now, if you hear a man has died, he left behind say a widow and children,
and some months before he died, he failed to pay up his life insurance.
Now we sort of think of that as a duty that that person had.
Other economic transactions related to death can also have this combination where there's
a dislike of market forces entering in too fiercely into the picture.
There's a lot of people who don't haggle very much with the funeral home over the price
of the casket or the service or the burial.
They don't do price comparisons.
In the recent times, there have been ongoing lawsuits and government regulations over questions
like can you buy a casket across state lines or can you buy a casket over the internet?
Currently, there's some controversy over what are called viadical settlements.
What that is is when a third party market or fund buys life insurance policies from elderly
or terminally ill patients.
So the patient gets money right away while they're still alive, and when they die, then
the company gets paid off by the life insurance.
The argument against these viadical settlements is that the companies that sell life insurance
are okay because they make money as long as you live.
But companies that buy viadical settlements only make money when you die, and so they're
profiting from death, and that would be wrong somehow.
That may sound reasonable, but if you look at that argument a little more closely, I'm
not sure it holds very well.
After all, if you buy an annuity when you retire, it pays you a certain amount every
year until you die.
The company also benefits if you die earlier, but there's no big outcry against annuities
as profiting from death.
We're children of our time.
It's hard to capture the sense of outrage over payment of interest.
It's hard to capture an outrage over life insurance.
So let's try an example which is a little closer to our own time.
Let's think about the baby market.
In the last few decades, socially acceptable markets have emerged for all kinds of things
related to babies, for sperm, for human eggs, for in vitro fertilization, and even for surrogate
motherhood.
Around the world, about 10% of all couples at any given time are infertile for one reason
or another.
There's a scientist named Robert Edwards.
He and several co-workers worked hard at this problem of how do you solve human infertility
for several decades through the 1960s and into the 1970s.
On July 25, 1978, Louise Brown was born, the world's first test tube baby, born through
in vitro fertilization.
Her parents were a working class couple.
They'd been married 10 years.
They wanted to have kids.
The wife had a blockage of her fallopian tubes.
They said that having a child seemed like a miracle to them.
Eventually, Robert Edwards went on to win the Nobel Prize in medicine in October 2010.
And at that point, about 4 million individuals had up to that point been born following in
vitro fertilization.
It's easy to forget the controversy about in vitro fertilization back at the time in
the late 1970s.
One leading Protestant ethical thinkers said, men ought not to play God.
The Catholic Church said, from a moral point of view, procreation is deprived of its proper
perfection when it is not desired as the fruit of the conjugal act.
That is to say, of the specific act of the spouse's union, which I think is the long-winded
way of saying in vitro fertilization isn't right under Catholic doctrine.
There were some feminist groups who welcomed in vitro fertilization.
They thought of it as greater freedom for women to choose.
There were other feminist groups who viewed it as a conspiracy of men in big business
based on an assumption that women could only be happy if they could be pregnant.
There are all sorts of commissions and inquiries and reports.
There was a real controversy over this for a long period of time.
But it was now technically possible.
In vitro fertilization was possible, and there was a huge demand of parents facing fertility
issues who were interested in trying it.
The total cost of a cycle of in vitro fertilization runs about $10,000.
In some states, it's covered by insurance, and others not.
$10,000 is a lot of money, but children are a great thing.
It's the cost of a decent used car.
Some of the necessary ingredients for in vitro fertilization can be donated by the prospective
parents.
But markets have emerged for these ingredients as well, particularly sperm, eggs, and hormones.
Commercial for-profit sperm banks have been around since the 1970s.
In fact, the first one opened in my home state of Minnesota.
They often market their product by giving lots of personal information about the sperm
donors and what wonderful, healthy, smart, splendid people they are.
They don't usually give their names to the potential users.
Big companies developed ways of making fertility drugs.
A market for human eggs didn't emerge until the 1990s.
Originally, in vitro fertilization was for a situation where a woman could produce the
eggs, but for some reason they couldn't get to the uterus to be fertilized.
The market for human eggs started off as mainly just donations.
But then, women became paid to donate eggs, and after all, it is a lot harder to donate
eggs than sperm.
It typically requires about three weeks of hormone injections, lots of doctor's visits,
and then the eggs need to be removed with a small probe.
By the mid-2000s, depending on the part of the country, the circumstances, you could pay
a woman maybe $5,000 or sometimes more than that in different urban areas for healthy
human eggs.
There is some controversy, in fact, that these prices are being set too much through professional
standards and guidelines, which some people argue have the effect of holding down what
women would otherwise be paid for what, after all, is a lengthy and pretty uncomfortable
process.
Eggs, sperm, hormones can all come together in fertility centers.
Some of these are standalone centers, some are based in hospitals.
But the next step is, does it have to be in vitro?
Could we bring together the sperm, eggs, and hormones in a surrogate mother?
And here in the United States, the precedent-setting case was what came to be called the case of
baby N in 1985.
A couple named Bill and Betsy Stern wanted to have kids.
They found out Betsy had contracted multiple sclerosis, so there was a really big health
risk if she became pregnant.
They signed a contract with a woman named Mary Beth Whitehead to have a child via artificial
insemination with her own eggs with the sperm from Bill Stern.
Four days after baby M was born, Whitehead, the birth mother, said, I signed on an egg.
I didn't sign on a baby girl.
She threatened to keep the baby, take the baby, and leave the country if necessary.
After weeks of court cases and media coverage, the contract was upheld, and Whitehead was
required legally to give the baby to the Stearns.
In other words, surrogate motherhood contracts were legally enforceable.
Now, there's been surrogacy for a long time.
In the book of Genesis back in the Bible, for example, Rachel tells her husband to go
to the maid and get her pregnant so that Rachel can raise the child.
But it's hard to remember how controversial all this was in the 1980s.
There are all sorts of terms like, you know, women's bodies are being treated like a commodity,
women are being treated like breeding machines, there would be a reproductive supermarket.
You could obviously combine in vitro fertilization and surrogate motherhood, so a couple could
join their egg and sperm in a test tube and have another woman go through the pregnancy.
This really changes the deal.
It was no longer true the surrogate mom had to use her own eggs, now she just needed to
be healthy.
Also, at some level, the surrogate mom perhaps had less feeling of it being her baby, because
her eggs were not involved.
And so the market for surrogate motherhood has now gone international.
If you're a U.S. person or European person, you can hire surrogate mothers in the Philippines
and India and Poland and other countries.
And this is, again, extraordinarily controversial.
There are terms like baby farming or international traffic in women.
But if it's okay to do surrogate mothering in the United States, it's hard for me to
see at least why it becomes bad if the surrogate mother is in Mexico or India or somewhere else
around the world.
Across the globe, there are hundreds of thousands of people involved in what we could broadly
call the baby market, including all these different markets.
There's substantial costs, certainly well into the billions of dollars, probably tens
of billions of dollars.
What technology is next here?
What about embryo adoption for frozen or unneeded embryos, perhaps some technology involving
genetic manipulation of some kind?
There's an economist named Deborah Spar, who's now president of Barnard College, and
she's one of the people who studied this baby market most closely.
She wrote, we have a demand for babies, a supply of babies, and a growing set of intermediaries
who serve to bring demand and supply together.
Given the situation, we essentially have two choices.
We can rue the baby business and call for its demise, or we can accept the market has
arisen and try to make it better.
So she calls for trying to figure out how to make the contracts more clear, how to make
rights of ownership more clear, to make sure people are safe and well treated, how to deal
with international treaties, and all those sorts of issues.
Just to put all my cards on the table, I'm in favor of interest rates, I'm in favor
of life insurance, and I'm in favor of in vitro fertilization.
I admit to some qualms about surrogate mothering, but ultimately, I can certainly imagine situations
where all the participants would be well informed and reasonably compensated, and it's hard
for me to see in that setting why it's my business any more than when other people take
up difficult or dangerous jobs and I let it happen out there in the great global economy.
But this list of what I'm in favor of and against seems in a way to me highly suspicious,
because it basically says, I'm a creature of my own time.
I favor what's already established as being part of the market domain for a long time.
I'm queasy, but somewhat accepting of what's new, I'm hesitant about pushing it any further.
In these cases, economic analysis can turn out to be a way of asking yourself a hard
question.
Do you have independent moral judgment of your own about economic transactions?
Or are you just a creature of your time?
What exists is good, what doesn't exist might not be so good.
You know, I certainly don't believe that everything should be an economic transaction.
I'm opposed to slavery, or even selling yourself into slavery, I'm opposed to vote selling,
I'm opposed to contracts where you might sell off, for example, your right to future
freedom of speech on a certain issue.
I have no problem with certain kinds of weapons being banned or regulated in certain ways.
I have no problem with certain kinds of drugs being banned or regulated in certain ways,
although there are obviously a lot of legitimate disagreements over where to draw the line and
what the appropriate legal penalties would be for crossing those lines.
What I'm trying to say is there are a lot of really genuinely difficult in-between cases
here.
In the next lecture, I want to consider some cases that push the borderline, that is, things
that are not market transactions now, or are highly controversial transactions, and I want
to argue that there is a strong case for making at least some of them legal.
