If you had a relative who needed a kidney, would you be willing to donate?
What about if a stranger needed a kidney?
Would you be willing to donate?
What about if a stranger needed a kidney and someone was willing to pay you for donating?
Would that make you more likely to donate?
A lot of economists think that making a financial offer to buy a kidney would be a reasonable
step to take in making sure there are sufficient kidney transplants for all who need them.
And even a fair number of doctors and health care professionals would agree, although the
doctors in particular might not be so blunt in saying so.
Here, I want to build the case one step at a time for why it might be useful to have
a market in buying and selling kidneys for transplants.
Of course, you don't need to agree with this conclusion, but one way or another, I hope
you find the argument interesting.
As a useful starting point, let's have a quick review of what your kidneys are and
why they're important to your health.
I'm not a medical person, so it's useful for me to lay it out for myself as much as
for anyone.
Kidneys filter your blood.
They get rid of waste products that are in your blood.
They balance out the salts in your blood, things like sodium and potassium.
If you're working out hard, kidneys hold on to more moisture and help the body adjust.
Kidneys also play a role in controlling your blood pressure and encouraging your body to
produce red blood cells.
You sometimes hear about renal disease.
That's the same thing as kidney disease.
Blood goes in and out of kidneys through what are called the renal arteries and the renal
veins.
Kidneys can be injured in various ways.
There's kidney diseases of various kinds.
There's diabetes, certain sorts of infections, kidney cancer, and even prolonged high blood
pressure for a long time.
Think of pushing the blood through the kidney very hard can damage the kidneys after a while.
Your kidneys are failing.
It's a serious thing for your health.
You start feeling weak, lethargic, having shortness of breath.
If the kidneys really aren't doing their job at all, waste products build up in your blood.
Your blood pressure can go haywire.
It leads to all sorts of health problems.
At severe cases can lead to heart attacks, coma, even to death.
In mild cases where you have some kidney disease but the kidneys are also partially working,
you can address the symptoms of kidney disease to some extent with diet or with pharmaceuticals.
If you eat less salt, control your high blood pressure, you can manage your diabetes to
a large extent.
But if you've got extreme kidney disease, there are really only two ways to deal with
it.
One is a dialysis machine.
Dialysis is when they hook you up to a machine, run your blood through the machine, and it
acts as a sort of artificial kidney.
Dialysis treatments usually occur three times a week and they last a few hours at a time,
so it's an enormously large commitment of time and energy.
It's in fact really downright exhausting.
Dialysis treatments typically cost about $40,000 a year.
Now dialysis is, at least in my mind, it's a medical miracle.
It's a remarkable invention.
It sustains life, but it's not a perfect miracle.
For many patients, a kidney transplant would provide a better quality of life than dialysis
and a better life expectancy over time as well.
In fact, the cost of a transplant is going to be lower in the long term than trying to
keep someone on kidney dialysis for a period of years and years.
Moreover, if you're going to do a kidney transplant, it's better to do it sooner because when you're
on dialysis, many patients experience a gradual slow deterioration.
In fact, it's true that the longer a patient is on dialysis before getting a kidney transplant,
the shorter the life will be for the transplanted kidney later on.
Starting point for our problem here is that there's a severe shortage of kidneys for transplantation.
There's an official U.S. government waiting list for people who are waiting for a kidney
transplant.
That list had about 17,000 people on it in 1990.
By 2008, there were 75,000 people on the list for a kidney transplant.
Part of the reason for that increase is that the procedures have gotten better over time
so that it's reasonable to add more patience to the list because more of them could use
a kidney or survive a kidney transplant.
It's also true that there are not enough kidneys, so the weight is expanding and expanding over
time.
The time on the kidney waiting list varies a lot depending on how easy it is to find a
match.
If you have a relative who's ready to donate a kidney to you, you may just be on the list
a few months.
But if you have some sort of issues that make it hard to find a match for you, you might
end up waiting several years.
Just to give you a sense, in 2005 about a quarter of those on the waiting list had been waiting
more than three years for a kidney transplant.
In fact, the waiting list would probably be even longer if there were more kidneys available.
There's a lot of people who don't get added to the list because the doctors know there's
no chance they're ever going to make it to the top of the list.
Of those on the waiting list for a kidney, many suffer the difficult symptoms of kidney
disease and they try and get by on dialysis.
But let me give you one number that really sticks in my mind, one rough measure of the
health issues we're talking about here.
About 4,500 people die every year while waiting for a kidney transplant.
So why don't we try and solve this shortage with more donations?
There have been lots of public information campaigns, lots of information pledges, lots
of sign the donor card kinds of public TV spots, but despite all of these efforts, there's
not enough kidneys.
The waiting time keeps getting longer and longer and longer.
And there's some natural limits here to what any kind of organized donating that's happening
voluntarily can do.
If you get a kidney from a dead body from a cadaver, it's usually only good for about
two or three days.
In order to make it transplantable in that time, you need a blood match, a tissue match,
you need a donor who's in fairly good health, free of infection.
Often this would come from someone who's an accident victim or perhaps a stroke victim.
By some estimate, they're a maximum of about maybe 15,000 deaths per year, which would
be suitable for a kidney transplant.
But many of those people are not donors or for one reason or another, they don't die
in a way that would make it possible to do an organ transplant.
So one proposal to get more transplants has been to alter the presumption about willingness
to donate.
Current U.S. law says if you don't actually sign a donor card or check the organ donor
form or your driver's license or whoever your state does it, then you are not going to donate
an organ.
But what about if instead of having a rule that you have to sign the card, what about
having a rule that everyone will donate an organ unless you've checked off saying you
don't want to do so?
So the default would be donating instead of not donating or unless, say, the family objects
after death.
They've tried this in some other countries like Spain where it does seem to have boosted
the number of kidneys available for transplant.
That kind of change might well make a difference, but it opens some whole new can of worms.
There are presumably some people who wouldn't have wanted to donate, but if under this presumed
donation plan, they would end up doing so anyway.
There's also a risk that people who are willing to donate don't bother signing up because
they just presume after they die they will have presumed to have been given consent.
But then their relatives might say, well, they aren't sure, they don't know what the
person wanted, maybe that person didn't want to donate, so you can imagine all sorts of
difficulties arising with that sort of a system.
A final problem with kidneys from cadavers is that the donor is dead.
This, of course, isn't a problem for the donor, but it is for the recipient.
A kidney donation from a living, healthy person is just much, much better for the health of
the recipient.
The timing for the transplant can be set up if you've got a live donor.
It's not an emergency procedure where the clock is ticking on two or three days.
You don't have to worry about transporting the kidney or understoring the kidney.
It's just much easier all around for the process to happen.
Right now, live transplants, that is transplants from live donors, are about half of all kidney
donations.
And about four-fifths of those come from relatives, parents, children, and siblings.
But boy, 4500 people dying every year, it sure would be nice to have more.
Another approach is called the New England Program for Kidney Exchange.
The idea here is, what if I have a kidney donor, someone is willing to donate a kidney
to me personally, but that person isn't a good match for me, and say, you have a kidney
donor, but your kidney donor isn't a good match for you.
Maybe your donor could give me a kidney, and my donor could give you a kidney.
Can we coordinate somehow?
And perhaps not surprisingly, this organization for coordinating across different donors was
designed by economists.
One leader on the team was Alvin Roth, a Harvard Economics professor, who specializes in thinking
about how to resolve exchange and resource allocation problems in non-standard situations.
For example, Roth has worked on the problem of when a city has a lottery, to let kids
apply to certain public schools, how should that lottery be run?
Or when medical schools have matched their grad students to residency programs, how
should that match program be run?
This idea of matching from my donor to you and your donor to me is certainly a good thing
to do.
But there are not large numbers of people involved overall, not enough to put a dent in the overall
waiting list or the number of deaths.
By 2011, this program had facilitated fewer than 100 matches.
Well, what about paying for kidneys?
To economists, there is really a pretty straightforward answer here, I want more kidneys, how about
paying for them?
In fact, back in 1984, there was a former doctor who announced a plan that would set
up a company to buy kidneys from donors and sell them to patients.
And to set off an uproar at the time, Congress responded by passing the National Organ Transplant
Act of 1984.
To quote from the law, it is illegal to knowingly acquire, receive, or otherwise transfer any
human organ for valuable consideration for use in human transplantation.
The law does allow covering the costs of a kidney donor, which offers some limited scope
for paying folks, but not very much.
If you did have a market for kidneys, what would it look like?
How might it work?
In the economics journal that I added a few years ago, Nobel laureate economist Gary
Becker co-authored an article which did a bunch of calculations and found that paying
for kidneys could eliminate the backlog of those waiting for a kidney donation.
And so save 4,500 lives a year as well as a lot of pain and sickness for thousands and
thousands of people.
To figure out the possible supply of kidneys, what Becker did was basically look at the
costs of donating a kidney.
That is the time involved, the inconvenience, the lost wages, some compensation for the
risk and the pain involved.
Now clearly this is sort of a back of the envelope kind of calculation as to what you'd
actually need to pay someone for a kidney, but it's illustrative.
At the time he wrote this article, the cost of a kidney transplant was about $160,000.
Paying the donor, he calculated, would increase the cost of this kidney transplant by maybe
15%, something like that.
Of course no one would be required to donate a kidney, the whole idea is it's a market,
you don't want to sell, you don't have to sell.
And as in any market, kidneys would sell for more or less the same price.
If somebody tried to charge a lot more, no one would be willing to pay them.
Of course you don't maybe kidneys which were from people in especially good health might
get a little bit more.
Often presumably insurance companies might end up as the buyers because it would be better
for people to live longer with a healthy kidney than to deal with all the health problems
of diabetes or other kidney disease over time.
The expense is real, but kidney transplants would pay for themselves and saved medical
costs in probably about four to five years.
And of course if you were paying for kidneys, you wouldn't have all those costs of encouraging
people to donate all the time, you could just buy what you need and not organize all those
other programs or at least not organize them as much as you might otherwise do.
Well, this is obviously a controversial proposal, there's lots of different controversies, let's
try and walk through the issues.
First issue, how safe is this for the donor?
Well it's worth remembering that in our capitalist economy it's okay to get paid for jobs that
have some risk.
Being in the army, for example, or being in some hazardous occupation like mining.
In the U.S. as we talked about, women can often be paid for being a surrogate mother.
And it's interesting, I found this profoundly interesting as I looked into it, that the risk
of death for a healthy person donating one kidney is lower than the risk of dying from
complications in pregnancy.
In fact donating a kidney has about the same risk to the life of an average person as working
in the construction industry or driving a delivery van.
It's the sort of risk that a lot of people take every day on their job.
Another concern is that the poor will be disproportionately tempted to sell a kidney.
There are racial implications here too.
The poor are often disproportionately ethnic minorities, so you can imagine that African
Americans, Hispanics, some groups of Asians will be more tempted to sell a kidney than
others.
This is a real issue and a genuine issue, but there's something to be said on the other
side of it too.
After all, those who get kidney disease also tend to be disproportionately poor and ethnic
minorities.
Of those on the waiting list for kidney donations, nearly half are black or Hispanic.
So the benefits of this program would also flow disproportionately to these ethnic groups.
And at least to an economist, this is also a bit of a weird argument.
If you think about it, to say something is bad because it would mainly involve paying
the poor.
I mean, poor people are always more tempted to take on jobs or risks that they wouldn't
do if they had more money, joining the military, other kinds of risky job choices.
Is it really such a terrible thing that a poor person should have a choice or an option
to receive $15,000, $20,000, $25,000 for a kidney?
Why is it fair that the doctor and the hospital and everybody else makes money from the kidney
transplant?
It's only the donor who's actually giving up the kidney who's supposed to do it out
of some sort of pure altruism unlinked to any kind of a monetary incentive.
Could someone be pressured into donating a kidney?
Well, it's possible.
I mean, people do get pressured into all sorts of potentially ugly activities.
At least with donating a kidney, you would need to be a healthy person that is not sick
or a heavy user of drugs or alcohol.
You could certainly require a process of counseling and a waiting period, and it would only be
done by licensed professionals in a medical setting.
There's a lot less pressure than many people would face in a lot of other settings.
Some of those who oppose kidney sales offer long arguments about philosophy and morality
and culture, and there's often a lot of interesting discussion and wisdom in here.
I also think that a lot of these philosophical and moral arguments basically boil down to
a really complicated way of saying, this feels yucky.
And I admit I feel the yuck.
You may feel quite emotionally attached to the idea that we shouldn't sell kidneys.
And I don't want to downplay that emotion, but economics is about facing the trade-off
squarely in a world of scarcity and without flinching.
Thousands of people are suffering all the time.
4,000 to 5,000 people a year are dying every year for the lack of a kidney transplant.
Often poor people and people of minority status.
There's also a lesser harm, but there's another group of healthy people who don't have the
opportunity to have $15,000, $20,000, $25,000 in their pocket from selling a kidney.
Now those trade-offs are pretty darn large.
This is fundamentally an argument that pits, for many people at least, some internal sense
of what's right and wrong against concrete consequences.
I'm uncomfortable with selling body parts, but in this case, rather than have thousands
of people dying every year, I personally would overrule my discomfort.
Indeed a few years ago, the American Medical Association voted to have studies of the effect
of financial incentives on rates of organ donation from cadavers be done.
And for the AMA, that was a huge change and a very controversial thing to do, just the
notion that this was an idea that was worth studying.
One final fear is that paying for kidneys could discourage people from signing organ donor
cards or otherwise participating.
And there are really two claims here.
One is that if people knew they were being paid, they might feel less need to sign an
organ donor card.
Another is that some people don't want the money, they feel wrong taking the money, and
so they wouldn't want to donate under those conditions.
Now this is sort of a speculative argument.
It's not obviously true what would happen here.
My guess is that a lot of family members would keep donating kidneys just like they're doing
now.
A lot of people would sign the organ card just as they do, but there would be some extra
group of live donors, and that would be a good thing.
If there's people who just feel uncomfortable about taking money, you could either use some
of the money to cover funeral expenses for, say, those who give after death, or you could
pay it to the charity of their choice or a college fund for their children or a life
insurance policy.
If we called it a rewarded gift, then perhaps people would find it a more acceptable thing
to do.
Now I've spent some time and energy on this issue of kidney transplants because it seems
to me a vivid illustration of all sorts of issues that often arise.
One difference for many of these other controversies, which I'll talk about more in a moment, is
that some other markets may be preventing buyers from getting what they want or preventing
sellers from selling what they want to sell, and that's not a good thing a lot of the time.
But blocking kidney markets is different in this sense.
Because we don't have kidney markets, thousands of people are dying every single year.
And that's a fact that if you want to block this market, you have to carry that around
as one of the trade-offs you're willing to make.
Let's talk about some other controversies about what should be marketed.
Well, some controversies just involve other kinds of body parts.
For example, there are many issues with liver transplants that are very similar to those
for kidneys.
The technology for liver transplants is probably a decade or two, at least, behind kidney transplants.
The main fact you need to know here is that you have only one liver, but two kidneys.
However, it's perfectly possible to take a piece of a live liver and transplant it into
someone who needs a liver transplant.
Less than 10% of all liver transplants now are from live donors, but that share seems
certain to rise over time as the procedure works better.
Another body part, which has been bought and sold and arguments over that have happened,
have to do with commercialization of blood supply.
And here, a lot of the controversy traces back to about 1970, when a British sociologist
named Richard Titmuss wrote a book called The Gift Relationship from Human Blood to Social
Policy.
Titmuss was writing in the United Kingdom.
He wrote that blood donations were largely voluntary there at that time in 1970, whereas
in the United States, blood donations at that time were often paid.
However, the U.S. had a much greater problem with hepatitis and other blood-borne diseases
that were from paid donors coming and giving blood.
He concluded that making blood a commercial transaction was unwise because it was bad
for health.
Well, it's not obvious that this approach is the best approach to getting a stable blood
supply.
Sometimes you need a lot of blood in a hurry, say after natural disasters of certain kinds.
You can also imagine in poor countries after a natural disaster, maybe paying healthy people
to donate blood might spread some income around after the disaster and also boost the blood
supply at a key moment.
And yes, of course, you need to screen the blood, which we can do much better now than
we did back in 1970.
Maybe you need certain legal liability rules to make sure the screening is done properly.
But healthy people are not injured by giving blood.
And compensating, say, a bunch of healthy young people in their early 20s, so they give blood
more regularly seems to me like a win-win kind of situation.
Let's go beyond some of these discussions of body parts and talk about some other kinds
of blocked trades.
One different example is the example of eating horse meat.
In 1998, a law passed in California which said horse meat may not be offered for sale
for human consumption.
So restaurant, cafe, or other public eating place may offer horse meat for human consumption.
So let's be clear about this.
Just what this law says.
It's not against the law to kill horses.
It's not against the law to kill horses and eat the meat yourself if you don't sell it
to anyone else.
It's okay to ship horses to other countries where they'll end up being killed and eaten,
like Mexico or certain European countries.
It's just not okay to sell horse meat for humans to eat in the United States.
Now my wife rides horses.
I like horses, but it's hard to get the bright, clear moral line on exactly why this should
be a law blocking some people from doing something they'd like to do.
The deprivation here isn't large.
I mean, after all, people who can't buy horse meat can presumably buy other kinds of meat.
It's not like kidney transplants where thousands of people are dying, but it's an interesting
example of thinking about a good which could be bought or sold and which we don't allow
just because it seems odd to us.
There are places in the world where they don't eat beef or don't eat pork, and of course
to me that seems silly, but not eating horses or dogs seems reasonable.
Because we're thinking about all these block transactions and thinking about do they really
make sense, or are they just expressions of how we accept things that are the way they
are and we don't accept things that are different.
What about jobs that are blocked?
Well, think about a particular strange job, the job of being a dwarf who gets tossed
in bars.
In 1991, the French government announced that dwarf tossing, which people competed to see
how far they could throw a small person, should be banned as part of the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
There was a French dwarf who had been working and making a decent living being tossed in
these competitions.
He appealed the ban to the United Nations.
He argued that having a job was part of human dignity.
There weren't a lot of other jobs that paid as well, and after all, he was choosing it.
It was a voluntary choice.
In 2002, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and yes,
it went that high, upheld the ban on dwarf tossing.
But this seems like a genuinely hard question to me.
Is it okay to toss a dwarf for pay in a bar if the dwarf says it's okay?
We have no problem that people are paid money based on physical attributes.
Think about models, think about athletes.
Why are we blocking this particular transaction?
There are wife-carrying competitions, where large men carry small women, not always their
wives, around on an obstacle course.
There are national and world championships in wife-carrying.
Now, just to be clear, I have less than no interest in dwarf tossing.
I would actively avoid any place where dwarf tossing was happening.
But you know, without getting too specific, there's a lot of other activities that happen
in a lot of bars around the United States and the world, in which I also have less than
no interest, and where I would actively avoid.
It's interesting to think about why we ban certain things just out of a feeling that
they should be banned.
Is it again just giving in that things are the way they are and they shouldn't be different?
Or do we really have some good, solid reason based in economic thinking, based in costs
and benefits for why one should be allowed and not another?
As a final example of a barred transaction, what about the right of a dying person to
buy an experimental drug or a person to use, say, marijuana to reduce pain or to relieve
glaucoma?
This sort of thing is often defended on the ground that we need to ban these things because
sick people might be susceptible to frauds or quack cures.
I mean, after all, they're dying.
They'll grab for anything they need to be protected.
It's also sometimes argued that the use of marijuana for this kind of medicinal reason
or pain relief reason is just a cover for ending the prohibition on marijuana in general.
And so everyone would say, oh, you know, I've got a headache.
I've got a sickness.
I've got a problem.
And so I'll self-medicate in that way.
Now those arguments have some force, but it's also true that society in the form of government
is telling you what you can do for yourself.
Death is bad.
Pain is bad.
Death without hope is bad.
Individual choice is worth something.
And so thinking about what here is the expression of a prejudice and thinking about what steps
government should take actually to protect people as opposed to letting people protect
themselves, especially people who are already about to die seems like a worthwhile step
to me.
All of these are cases where there's real genuine demand for a product or a job or a
service, and there's also willing and voluntary supply of that product or service.
Some sort of transaction is likely to happen under those conditions.
And in all of these cases, there's also some group, some cases the broader American public,
saying it would rather the world didn't work this way.
We'd rather there wasn't a demand for the product.
The demand is wrong.
We'd rather there wasn't a supply of the product.
Those who supply it are wrong.
There's this wish that it just wouldn't be that way.
But if you're going to think like an economist in the broader sense, you can't give into
that temptation just to wish away the forces of supply and demand.
You need to recognize that government isn't a magic wand.
It can raise the price of doing things.
It can push things underground.
It can force things to happen in convoluted ways, but it can't wipe them out.
So we need to think about when it's worth blocking transactions and what it means to
block transactions.
Now, maybe it makes me a heretic among economists to say this, but I don't believe that the
market is everything.
I don't think everything should be in the market no matter what.
I do think there are some cases where an argument based on certain values or even maybe a widespread
social yuck is an appropriate reason to limit or block certain kinds of transactions.
But that said, it's important to remember that whenever you block a transaction that
two parties would have been willing to make, you're blocking a possible opportunity for
those parties as well.
You need to be clear on why you're doing that, and just saying it's fair or it would
be yucky, that isn't enough.
Perhaps a certain transaction does have downsides and tradeoffs, but other options may not be
so good either.
Even worse, the Long History of Economic Regulation offers a lot of examples where regulations
were deployed in ways that made sense to people at the time, but that we find not so attractive
as reasons now.
For example, one of the main arguments made by progressive movements for minimum wage
laws back at the start of the 20th century was that women and immigrant minority men
were willing to work for wages that were too low.
The idea was that by having a minimum wage, those women and minorities could be pushed
out of the labor market altogether.
Now modern folks who think of themselves as progressive are typically horrified by that
particular motive, but those people were acting to limit transactions based on their own deeply
held beliefs at the time.
And there are lots of cases of regulators who maybe started off protecting consumers,
but ended up making sure that, say, the electric company or the phone company or the airlines
or some other regulated industry could make really high profits and shut out possible
competition instead.
There are lots of examples of public officials who seem more interested in whether government
contractors get big checks or government employees get good raises than they are whether taxpayers
are getting the best money, the best value they can for the taxes they pay.
In the case of kidney transplants, lots of money gets spent on kidney transplants and
lots of salaries are paid, only the donors expect to do it all as a charitable donation.
It seems to me that in many of these cases, the rules blocking payment and blocking transactions
give control to a certain group, but they're not necessarily the interests of those who
would like to participate in the transaction itself.
When it comes to thinking about what's right or suitable or appropriate, there's no escaping
that we're all creatures of our own culture and our own time.
And there's nothing wrong with that, but history teaches us the humbling lesson that
people a few decades from now or a half century from now will look back on us and they will
think we were moral defectives or just foolish for limiting some of the transactions that
we did.
