Have you ever had that sinking feeling where you're driving down the road, you're just
up the on ramp to get on to the freeway, and as you look ahead you can see this stretch
of cars as far as you can see, nothing but a whole lot of red brake lights looking at
you.
And you know that as you get on to that road, you're just going to be stuck.
I like to think of myself as a fairly mellow person, but I confess that time spent stuck
and barely moving in heavy traffic feels to me like I can hear the seconds of my life
ticking away.
It's especially bad when I see it, when I know it's coming.
I'm one of those lucky people who most days has an ability to shuffle my hours a bit,
maybe work at home in the morning or in the late afternoon for a couple hours, avoid the
worst of the rush.
But sometimes there's just no help for it, I just need to plunge in.
I'll take surface roads all the way across town just to avoid sitting still on the freeway.
Of course I'm not the only person doing this, so I'm not sure it's actually faster, but
at least I feel like I'm moving.
An organization called the Texas Transportation Institute puts out an annual urban mobility
report that among other things estimates the costs of traffic congestion.
Now just to be clear, this isn't the time spent commuting to work total, it's just the
time spent sitting in traffic, or time spent going significantly more slowly than the speed
limit because of very, very heavy traffic.
Other estimates come out a couple years after the fact, but their estimates for 2009 suggest,
which are based on 439 different urban areas, found that in that year congestion caused
urban Americans to travel 4.8 billion hours more than they otherwise would.
If you value the time of people stuck in traffic at about $15 an hour, and if you value the
time of trucks stuck in traffic at about $100 an hour because there's extra costs of having
all that equipment tied up and what they're carrying tied up for extra time, you end up
with really high costs.
If you add together the purchasing an extra 3.9 billion gallons of fuel while you're stuck
in traffic, the total congestion costs, as they calculate it, come out to about $115
billion in 2009, which is about a third higher than it had been a decade earlier.
That estimate may even be a little bit too low because it focuses on monetary costs and
the psychic costs are high too.
To put it another way, valuing time at $15 an hour when you're stuck in traffic may
be too low a value.
In fact, congestion would have been much worse in 2009, except the slowdown in the economy
that started in 2007 held down on the rise in traffic congestion that otherwise would
have occurred.
In a later lecture, I'll talk some about attempts to measure happiness in a direct way.
One way is to ask people to fill out a time diary.
They say what they were doing at different times during the day and what level of happiness
they experienced.
One result from such time diaries tells me I'm not alone.
There's just a lot of people out there where the worst thing that happens to them day after
day after day is being stuck in traffic.
Now here's what I suspect is an emotionally unwelcome bit of analysis from economics.
When you spend time stuck in traffic, you are the economic equivalent of a polluter.
The logic of the argument goes like this.
In economic terms, someone who pollutes the air or water is someone who imposes economic
costs on others in society, and those costs are not part of any market transaction.
When you are in the middle of congested traffic, you are imposing costs on broader society.
In particular, you are delaying everyone who's behind you in line.
Now in my experience, people just really purely hate thinking about it in this way.
We like to think we're all victims of traffic congestion.
We're not causes of it.
But a more precise way of putting it would be that when you're stuck in traffic, you're
a victim of everyone who's ahead of you blocking you from speeding up, but you are imposing
costs on everyone behind you because you are preventing them from speeding up.
In this sense, traffic congestion is a textbook example of what in an intro to economics class
is called a negative externality.
That's a situation in which one party causes negative effects on another without being
compensated for those negative effects.
Classic example of what the government should do with negative externalities is to force
the party that's causing the negative effect to face up to the costs it's imposing on others.
This could be done in the case of pollution with different kinds of regulations or permits
or fees or charges.
The point is to make people bear the costs that they're imposing.
Now I can hear the responses now.
I'm just one car.
I don't create any delay.
Now granted you're just one car, but think about it this way.
Say that your one car imposes a delay of four seconds and you impose it on each of 300 cars
behind you in your lane of traffic.
In other words, your car is creating 1200 seconds of delay or 20 minutes of delay.
And if we value the time of the drivers at, well again, say $15 an hour, then you're causing
$5 worth of delay.
And of course in many cases you might be ahead of a lot more than 300 cars behind you.
When you say I'm just one car, it's not my problem.
It's kind of like a polluter saying I can't be the cause of society's problem with air pollution
because I'm just one little factory, one little emitter of pollution, a very small part of the whole.
In fact, I suffer from pollution.
I have to breathe just what everyone else is emitting to.
Now most of us wouldn't buy this excuse as an argument for letting companies pollute.
We shouldn't really buy it for traffic congestion either.
Why is traffic congestion so hard to fix?
An economist named Anthony Downs, who's spent much of his career at the Brookings Institution,
has done some of what I think of as the most interesting work.
He's emphasized that when you see traffic congestion, there's a sense in which you're
only seeing the tip of the iceberg.
When you see traffic congestion, you're seeing the people who find it worthwhile to sit in traffic.
You're not seeing all the other people who would actually like to be on the road at this time,
but because of congestion, they found other ways of avoiding it.
Downs emphasizes that there are always three other options to traffic congestion.
One is taking an alternative route, side streets, parallel roads, through neighborhoods.
Maybe get on the congested road for a short time, not the entire way.
Second option, some shifting in time.
You could maybe travel an hour or two earlier or an hour or two later and avoid some of the congestion.
And the third possibility is shifting your mode of transportation.
That is, instead of driving alone, maybe you could carpool or take the bus or telecommute sometimes.
If you think about the problem of traffic congestion in this way, you can imagine there are all sorts of people out there
who, if there was no congestion, they would choose to be driving a car down the road at that time.
If you take steps to get some current drivers off the road during the peak time,
so the congestion is less bad, some of those folks will shift back into the pool, back into the congested period.
So the problem isn't a fixed number of cars on the road and how do we reduce them.
The problem is all the cars on the road plus all the other cars that would want to be on the road
if there was less congestion.
And going after that broader problem is a very hard social problem indeed.
When you recognize that congestion is only the tip of the iceberg in terms of who wants to be on the road at a given time,
you can understand why a lot of the proposed solutions really only make a modest and temporary difference.
Let's talk about some of those proposed solutions.
For example, what about building your way out of congestion?
What about building an extra lane or two on highways?
Well, if the extra lane entices back additional travelers who had shifted their route or time or mode of travel,
the reduction in congestion from building is not going to be very large.
The Texas Transportation Institute suggests you'd need to build something like 12,000 or so extra lane miles of highway each year
just to keep congestion at the same level.
Again, the difficulty is, as you build more, people keep shifting back from other times, other modes and other routes.
Also, if you think about it, you would be really wasteful to build 15 lanes of highway each way,
make sure there was zero congestion during a short commuting period, and then have 15 lanes sitting empty the rest of the day.
U.S. cities that have tried to build their way out of congestion say some of those with the widest highways and most extensive road systems,
thinking like New York City, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, a few others.
They certainly have not managed to build their way out of congestion.
What about if we built more mass transit?
If we got an extra 3 million or so mass transit riders every year, we could keep congestion at about the same level, not rising much.
Of course, to reduce congestion, you need to increase that number by even more.
But mass transit is not likely to reduce congestion all that much.
Look at cities that have quite good mass transit systems, say New York or Boston or Washington, D.C.
Since 1960 or so, there are three major U.S. cities that have built really large-scale mass transit systems.
Washington, D.C., the metro there, the San Francisco area BART system, and Atlanta's MARTA system.
But traffic is worse than ever in those cities.
What often happens is, people locate and move in response to the train system.
They often move out to the edge of the train system, and then they are driving or moving even further as they commute.
Lots of people locate thinking they'll take mass transit all the time, but they don't always take it, and they end up as more cars traveling further on the road.
Americans mostly live in low-density patterns.
To some extent, they also work in spread-out patterns.
And as a result of that, it's hard to have a mass transit system that collects everyone in a dispersed area and delivers them to some other dispersed area.
There's not much money available to build dense, high transit, to deliver people only within a city to other destinations in a city.
A lot of mass transit really enables suburban commuters as much as anything else.
What about the possibility of dramatically higher gasoline prices?
If gas prices are higher, then people would reduce the amount of driving they do.
In general, the estimates suggest that in order to make a real difference in congestion, you'd have to get gas prices well above $4 a gallon and keep them there.
Now, of course, gas prices did reach above $4 a gallon in 2011, but I'm talking about that being the new norm and staying there permanently.
That does happen. I expect we will see smaller rises or perhaps even decreases in traffic congestion over time.
Of course, you'll still have a problem that as some leave during the congested time, others will shift in from other routes, other time periods, and other modes of transportation.
It's also probably true that the economic slowdown that started late in 2007 has held down the increase in traffic over the last few years.
But I think for most big cities, you haven't seen a huge drop-off in congestion.
It's just that the increase hasn't been as much as one would have otherwise expected.
What about all the other tricks to help freeway traffic flow more smoothly?
Bus and carpool lanes, coordinating traffic signals, getting vans out on the road so if something happens, you can get it out of the way, off the road, ramp meters, all those kinds of things.
I think all those things probably help. I'm not opposed to them. It's good to use the roads more efficiently, but they're a very partial answer to the ever-rising problem of traffic congestion.
What about zoning for higher density? To encourage people to live and work in areas mass transit can serve where mass transit can really work.
You can drop on a blackboard. You know, all the people will live here, the jobs will be here, and the transportation will go back and forth between them.
But that's not how a lot of people actually want to live. You can get some young singles and childless people and retirees to live that way, but Americans with kids who are often people in their prime working years, if they can afford it,
they typically aren't looking to raise their kids in big complexes of high density apartment buildings.
And the truth is, even a lot of singles and empty nesters and retirees don't seem to want to live that way either.
In all of this, I'm not saying that the many steps I've been talking about are a bad idea. Rather the reverse, I think we need to keep doing all of the things I've been describing in a cost-effective kind of way.
I think sometimes we do need more roads, especially when there are huge bottlenecks that cause problems almost every working day for hours and hours.
I think we could use more mass transit, although I admit that I often wonder if we put all the money that we put into light rail into buses, I suspect with dedicated bus routes, we might get more bang for our buck than we do with some of the rail systems.
I also think all the tricks of traffic management are certainly worth thinking about. There's some estimates that say that for every dollar that's wisely invested, you can get $5 or more in social benefits in terms of reduced time spent in traffic,
less gas used, less wear and tear on vehicles and all of that. Of course, I said there very quickly, it does need to be wisely invested, which is a big warning, I agree.
But there are possibilities here for doing things. All these efforts, though, all of them taken together remind me a bit of the famous lines Lewis Carroll wrote in Alice through the Looking Glass.
If you remember the book, Alice and the Red Queen are running and running across the countryside, and Alice says, well, in our country, you'd generally get to somewhere else if you ran very fast for a long time as we've been doing.
A slow sort of country says the Red Queen. Now, here you see, it takes all the running you can do to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that.
My point here is just to emphasize that although these things are helping, if we want to get someplace else, we have to run twice as fast as that. We still face a fundamental problem. People in traffic are polluters.
They can impose a cost on a lot of other people and they don't have to pay that cost. As long as that is true, traffic congestion is going to be a problem.
Are we headed toward a world where we do make people pay those costs directly through congestion charging? In the city of London, they've been trying to do exactly this.
About a million people enter central London on a typical workday. By the late 1990s, the average driving speed in central London was only 10 miles an hour. By the early 2000s, it was down to 8 miles an hour.
Drivers in central London spent on average 30% of their time standing still. It sounds familiar, I suspect, to commuters in some US cities as well.
In fact, someone figured out that by the early 2000s, it was slower to drive across central London by car than it had been 100 years earlier to drive across central London in a horse and carriage.
Now, the city of London is fairly rich in mass transportation. It has bosses and subways. It's a fairly walkable city, but congestion was getting worse and worse and worse and worse. What to do about it?
Well, they decided to think about a direct charge on those participating in congestion. This is sometimes called congestion pricing.
The idea of this kind of a charge has been talked about by economists for decades. For example, William Victory, who won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1996, was writing about the topic of congestion-based pricing for traffic in the late 1950s and the early 1960s.
This is another situation where the theoretical argument was recognized for a long time, but in general, it was thought just to be too hard in practice. I mean, what's the right fee to charge?
You can think about a fee for a bridge, but how do you think about a fee for all the entry points around the city? Would the fee go up and down by time, by place? How do you collect the fee?
If you're going to stop every driver going into a city every morning, that seems costly for the drivers, for the government. How do you enforce the fee? It just seemed improbable that something like this could ever work.
Well, in 2003, the City of London started imposing such a fee, and it worked like this. You pay if you entered an area called Inner London. Inner London is an area surrounded by a designated ring road, and you pay the fee if you enter between 7 a.m. and 6.30 p.m. on workdays.
Now, just to be clear, this Inner London is not the whole of Greater London. It's in fact only about 1% of the area of Greater London.
If you know the City of London, the part of it you probably know as a tourist is the center. It's like the financial district, parliament, the big tourist areas, the big entertainment area, the West End. That's the stuff which is in Inner London.
They defined a ring road around this zone, and they picked a road area that was already built, and they could expand a little bit. If you're traveling on the ring road, you don't need to pay any charge.
But if you go into the zone, you do need to pay. And I find this interesting because you can think of a lot of U.S. metro areas that have a ring road around them in one way or another.
Individuals living inside London, inside the zone, get 90% off the charge if they drive, and they don't have to pay at all if they keep their car parked off the street somewhere.
There are also some examples of folks that don't have to pay, motorcycles don't have to pay, bicycles, emergency vehicles, buses.
They started off charging a fee of five pounds a day. In 2005, it went up to eight pounds a day. Very round numbers say a pound is a buck fifty U.S., so call it twelve dollars a day.
If you were entering London 250 working days a year, that comes out to three thousand dollars a year. That's real money.
They chose a flat rate. You pay all that during those hours, not a varying rate, mainly on grounds of simplicity.
How do they collect the money? Well, no tool booths. You pay in retail outlets or kiosks by telephone over the internet.
You can even use text messages with your cell phone. You can pay in advance by the day, the week, or the year.
When you pay, you enter the license plate of your vehicle. Video cameras track all the license plates entering the zone inside the ring road.
They have software which recognizes the license plates and matches who is paid.
And most people, when you're going in and out of the zone, you pass by several cameras. The detection technology is probably only maybe 85-90% effective.
But if you're caught, a notice goes out to you, the owner of the vehicle, right away.
But here's sort of the subtle beauty of this. Because you've paid in advance, you don't know if you would have been caught or not.
You could gamble, sort of play roulette, not pay, and hope to skip by.
But the fine is more than six times the daily charge if it's paid right away, and the fine triples if it's not paid for a month.
There were some glitches in getting the system up and running. It was tricky to recognize the letter O and the digit zero,
the number one and the letter I. They eventually worked those out.
The biggest problem now is that when a car is sold, the official records haven't been updated.
The old owner gets the notice of the fine.
Overall, the result was that car trips into this area of Inner London were cut by about a third to a half,
and delays in traffic were reduced by substantial amounts as well.
What actually seemed to happen was many people switched modes, especially taking buses.
There's sort of a virtuous cycle here. There were lots more riders who wanted to take buses and lots more buses,
so the buses could run more frequently and go to more destinations, which encouraged more riders, which helped.
And so you had a virtuous cycle of people taking buses.
There was also some switching where some people came very early before the zone charge or left very late after the zone charge.
Financially, overall, the system cost more than they expected to set up, I guess these systems often do,
and it cut car trips by so much that the revenue they got was less than they expected.
But over time, they've sort of worked out most of the kinks, and the charge brings in a reasonable amount of extra money.
They earmarked the extra money for mass transit, about 80% of it for buses in particular.
Now, adding all this up in an economic view is a little bit dicey, but you can imagine,
there's a value on the time saved, a value on accidents avoided.
On the other side, you have costs of things like setting up the system and the charges and the penalties,
and when you try and do that kind of a calculation, if you put reasonable estimates on those sorts of things,
it looks like the benefits substantially outweigh the costs.
Politically, this seems like a winner. There is no major sentiment for ending the congestion charge,
and the politics of it are all sort of interesting.
It passed when the mayor of London was a fellow named Ken Livingstone.
And Ken Livingstone is an iconoclastic figure. He was called Red Ken for a long time.
He was a real thorn in the side of Margaret Thatcher, really a man of the left.
And here's this guy of the left who ran for office, promising to do congestion pricing.
In an interesting way, Ken Livingstone helped make the charge credible,
because his promise that you would use the money for mass transit was a promise people really believed.
They believed it wasn't just some tax increase or corporate money grab.
Having fees for entering a city may seem like an unthinkable change, something that just can't be accepted.
But an ongoing theme of these lectures is that there are a lot of examples of things that seem unthinkable,
but when the problem gets big enough, underlying economic pressures cause them to happen.
London wasn't actually the first city to use congestion pricing.
Singapore in 1975 was the first congestion pricing scheme.
Although as a tiny island nation with a strong central government,
it was sort of thought of as the exception that proved the rule.
But in the 1980s and 1990s, there were other examples.
Some congestion pricing started in Stockholm, in Bergen, in Norway.
There was a fee on cars entering the downtown during morning rush hours.
And in the U.S. there have been some experiments as well.
In the 1990s, they've been charging variable tolls on a few roads in Southern California,
in Orange County and in San Diego.
Around my hometown of Minneapolis, just in the last few years, they've started charging variable tolls,
which go higher or lower depending on how congested the roads are.
There are more and more places that are starting to have tolls and charges that are lower on weekends than on weekdays,
which if you think about it is a form of a congestion charge.
Think about the possibilities here.
Manhattan is, after all, an island.
Access to it could easily be monitored.
San Francisco sits on the tip of a peninsula.
Again, access could be monitored fairly easily.
Technology is going to get better for doing this sort of thing.
License plate recognition will get better.
The systems they call tag and beacon systems,
where you have something attached to the window of your car
that just sort of records as you go in and out, are going to get better and better.
Any place where the tolls are higher during rush hour than on weekends,
or the parking costs more during the business day than on evenings and weekends,
are all moving toward this general idea that it's okay to charge more during times of congestion.
And I think in general, we're headed toward that being a way that becomes an accepted idea,
not right away, maybe not in the next couple years, but decade or two down the road for sure.
The problem of traffic congestion fits into a broader theory,
which is called the tragedy of the commons.
It was named this by a biology professor named Garrett Hardin,
who wrote about it in a 1968 article.
As the primary metaphor driving his analysis,
Hardin discusses that back in medieval times there was an area called the commons,
where everybody could graze their livestock.
The commons wasn't owned by anyone.
Access to it is not restricted, and that worked fine for a long time.
You can take your livestock to the commons and graze them.
But as the population increased,
more and more people used the commons for their livestock,
and there began to be a problem,
a conflict between the pursuit of individual wealth and social welfare.
As population went up, the quality of the commons got worse and worse.
It was degraded by overgrazing, ruining the soil, the grass, hurting everyone.
Every individual in this situation had an incentive to graze more cattle,
because all the gains from grazing the cattle went to that individual,
while all the costs of degrading the commons were spread out over everyone else.
The solution to this tragedy of the commons is some kind of a social rule.
You can't just have a rule which says everyone needs to restrain themselves.
That isn't going to address the problem.
Not when every individual can get the gains from acting in their individual interests,
but spread out the losses among others.
For example, one rule might involve property ownership,
so those who own property have an incentive not to overgraze it.
Or it might be a rule that limits the total number of cows on the commons
and divides up that total somehow.
There could be some sort of rationing rule.
Maybe everyone gets two cows,
and I could sell my right to graze one of my cows or both of my cows to someone else.
You can imagine a charge of some kind.
Everyone needs to pay a certain amount to use the commons,
and you set the fee in such a way that the commons won't be overused,
and some workable solution will emerge out of pragmatism and fairness.
But you have to find a way to limit the use of the commons,
or the common resource will be degraded in a way that makes it less useful to everyone.
The idea that a commons can become, over time, too crowded
and need some form of rule to limit access to it is a widespread idea.
It applies to all sorts of situations around the global economy.
It applies to overfishing the oceans of the world, which are a kind of global commons.
It applies to polluting the air of the world,
which can be thought of as a global common resource.
For a long time in the United States,
free space on the highways during most of the day has been a commons
that we could all use without too much aggravation.
Just as we used to overgraze the commons and make it less usable for everyone,
now we overdrive on the roads.
One way or another, we need to think about alternatives to avoid that congestion.
We need to think about ways of raining back on it
and making people pay the costs they're imposing.
We need to think about congestion pricing.
