When most non-economists talk about why crimes are committed, it tends to be a version of
that old classic argument, nature versus nurture.
Are people criminals because of their internal moral weakness?
That was often the view in the early part of the 20th century.
Or are people criminals because of their upbringing, or their lack of education, or lack of other
economic opportunity?
That was often the position in the sociology literature in the decades after World War
II.
That literature often argued that criminals were nearly mentally ill victims of social
oppression.
In a way, the criminals were the real victims.
As a gang member put it in that old musical West Side Story, hey, I'm depraved on account
of I'm Deprived.
Economists see crime a little bit differently.
To give an idea of how they see it, let me tell a story from a famous economist, Gary
Becker of the University of Chicago.
Becker won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1992 for having extended the domain of microeconomic
analysis to a wide range of human behavior and interaction, including non-market behavior.
One of those ways in which Becker extended economic analysis was to the analysis of crime
and crime fighting behavior.
In his Nobel Prize lecture, he talks about how he came to the study of crime.
He was telling a story about how he was in Columbia University back in the 1960s, and
he was going to where he had to be part of a committee that was doing the doctoral oral
examination for a student there in the economics department.
Becker says, I'm running late, I really had to think about what I was going to do, I'm
driving down the street, I'm looking for a parking space, I don't know whether I should
wait to find a parking lot where I can park legally with my university sticker or I should
park illegally on the street.
So of course, being an economist, what do you do?
You calculate the likelihood of getting a ticket, the size of the penalty, the cost of
putting the car in the lot, and Becker says, well, I decided I had risked it, I'd park
on the street, and later he reported he didn't actually get a ticket.
And then, as he's walking over to the examination room to talk to this poor doctoral student,
then Becker reports that he thought about the city authorities and how they had thought
the same things he had thought.
They had thought about how frequently did we need to go around and inspect all the parked
vehicles, think about the size of the penalties that people should get.
And of course, he had to think about all these different things in terms of how people would
react to the incentives that they provide.
And the way Becker tells the story, the first question he asked the graduate student who's
there for his oral exam was to decide for him what would be the optimal behavior of
offenders and the police in the situation, which is a problem that just occurred to Becker
on the way driving over to the examination.
I've always pitied that student somehow.
But by 1968, Becker had published a famous article called Crime and Punishment and Economic
Approach, and the subject of crime and punishment through economics has been an active area
of economic research ever since.
Basic structure is potential criminals think about the chance of being caught and the penalty
if they're caught.
Government on the other side thinks about how much to enforce and what penalties to
impose when someone is caught.
And the interaction between all of those is an economic way of thinking about crime.
What are some of the insights from this economic approach to crime?
Well, first of all, it does help get past the old nature-nurture argument.
Economists essentially resolve this argument by saying that they both matter.
Lots of factors determine whether someone will commit crime.
There may be some people who have different ideas of morality than others that are more
or less inborn.
There's also going to be different incentives through law enforcement, different expenditures
on police and punishments for different crimes, different opportunities for legal employment,
so the whole thing fits together.
Now, this might seem obvious, but it leads to a thought that's a little bit less obvious.
Let's imagine that the crime rate changes dramatically.
For example, crime rises sharply in the U.S. in the 1960s and 70s.
It falls sharply in the 1990s.
If you know what affects crime, then you need to say what changed in order to cause that
change to occur.
Typically, it's not a very appealing argument to say, for unknown reasons, a whole bunch
of people suddenly changed their morality or their motivation, and that led to a lot
more crime or a lot less crime.
Instead, it usually makes more sense to say, what were the specific incentives they faced,
either legal incentives or economic and other social factors that infected their incentives
to do more or less crime?
And now, we left behind the world of is crime inborn or whatever, or in the world of incentives,
trade-offs, the world of economics.
In other words, economics might not be a great help in explaining why crime exists in the
first place, but in explaining why crime rises or falls, thinking about the changes in incentives
can be a great help indeed.
Another big implication of the economic view on crime is that law enforcement activities
vary on two main dimensions.
One is the degree of certainty that if you break the law, you'll be caught, and the other
is the severity of the punishment if you are actually caught.
When you think about certainty of being caught, you can think about this as shorthand for
how many police there are on the streets, the resources of the police, the ability of
the courts to process cases in a reasonably speedy way.
When you're thinking about severity, you can think about the length of prison sentences,
maybe the use of the death penalty, the size of fines, different kinds of punishment.
When you phrase the issue in this way, with certainty and severity together, you get some
interesting insights that begin to emerge.
For example, some crimes might be only rarely detected, so if those crimes are not punished
with some severity, there will be an incentive to gamble on not being caught and disobey
the law.
For example, if you're stopped for drunk driving, even though you haven't actually had an accident
or hurt anyone, the penalty can be quite severe.
It's not because you had a crash, it's not because one person driving drunk one time
is so destructive on average, it's because people know that they're only going to stop
and catch a tiny fraction of the people who are driving drunk, and they don't want you
to gamble on a chance of not getting caught, so they make the punishment quite severe.
As another example, imagine an economic crime, like a cartel that gets together where companies
get together to keep prices high.
It might be hard to detect this kind of behavior and to get a conviction.
If you just had to give back the extra profits you earned, companies might gamble and see
if they could get away with it.
So when you catch someone for price fixing, you need to penalize them not just for the
actual crime, but you need to penalize them to make it worthwhile not to gamble on not
being caught.
So the antitrust law says that when firms do anti-competitive behavior, they end up paying
three times any extra profit they would have received, trouble damages, and the executives
might go to jail besides.
On the other side, having a really high level of severity of punishment isn't always a
great idea.
Sometimes certainty would matter more.
In fact, many criminals often aren't worried about the severity of punishment because they
assume they aren't going to be caught in the first place.
For such criminals, having greater severity won't affect their choices very much, but
greater certainty of punishment might make a real difference.
Another difficult issue here when you have extreme severe punishments is that those punishments
will be especially unfair in cases where an innocent person is convicted, which will inevitably
happen from time to time.
Severeity is something that's highly visible.
You catch someone and then it's what you do to them.
Certainty is less visible because you don't really see those people you didn't catch.
But in a number of economic models, it tends to be true that certainty is more important
in stopping crime than severity, which doesn't happen all that often.
Another argument that can cut against the idea of too much severity for lesser crimes
is they might give criminals an inappropriate set of incentives.
For example, if you say we're going to have the death penalty for kidnapping, then maybe
a kidnapper is more likely to kill the victim.
After all, they're going to get the death penalty anyway.
If you have a law where you might get life in prison for a third crime, the so-called
three-strikes law, in a way you might have an incentive to kill any witnesses at that
third crime to avoid being identified.
After all, life in prison is probably the worst you'll get if you kill them, and it's
going to what you're going to get for your third strike.
Similarly, if you're already in prison for life without parole, then why not kill a guard
or another inmate?
After all, you're already in prison for life.
So thinking about how these implications play out for certainty and severity across
a vast range of criminal behavior has been an active area of research in recent decades.
If you get the same penalty whether you commit a crime with a gun or not, why not use the
gun?
With this idea in mind, many states have a separate penalty if you commit a crime with
a gun.
And that idea is to add on to make the punishment fit the crime in an appropriate way.
Economic view on crime also emphasizes that zero crime is just a flat-out, unreasonable
goal.
Crime will never be eliminated, it just costs too much to do it.
Imagine the resources you would need just to eliminate some simple crime, like illegal
parking or speeding.
Instead, public policy about crime is always going to involve thinking about trade-offs.
Now a lot of people don't like to think about crime in this way and you'll pretty much never
hear a politician say it.
But in fact, when we choose a level of policing or a level of imprisonment, we are saying
there was a certain level of crime that is de facto acceptable to us, because it would
cost too much to try and eliminate that extra amount of crime.
Many steps to reduce crime have benefits greater than costs if you pursued them up to a certain
point, but then might have costs greater than benefits if you push it harder and harder.
And I'll return to that idea at the end of this lecture.
What I really want to do in the body of this lecture is to sketch out the economic evidence
which suggests that an economic perspective on crime is really a useful one.
Now I will do my best, not always easy for me, but I will try not to turn into one of
those economic imperialists and argue that the economic perspective is all that matters
or it answers all the questions about crime.
But I do think it illuminates a lot of what we observe out there in the real world.
Let's first of all think about the problem of cause and effect.
If you're going to look at costs of fighting crime and benefits of fighting crime, you
need to come up with estimates of how much the different things you might do.
More police on the streets, more time in prison, private security forces, security cameras,
whatever else you might come up with.
Now several basic problems arise here, but the really big one is it's very hard to figure
out cause and effect in this situation.
Imagine there's a high crime area, for example.
Say it has lots of security cameras and in a low crime area you don't see any security
cameras.
Does this prove security cameras are no use in fighting crime?
After all, they're not there where there's no crime.
Or say there's a city or a state with a high crime rate and lots of people locked up.
Does that prove that the high crime rate caused a lot of people to be locked up?
Or does it prove the reverse?
It's very difficult to disentangle these different kinds of cause and effect examples.
So when you see a lot of crime fighting policy, what economists try and do is sort out.
Did the crime cause the crime fighting policy, or did the crime fighting policy fail to stop
crime that otherwise would have been even higher?
It's hard to disentangle those costs and benefits.
Economic researchers have tried out a number of different methods to unravel this puzzle
of cause and effect.
For example, one possibility is to look at how a change in crime fighting policy affects
the amount of crime after some amount of time is passed, and that's a reasonable approach.
Another approach is sometimes called a natural experiment.
You can imagine doing something like this.
Randomly choose, say, 100 areas around the country, then pick 50 of these areas at random
and give those areas, say, more police.
Then see what happens in those different areas.
Does the change in more police lead to difference in crime or not?
And because it was all assigned at random, you have some belief you might get a reasonable
answer out of that.
Now that example is hypothetical.
It's not likely that the U.S. political process can assign crime fighting resources like police
at random.
But the idea of a natural experiment can be used in some different ways.
What you need to look for is out there in the real world, is there a situation which causes
crime fighting to rise or fall in some places in a way that isn't related to the level of
crime?
If so, that could be a sort of experiment, a natural experiment, a quasi-experiment,
they say sometimes, where you could look at that experience.
Some of the most innovative work in this area has been done by Stephen Leavitt of the University
of Chicago, who's the author of the popular books Freakonomics and Super Freakonomics.
A couple of examples from Leavitt's research can give you an idea of how his mind works.
In a lot of states, for example, there are lawsuits to reduce prison overcrowding.
Because prisons are grossly overcrowded, these lawsuits do often win, but here's the key
thing.
These lawsuits happen at different times.
The timing of when the lawsuit is brought and decided can be thought of essentially as
a random decision.
So the way of thinking about that is, some states, pretty much randomly chosen because
of the timing of a lawsuit, end up releasing a bunch of prisoners at a time when a bunch
of other very similar states, perhaps with similar levels of imprisonment, aren't releasing
prisoners.
Now, this isn't intended as an experiment, of course, but it works as a kind of natural
experiment for researchers to study.
And that kind of study finds, for example, that in the three years or so after a major
prison overcrowding case is won and many fewer people are imprisoned as a result, the level
of violent crime goes up around 10% and property crime goes up around 5%, compared with other
areas that didn't have a similar prison overcrowding lawsuit.
Let me give you another example.
In the time leading up to an election, it's common for mayors to increase the number of
police on the streets.
It turns out when you look at this carefully, mayors tend to do this regardless of whether
crime is up or down, and in addition, not all cities elect mayors at the same time.
So there's some random group of cities, not that different from other cities, which we
see boosts in police at times not really related to changes in the crime rate.
Again, this gives you a natural experiment to think, how do more police affect the level
of crime?
Here's yet another example.
There's a company called Lowjack, which puts a private security system in your car and
there's a transmitter.
So if your car is stolen, it's a lot easier to track it if the Lowjack is inserted.
But to operate a Lowjack system and be connected to the police, you have to have some sort
of regulatory approval.
It turns out that when you look at cities where this approval was granted during the
1990s, it was a pretty random selection of cities.
It wasn't cities with more crime or more crime fighting or better emphasis on reducing
car thefts or anything else.
The main difference between these cities was just that some approved it and some didn't.
So you can treat the introduction of the Lowjack system as a random sort of natural experiment
and find out that it did indeed tend to reduce car theft by deterring potential criminals.
You can also show that car theft in surrounding areas didn't seem to go up.
So the theft wasn't displaced, it was an overall drop in crime.
Many more studies of this kind have been done.
There's often some controversy over what you have identified as really a random change
in crime fighting, how to estimate the effects, whether the effects are short term or long
term, all the rest.
The point here is to give you a sense of how economists overcome the cause and effect problem
of figuring out how crime fighting really does affect crime.
I want to give a sense that when economists say something about connections from crime
fighting to crime, it's based on a body of evidence.
It's not just based on some quick, average size of police, average crime rate, average
imprison rate across states.
Also, I think all this gives a sense of what it means to be creative in your academic research.
What it means to really think about and seek out and find and analyze these kinds of natural
experiments.
In fact, one reason why Stephen Leavitt is so highly regarded as an economic researcher
is that he has a genuine talent for finding ways to disentangle these kinds of cause and
effect issues, not just in crime, but in looking at a number of other subjects too.
Now let's turn to looking at swings in the crime rate.
Why did the U.S. crime rate increase so dramatically in the 60s and 70s?
Why did crime rates fall so substantially in the 1990s?
Crime rates shot up in the United States in the late 1950s and into the 60s.
For example, in the 1950s, large cities had crime rates similar to the national average,
but by 1970 or so, large cities had homicide rates that were four or five times the national
average.
What changed?
What made this different?
Well, the standard explanations are that what changed was a huge rise in crime, but
not an equivalent rise in police or prisons.
So the result was there were fewer arrests per crime and less prison time if convicted.
There was a drop in the certainty of being caught and in the severity of what happened
if you were caught.
If you put these two together, a criminal in 1970 would on average expect to spend 60%
less time in prison in 1970 than they would have in 1960 for the same crime.
Another factor here is the baby boomer generation.
This is the group born from about 1946 up to the early 1960s.
There's an enormous youth generation being teenagers in the 1960s, and we know that crime
is generally higher among young men than any other demographic.
It's also interesting to note, though, that the 1960s are a time of very low unemployment
rates.
At least during this time period, that doesn't seem to imply that a lack of opportunity is
what causes crime.
The problem is that when you take these factors together, the share of young men is up by
X%, they commit this much crime, and you try and estimate how much the demographic change
would have increased crime.
You take into account prison time going down, you estimate how that would affect crime.
You put all of this together.
What you find is that much of the increase in crime just isn't explained.
Was it crime among returning Vietnam vets?
Was it crime related to migration of African-American from the South to Northern inner cities?
But when you take all these factors together, everything they can get, it explains less
than half the rising crime that occurred.
So people have turned to non-standard explanations.
Stephen Levitt, for example, has argued that watching TV may be the key factor here.
Now I'm not talking about watching violent crime shows, just watching television at all.
The expansion of television across the United States happened a step at a time.
There were issues about how you would have the government rules to allocate the broadcast
spectrum, and as a result, some places in the US had TV signals in the late 1940s, others
didn't until the mid or even the late 1950s.
Well it turns out, the places that saw the rise in television coverage first also saw
a rise in the crime rate first.
You can also compare kids in cities that grew up without TV, and those in the same cities
that grew up a few years later with TV, and those who watched TV actually had a much higher
crime rate.
Now it's not obvious why this should be so.
Does watching TV at a young age do something to your brain?
Is it connected to something else about parents, or family structure, or communities?
Was there some sort of group momentum here where crime started going up and somehow it
was reinforced and kept going up?
It's a very difficult problem to solve, ultimately.
The rise in crime rates during the 1960s and 70s, all these reasons have some plausibility,
but they all sound a bit like they were made up after the fact.
It's just hard to test them statistically, so there's still a genuine puzzle here.
What about the drop in crime that happened in the 1990s?
From 1991 to 2001, crime rates fell by about a third.
Homicide rates, other violent crime rates, property crime rates, they fell back to the
levels that they were in the 1950s.
This event was just wildly unexpected.
Lots of experts at the time were predicting a new surge of higher crime.
They expected that there was a surge of young men coming, one of the echoes of the Baby
Boom generation, and that crime was just going to keep rising.
Well, why did crime fall?
And here I'll turn to a summary of the evidence, which was compiled by Stephen Leavitt, drawing
on his own work, as well as the work of many others.
He suggests that you can explain what happened through four main factors.
One is that police officers went up by about 50,000 to 60,000 for the U.S. as a whole during
the 1990s, so nationwide the police force increased by about a seventh.
Second thing was that the prison population rose a lot.
There were four times as many people in prison in the year 2000 as there were in 1971.
Third thing in the 1990s was that the crack epidemic subsided.
If you remember, there was a technological breakthrough, so to speak, in how to get high
on cocaine in the late 1980s.
You mix together baking powder and cocaine, heat it, and you get nuggets that can be sold
cheaply for maybe $5, $10 and give an extreme high.
It was a major moneymaker for a few years, leading to a lot of drug-related violence
and gang-related violence, and that epidemic mercifully diminished.
And finally, fourth and most controversial of all, Leavitt has argued that the legalization
of abortion in 1973 helped lead to a drop in crime.
Now people of all political persuasions tend to hate this explanation, which of course
doesn't mean that there's not some truth in it.
Leavitt's case basically goes like this.
If you believe unwanted children are more likely to end up in crime, and if you believe
that legalized abortion reduced the number of unwanted kids, then you must also believe
that legalized abortion should reduce crime.
He points out that 1973 was 18 years before 1991, which is the start of the decade when
crime rates started falling substantially.
Leavitt offers some evidence that in states where abortion was legalized earlier, crime
rates fell sooner.
And again, you can think of that as a sort of a natural experiment.
Now I should say, this link from abortion to crime is highly controversial among researchers.
Their disputes over exactly when abortion rates fell and abortion was not well measured
before it was legal, their issues about what happened to birth rates as a result, there
are a lot of other factors.
I would say this explanation is weaker evidence than the others, but social science is often
a matter of trying to piece together explanations, some of which are stronger than others.
Leavitt argues that these four factors taken together really do a pretty good job of explaining
the fall in the crime rate in the 1990s.
Yeah, there are issues over exactly what proportion is explained by each of these causes, but
overall it does a pretty good job of explaining what happened.
In addition, there is a strong economy in the 1990s and that provided probably more
job openings and thus alternatives to a criminal lifestyle.
Now let's shift a bit from the past to thinking about policy for the present and the future.
What lessons might we take away from the economics of crime and thinking about crime in an economic
way?
Of course, you're getting my reading of the existing evidence here and so it's a little
bit opinionated, but as always I'll try to spell out the underlying arguments.
First, what about letting some people out of prison?
The argument goes something like this.
It's probably true that locking up more people reduces crime.
A fair summary of all the research that's out there would be that locking up 10% more
people will reduce crime by maybe 2% and conversely locking up 10% fewer people would increase
crime by about 2%.
This includes reductions in crime that might happen because people were incapacitated and
locked up and also people who were deterred from committing crimes with changes in the
imprisonment rate.
Now, let's do a back of the envelope calculation here.
Let's say the cost of keeping someone in prison for a year is about $50,000.
Round numbers?
There are about 2.3 million people in prison or jail at any given time, so let's say we
let out a tenth of them, that's 230,000 people.
Now, the national crime rate would go up as a result of doing this, it would go up 2%
and that's a real cost, but remember we would be letting out the mildest offenders, the ones
who don't have any record of any real violence.
On the other side, at $50,000 ahead, the lower prison population would save $11.5 billion
dollars and at a time when state and local budgets are very, very stretched, that's really
a whopping chunk of money.
Maybe we can come up with some other sorts of punishment, situations where fines might
be more important than prison.
After all, with a fine, the government has money coming in.
With imprisonment, it has money going out and that should matter.
As a second area of where we might change policy, think about changes in the certainty
of being detected and what I mean by that is hiring more police.
A 10% increase in the police force reduces crime by, if you put together a lot of different
statistical evidence, probably about 4%.
So let's again do a rough calculation here.
Let's say it costs $100,000 a year in salary and benefits and gear to add a new police
officer, it's probably more than that, but good round number.
In round numbers, there's 700,000 police in the United States.
So if we increase the number of police by 10%, that would be an extra 70,000 police
at a cost of 100,000 a piece, which comes to $7 billion per year in spending.
And that would reduce crime by about 4%.
Remember, the likelihood of being caught is part of what really deters crime.
It's one of the reasons that crime declined in the 1990s, that expanded police presence.
So you can see the possibility of a trade-off here.
If we lower the prison population, we take the money that we saved from that and put
some of it into more police, the result would be that we could save money and have a lower
crime rate.
That agenda combined would help get us all of what we really want.
There are lots of other parts of an agenda to reduce crime.
For example, you could think about alternative ways to reduce drug use.
I talked earlier about letting people out of prison.
Well, there are about 400,000 individuals who are in prison for nonviolent drug crimes.
I mean, they were buying or selling drugs, but without violence involved.
About 50,000 people are in jail or prison for violations that involve only marijuana.
There's also sort of a broader social agenda you can think about here.
If we could encourage less teen pregnancy or better connections to jobs or better pay
for low-skilled workers or stronger families, all of those things might have some ways of
helping to hold down our crime rate.
Overall, what I'm really arguing for here is to get beyond liberal and conservative
and really try and think these things through in a pragmatic way.
Some of these possible suggestions have a real liberal tone.
I confess, a fewer people in prison.
Other recommendations have what you might call a stereotypically tough-on-crime conservative
tone, more police.
My underlying message here on this subject as on so many other subjects isn't so much
that you need to agree with my recommendations.
It's that you have to take economic analysis seriously.
Individuals will alter their decisions when their incentives and their trade-offs change.
Trying to measure how they'll alter their behavior and how public policy should take
this into account when setting anti-crime policy is an important thing to do.
Crime is an important subject.
And so, in a world of scarce public and scarce private resources, we really need to think
about the costs and the trade-offs.
