It is often argued that addressing poverty is the right way to reduce terrorism.
For example, George Bush said in a speech in the early 2000s, not long after the terrorist
attacks of September 11th, 2001, we fight against poverty because hope is an answer
to terror.
We will challenge the poverty and hopelessness and lack of education and failed governments
that too often allow conditions that terrorists can seize.
Similarly, James Wolfensohn, who was then president of the World Bank, said, the war
on terrorism will not be won until we have come to grips with the problem of poverty
and thus the sources of discontent.
Kim Dae-jung, the South Korean winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 2000, has been quoted
as saying, at the bottom of terrorism is poverty.
And President Barack Obama has also said, extremely poor societies provide optimal breeding
grounds for disease, terrorism and conflict.
Now I could keep multiplying these examples in various ways, and I am strongly in favor
of reducing poverty in a lot of ways.
But the argument that poverty is linked to terrorism is probably wrong, or at least very
incomplete.
Let's talk about how economists think economic factors are linked to terrorism.
Let's start off by talking about why it seems unlikely that poverty is causing terrorism.
If you think about the world as a whole, roughly a quarter of the world's population
lives on less than $1.25 a day of consumption, according to World Bank statistics.
Almost half the world's population lives on less than $2 a day.
Now very, very, very few of these people actually become terrorists.
Indeed, my guess is a lot of them would regard it as a slur on their character that you might
think they were likely to be terrorists.
In addition, poverty has been this way for a long time.
In fact, poverty has gotten somewhat lower in recent decades around the world with the
explosive growth in the economy of China and India and some other countries.
If poverty is the go to terrorism, then we should be seeing a decline in terrorism over
recent decades, as economic growth pushes countries wealthier.
And that doesn't seem to be the trend line.
Another reason for doubting whether poverty causes terrorism is to look at the experience
of terrorists from high income countries.
Think of the terrorist groups since the 1970s, the Red Brigades in Italy, who kidnapped a
former prime minister of Italy and murdered him, or the Bader-Meinhof gang in Germany
who murdered police officers and government officials and hijacked a plane.
In the United States, the Symbionnes Liberation Army, who carried out a string of bank robberies
and murders, and perhaps most famously the kidnapping of Patricia Hearst.
All of these organizations were operating in developed economies.
The members clearly were not people who were starving to death.
By world standards, they were not greatly oppressed.
Most of them were actually quite well educated.
In fact, a number of studies have looked at biographical data on terrorists to see if
there's a link between poverty and terrorist behavior.
An economist named Alan Kruger, who's based at Princeton University, and I should in full
disclosure say that he was a former boss of mine at My Economics Journal and a friend.
Alan has contributed a lot to this research and also collected a lot of it in different
places.
Alan looked at these, for example, at the terrorists who were honored by the group Hezbollah,
a group that was originally based in Lebanon and is viewed as a terrorist group by the
United States, the United Kingdom, and others including Middle Eastern countries like
Egypt.
He compared those killed in missions for Hezbollah to the general population of Lebanon, and
he found out that those who were terrorists had a slightly lower poverty rate than the
general population and a higher level of education than the general population.
Kruger also looked at a group called Gush Imumin, an Israeli group which claimed religious
justification for killing several Palestinian mayors on the West Bank and trying to blow
up the dome of the rock mosque in 1980.
That group turned out to include engineers, teachers, a combat pilot, computer programmers.
All of them tended to be well above the average in both income and education.
In another study along these lines, an economist named Claude Berebe, who's based at the RAND
Corporation out in California, looked at terrorists from the West Bank and from Gaza in the 1990s.
He found that suicide bombers were less than half as likely as others in the population
to come from families in poverty.
He also found that 60% of those suicide bombers had a high school degree, compared with only
15% of the surrounding population.
He had another example with a similar point.
The terrorists on 9-11, well at least four of them were able to pilot airplanes so they
were somewhat educated, of the other 15 they were mainly from families headed by civil
servants or small businessmen.
Compared to others in their country of origin, this was a group with better than average
education and definitely not the poorest of the poor.
They're just people who had been radicalized in some way.
And with the thought of being radicalized, we begin to push a little bit closer to actual
determinants of terrorism.
Greater education has been in some cases known to make people feel more embittered.
They feel extremely strongly about the world and they become, for whatever reason, willing
to take violent action.
They apparently never got the moral constraints to go with their strong feelings.
Now of course, I'm not saying here that most college students grow up to be terrorists
or anything like that.
What I am saying is that in many countries, when you look at prominent people in terrorist
plots, what you often find is that those people have more education than average.
Immigration, riots and violence have really strong supporters among university students,
much more of those than say, impoverished rural farmers.
So why is it that terrorists often come from families with higher than average incomes?
Why is it that terrorists have higher than average education levels?
You might think the poor and the less educated have less to lose.
They might be more embittered.
Well, part of the reason is that terrorists don't just volunteer.
They typically need to be chosen by an organization for a mission.
This process of choosing who will commit the terrorist act, you can think of it sort of
as the hiring decision for terrorists, helps to explain why those who are chosen often
are above the average for their area in income and in education.
A Pakistani journalist named Nazra Hassan some years back interviewed a number of terrorists
and their families.
One thing she learned during these interviews is that the planners and leaders of terrorist
groups have lots and lots of volunteers.
One planner for a terrorist organization said to her, our biggest problem is the hordes
of young men who beat on our doors clamoring to be sent on suicide missions.
It's difficult to select only a few.
Now it's of course possible, even likely, that his leader was overstating a bit about
how everyone wants to join their group.
Still, there is a certain age for young men where you can imagine that when they're stirred
up by a certain kind of high profile rhetoric, some small but real proportion of them become
at least somewhat interested in thinking about terrorist activity.
A planner for a Palestinian terrorist group called Islamic Jihad also explained that
they could pick and choose who they wanted.
In fact, they explained they had certain rules.
They said they would reject anyone for a terrorist action who was under 18, anyone who was a
sole wage earner for an extended family, and anyone who is married.
Moreover, they tried to screen out and choose those who were really, really committed to
carrying through on the terrorist task.
Now, given that the planners of terrorist activities can pick and choose, it makes sense
that they would tend to pick those among their group who tend to be highly functional in
some broad sense of the word.
Often that will mean fairly educated people.
After all, people who commit to a long-term course of study and have the persistence to
carry it out might have that persistence to carry out other tasks as well.
Indeed, there was one study of Palestinian suicide bombers who found that when the target
of the bombing was more important, the bomber tended to be more educated.
Which makes perfect sense if the planners of terrorist activities were allocating the
people they viewed as their most reliable terrorists to the most important targets that
they were trying to hit.
This idea of terrorists as relatively highly educated people taking extreme violent action
because they think it will help bring about some change that they at least view as desirable
leads to an interesting and provocative claim about terrorism that was advanced by my friend
Alan Kruger, the economist I mentioned earlier, who spent a lot of time thinking about this
subject.
He makes the argument that terrorism is in a strange way closer to voting than to crime.
Kruger points out that lower-edge income people and less educated people are more likely to
commit street crimes, and that's of course in part because their economic alternatives
to crime look worse.
So what they could gain by committing a crime looks relatively better, and what they would
lose if they're caught committing a crime looks relatively smaller.
One interesting issue about voting, which will be the subject of a later lecture in
this course, is that you might predict voting rates would be lowest for those with high
incomes because it costs them the most the time they give up to go to the polls costs
them the most.
But with both voting and terrorism, the reverse is true.
Those with high incomes vote much more, presumably because they are involved in some way and
have more reason to care about the outcome.
Similarly, terrorists are those with extremely strong beliefs, so strong that they're willing
to do terrible, indefensible things to other people and to kill themselves in the process.
I sometimes think that instead of comparing terrorists to voting, a better comparison
might be to compare them to those who engineer voting fraud.
That is, those who want their desired outcome so much that they'll break the rules to get
it.
There's not a difficulty with this analogy, there are many difficulties with this analogy,
but one is that if you want really to do widespread voter fraud, you need widespread social control
so you can manipulate the vote count all over the place.
It tends to be repressive governments that do voter fraud the best because they have
that kind of social control.
But I strongly suspect that if terrorist groups gained power, they would be likely to suppress
the popular vote in violent ways, so they would be able to keep power and not need to
give it up to anyone else.
Let's now take a half-step back and explore how terrorism is defined in the social science
literature and what broader data is available about it.
Up until now, I've really been focused on studies that look at particular terrorists
and their biographical backgrounds.
But if you're doing social science, you're thinking about cause and effect, you're thinking
about why is terrorism more likely in some countries than in other countries, you need
to have some actual data and thus you need some practical definitions of what's going
on.
As I'm sure a lot of you know, there are lots of rhetorical and political games that
get played in how to define terrorism.
Basically, the game is to define actions by those you dislike as terrorism and actions
by those whose goals you support as in some way legitimate and therefore not terrorism.
Now, there are literally dozens of definitions in the academic literature about terrorism
and what it means.
I do economics, not linguistic analysis, so I don't want to get bogged down in all
of this, but it is useful to set the stage a little bit and so I'll talk about a couple
of the prominent definitions that are used.
First let me focus on the definition of terrorism in U.S. law.
In federal law, terrorism is defined as premeditated politically motivated violence perpetrated
against non-combatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents.
That's a long set of words, but there are a few key ideas here.
One is that it's a premeditated action, not a spontaneous riot or an uprising.
Another is that it's politically motivated.
It's not criminal behavior for private gain.
Terrorism goes after non-combatant targets.
It's not just that civilians get hurt as part of an action against soldiers, but that non-combatants
are the actual targets of the activity.
And terrorism involves subnational groups or clandestine agents.
That is, it's not an army fighting against another army, it's something else.
Now there's several organizations that try to count terrorist actions around the world.
You need to do this if you're going to build up a data set that you can look at for social
science purposes.
So you can look at terrorist actions and you can compare them with political or economic
or social conditions in different countries and see what patterns come out and emerge.
Probably the most comprehensive, unclassified database on terrorist events is what's called
the Global Terrorism Database.
It's run by something called the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and
Responses to Terrorism, which has an acronym buried in there, START, at the University
of Maryland.
It's funded by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
This database goes back to 1970.
It includes 38,000 bombings, 13,000 assassinations, 4,000 kidnappings, and many other events.
It includes information on at least 45 variables for each case in the database.
And more recent incidents have information on 120 different variables for each event.
Roughly you can say that they've classified about 2,000 terrorist events a year on average.
And just to give you a sense, in about half of these incidents, no one is actually killed.
There's a building that's bombed, there's a pipeline that's blown up, or for some reason
there's an attack that is thwarted with minimal damage.
They use the definition of a terrorist act that has three criteria.
It sort of echoes the U.S. State Department definition in some ways.
Their first criterion is the act must be aimed at attaining some political, economic, religious,
or social goal.
The second criterion is there must be evidence of an intention to coerce, intimidate, or convey
some other message to a larger audience than the immediate victims.
And their third criterion is the action must be outside the context of legitimate warfare
activities.
Now, these sorts of definitions, of course there's always a worry the definition isn't
worded quite right.
It might be a little too loose, a little too tight, not fit conditions in some way.
But the useful thing about having these three definitions is you can say to yourself, do
terrorist acts just fit one of the three criteria, or two of the three, or three of the three?
If largely the same conditions hold, regardless of how many of the criteria hold, then you
can sort of say the exact definition is not the issue here.
The patterns you're finding are fairly robust.
Using this kind of data, what sort of conditions emerge across countries?
While much of the research on terrorism emphasizes international terrorism, perhaps because this
seems like more of a direct threat to the United States and other high income countries
where domestic terrorism isn't all that common.
In the U.S. perspective, we do have examples of domestic terrorists, of course.
There's Timothy McVeigh, who detonated the truck bomb in front of the federal building
in Oklahoma City in 1995 that killed over 160 people and injured hundreds more.
There's Ted Kaczynski, known as the unabomber, who sent mail bombs over a period of 20 years
that killed three people and injured a number of others.
But for most countries, it's not true that international terrorism is a bigger problem
than domestic terrorism.
Depending on the data set you look at, only about 15 to 20 percent of terrorism incidents
are international.
The rest happen inside a country.
In fact, about 20 groups are responsible for 30 percent of all the actions in the global
terrorism database.
In other words, terrorism is somewhat concentrated among these groups, although it's not all
that highly concentrated.
The database lists over 2,000 active terrorist groups from 1970 up through 2008.
Some of them are typically international groups, like the PKK group in Turkey, the Taliban
in Afghanistan, Tupac Amaru in Peru.
Al-Qaeda was suspected in 105 out of the 87,000 total terrorist incidents in this database.
That is one-tenth of one percent.
A number of other terrorist groups are mainly domestic, such as the Shining Path group in
Peru, the Therabundo Marti National Liberation Front in El Salvador, or the African National
Congress that operated for some years in South Africa.
When you look across these terrorism groups, you can ask the question, does the chance
of terrorism originating in a certain country rise if the country gets richer?
Or does it fall?
Now, of course, this will be an average or an overall pattern, which doesn't hold for
every country at every time.
But actually, it seems true that as countries get richer, there often is more terrorism.
Now, a counter example, which is often cited in this pattern, is the effects that have
happened in Ireland.
When Ireland's economy boomed in the context of the European Union and the broader world
economy in the 1990s, it seemed to take a lot of the energy away from terrorism that
was happening in Ireland.
It gave young people, young men in particular, a different horizon, a different outlet for
their energies.
But the broader pattern around the world is considerably more complex.
Lots of the poorest countries of the world are in Africa and East Asia, and some have
a fair amount of violence and civil war, but they're not known for terrorism as defined
here.
I'm thinking about countries like Ethiopia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Niger.
You think about countries that are starting points for terror, say some of the countries
in the Middle East or North Africa, many in Latin America.
Many of these by global standards are actually middle income countries rather than the poorest
countries in the world.
So you see a pattern that as countries move from poor to middle income, there is actually
more terrorism in those countries.
It's true that the richest countries in the world don't originate a lot of terrorism,
but it's worth remembering that residents and citizens of these countries have been
known to participate in terrorist ventures.
I mentioned some of the examples from back in the 1970s and 1980s, but also don't forget
the IRA and the United Kingdom, the Basque separatists in Spain, the Corsican separatists
in France.
I talked about the Bader-Meinhof gang in Germany, the Red Brigades in Italy, and it's not unheard
of to have people from high income countries join up with international terrorist groups
today.
It's also true that more urbanized countries seem to have more terror.
Terrorism overall seems better able to put down roots in countries that aren't dirt
poor, that have cities, and that are sort of organized at least to some extent socially
in that way.
Research looking across a number of countries finds that the level of democracy has potentially
conflicting effects on terrorism.
On one side, democracy offers a way for those who are upset to voice their concerns, and
in this way, democracy can alleviate some of the impetus behind terrorism.
Democracy can be a sort of social pressure reliever.
On the other side, democracy often is not especially good at addressing really violent
situations.
A authoritarian government can really crush a dissenting terrorist group.
It's a lot harder for most democracies to reach out and crush some group because they
think it might be involved in terrorism.
Further, a difficulty with democracy, if you're a terrorist, is that you're such a small group
and your cause is often so incredibly unpopular that you're not really going to have much
of a voice in that democracy.
Maybe you can elect a token representative or two, but democracy doesn't offer you a
way to achieve the goals you want to achieve.
In contrast, extremely authoritarian countries as a group tend to crush terrorists.
So you can sort of imagine a pattern here where for very authoritarian countries like
North Korea or Chad, Burma, Russia, Vietnam, a few years back, those countries really crush
terrorist activity.
In a separate category, you can think of countries that in a way are failed states.
They have very, very weak governments, and those countries often have a lot of terrorism.
And then there's other countries which sort of go from fully functioning democracies with
freedom of speech and the press and public accountability, and you can imagine those
countries having some turnover of power, but those countries range to countries that
have some turnover but have more rules that repress speech or repress the press and where
the government isn't quite as accountable.
In that sort of middle range, there's a general agreement that the high-income, high-democracy
countries don't really have more terrorism as a result of greater democracy.
But in the middle range, there are some studies that find increases in democracy actually
lead to more terrorism.
As countries become more free and people able to act in ways that they weren't able to
act in a repressive regime, they're able to carry out more terrorist activities as well.
Examples of countries with a sort of middling level of democracy but quite a bit of terrorism
over the years would include countries like Sri Lanka, Colombia, and Chile.
Considering terrorism around the world over the last four decades, one predictor of whether
a place is likely to have terrorism in the present is whether it's had terrorism in the
past few years.
To put it another way, terrorism isn't like a lightning strike of a 100-year storm surge.
Once terrorism is taken root, it tends to continue for a time.
There seem to be places with a history of terrorism and conflict.
This suggests that when you're thinking about the costs and benefits of fighting terrorism,
it's really important to focus on not letting terrorism become established.
Because like a particularly nasty weed, if it gets established, it will tend to go on
and on and on.
Let me close this lecture with a few thoughts about how we think about the relationships
between economics and terrorism.
It would be nice to think that as the world economy grows and as democracy gets a foothold
in more and more places, this will lead to a drop in terrorism.
Unfortunately, that's probably just not true.
As some countries move from extreme poverty to being more lower middle class or middle
class by world standards, the historical pattern we've seen is that we're likely to
see an increase in terrorism in those countries.
As some countries move away from authoritarianism, which has the real power to repress terrorist
groups very sharply and move toward a greater degree of democracy, at least in some of those
countries, it's going to unleash certain energies, which in some cases will lead to
terrorism as well.
So while it would be nice to believe that fighting poverty and spreading democracy will
reduce terrorism, that seems unlikely to be true based on the evidence that we've got.
Moreover, terrorism is usually not an action by a single unconnected person.
It's instead part of an organization of some kind.
This suggests that if you're going to go after terrorism, you need to think about going after
the organizations which create terrorists.
Now what exactly are these organizations?
It's of course going to vary from country to country and place to place.
In some places, it might be political institutions.
In some cases, it'll be educational institutions, social institutions, religious institutions
in some places.
But in all these institutions, they are somewhat similar in how they lay a broad framework
for getting people to become terrorists.
They select those who seem especially susceptible to being terrorists.
They gradually bring those who are selected into a series of inner groups and more inner
groups and more inner groups.
This makes the person feel special and like they've been chosen.
It also isolates them from others and from the reactions of others as to what they're
being asked to do and what they're thinking about doing.
One way to fight terrorism is to think about understanding that process.
That means identify where it's happening and disrupt it.
Now that's of course easier said than done.
Finding it requires getting involved in these groups, understanding them, and in some cases
disruption might require police or military action.
In many other cases though, I suspect that disrupting the momentum of terrorist groups
might mean encouraging and rewarding and even treating it as heroes.
Those who are very, very committed to the same broad cause, even if it's an unpopular
cause, but who absolutely refuse to in any way encourage or tolerate terrorist activity.
Final issue with terrorism is to think about not just the direct costs of terrorism in
terms of human life and suffering on property damage.
Those costs can be unbearably extraordinarily, heart-breakingly high.
But it's also true that in some broader sense, the level of destructiveness of terrorist
activity isn't the equal or even all that close to having a war fought on your territory.
Some physical capital stock is destroyed in terrorist attacks, but it's usually not as
bad as a tidal wave or a large earthquake or a war.
It's possible to compare the economic costs of an extreme terrorist event, like say the
9-11 attacks against the United States, with the costs of an extreme natural disaster,
like the tsunami that hit Japan's coast early in 2011.
Tsunami is something like 18,000 dead and a risk of nuclear disaster.
The 9-11 terrorist attack was 3,000 dead, then of course enormous property destruction.
Now of course both of these are terrible events, it almost feels heartless even to try and
compare them.
But what I'm trying to get at here is that terrorism is not just about the actual physical
costs or the costs of lives lost.
Having people die from a terrorist attack or having a bombing in a public place is fundamentally
different than having a tidal wave or having an earthquake.
Having a terrorist attack involves the disruptive knowledge that someone is wishing you ill.
There's a sense that even when a terrorist bombing is stopped, the media attention created
by this kind of disruptive knowledge spreads and in that sense the fear it creates means
the terrorist attempt has partially succeeded.
Now it's hard to figure out just how to weigh this kind of a cost, this indirect cost of
terrorism and it's hard to weigh it against the costs of taking actions to prevent terrorism.
As a sort of sample, let's think for a moment about the issue of extra security precautions
at U.S. airports in terms of the time that's involved.
There are roughly 800 million air travelers in any given year in the United States.
Let's say it takes each of them an extra 15 minutes to get through security because of
the extra precautions to prevent terrorists.
You multiply that out, works out to about 200 million hours extra people are spending
in line every year.
If you value their time at $20 an hour, the lost time of standing in line would be worth
$4 billion a year.
And that cost doesn't count the actual costs of additional security people and the machinery
and all of that would increase the cost substantially.
Now in the context of the huge U.S. economy, $4 billion in these other costs are not over
overwhelming, but certainly it's a very real and important cost.
You can think of a variety of other steps to prevent terrorism as well.
These would range from things like extra security at borders to make it harder to get things
across the United States border, monitoring of communications, and you can even think
of things ranging up to overseas combat with all of those costs.
And it's certainly not my place here to try and stake out costs and benefits at each of
these sorts of policy decisions.
My broader point is that for any of these decisions, as you expand further and further
and further, eventually at some point, the costs of trying to prevent terrorism in those
ways will outstrip the benefits and leave it to you to decide whether in certain areas
we've passed that point already or we're close to passing it or whether it's somewhere
off in the future.
Insights from economics alone aren't going to provide a full understanding of terrorism.
We're going to need contributions from sociologists, psychologists, political scientists, historians,
as well as people like diplomats, police officers, experts in espionage and military generals
as well.
But economics does have a part to play.
Indeed, good economics, really the best kind of economics, will often have elements of
all these other areas of expertise too.
