My own marriage feels to me like a remarkably fortunate event.
The shorthand word for it is being in love, and at some risk of being soppy and romantic
year, a longer way of making the same point would include a list of items like a sense
of belonging together and companionship, an enormous joy in sharing both life's day-to-day
events and also the big events.
Blessings are doubled by sharing them with my wife, and worries are halved.
Believe it or not, I have just a few personal quirks, and it's a wonderful thing to be married
to someone who actually seems to enjoy and appreciate such quirks.
It's a wonderful thing to share a history with someone you love.
And of course, I don't want to presume that I'm enunciating my wife's feelings in any
exact way here, but setting aside specific details, my wife has consistently informed
me that at least on the broader sentiment of being in love, she finds herself in general
agreement.
So, the question becomes, how in the world do economists take this intimate personal
relationship and somehow twist and meld it into an economic theory?
for letting all the air out of the balloon put the issue of marriage more simply?
Why get married?
Well, presumably, the reason is that you expect it to be better than remaining single
or better than waiting and maybe marrying later.
Similarly, why get divorced?
Well, because you expect it to be better than remaining married.
Now, these sorts of questions and answers may seem overly simple, but when applied to big
groups of people, they are a useful starting point for doing social science.
Now that you tackle questions like, why is it that over the last 25 years or so, fewer
people are marrying?
Why is it that there was a spike in the divorce rate in the 1970s?
It seems unlikely that people in love and soul and spirit and togetherness were somehow
fundamentally different from one decade to the next.
Once we set aside a little bit our own personal romantic visions and start looking at data,
the raw simplicity of the economic view, looking at why would we make a choice, helps to explain
trends with a certain kind of power.
I'm not asking why I love my wife, instead I'm asking questions like, what broadly applicable
social factors changed in a way that over time has made marriage sometimes a less attractive
option or divorce a more attractive option at different times and places.
But economic perspectives on marriage go beyond just thinking about what affects the choice
of individuals in deciding to marry or divorce.
It looks at outcomes in what sometimes economists refer to as the marriage market.
Now the idea of a marriage market may seem a little bit odd.
Of course this is not literally a market of buying and selling, it's not a market for
pizza or used cars, but it's a market that involves searching and then making lasting
commitments.
The 2010 Nobel Prize in Economics was given to a combination of three economists, Peter
Diamond, Dale Mortensen and Christopher Pissarades, for their analysis of markets with search frictions.
Now what do we mean when we talk about a search friction?
For most people the idea here is pretty clear when you apply it to the labor market.
Looking for a job requires a process of searching, finding some possible alternatives and along
the way you often have to decide.
You take the first thing that comes along or maybe take a part time job while you try
searching for something better or do you continue searching and hope that something better comes
along even though you're passing up something in the short term.
This same idea applies to the process of hiring in labor markets, that also requires a process
of searching.
You have to decide whether to take the first job applicant who comes along or maybe hire
a temp or struggle along understaffed for a time and wait in the hope that someone better
will come who will really be a good fit for your enterprise.
The underlying idea here is that both workers and employers are searching, they're looking
for that elusive good match.
Now lots of markets involve some searching, for example housing markets involve looking
for a house and deciding whether to take one or whether not to.
Housing markets, labor markets are characterized by the fact they really have a lot of search
where search is really a central part of what happens in those markets.
Marriage is a search market too.
At any given time there are lots of single people who at least in theory would like to
be married, but they don't all just marry that first person who comes along.
There is a search process which we refer to as being single or perhaps dating.
You go through a process of evaluation.
When we've built up an economics of the marriage market we begin to think about who gets matched
up in the marriage market and who is left so to speak unemployed in the marriage market.
As a starting point in this market let's talk about some trends in marriage and divorce.
Now in describing these trends I'm going to draw heavily on some statistics compiled by
Justin Wolffers and Betsy Stevenson, two economists who are based at the University of Pennsylvania.
Let's first start off by talking about marriage rates.
We really have pretty good data on marriage rates in the United States over the last 150
years.
From 1860 up until about 1980 with modest fluctuations about 1% of adults in the US
got married each year.
Now that rate of marriage is a little higher sometimes like the years right after World
War II when the soldiers are coming back from the war.
It was a little lower during the Great Depression when bad economic times discouraged a lot
of people from getting married.
But in the last few decades instead of roughly one hundred and fifty years of marriage,
but in the last few decades instead of roughly one percent a year getting married, the long
term average remember over the 120 years from 1860 up to about 1980, that marriage rate
has trailed off and over the last 30 years or so we're now closer to about half a percent
of all adults each year getting married.
Divorce rates on the other side have some overall upward trend along with some sharp
movements along the way.
If you go back to around 1920 about five out of every thousand married couples would
divorce in a year.
Come forward in 1940 about ten of every thousand married couples divorced each year.
Right after World War II there's a big spike in divorces up to about fifteen divorces for
every one thousand married couples but then after World War II by about 1960 we're back
down to about ten divorces for every thousand married couples.
Now at about this time the 1960s early 1970s divorce got legally much easier.
The idea of no fault divorce began to spread across state laws and when that happened the
divorce rate took off it topped out at a rate of about twenty three divorces for every thousand
married couples in 1979.
But by 2010 the divorce rate had dropped back down again, was down to about fifteen divorces
for every thousand married couples.
So with divorce we see this slow increase over much of the twentieth century going to
a spike in the 1970s and then a drop in the divorce rate after that time.
What about if we take these marriage rates and divorce rates and we put them together?
We can look at those who are involved in their first marriage and then what happens to that
first marriage over time.
For those who had a first marriage in the divorce happy 1970s for example forty eight
percent of those people had divorced after twenty five years and if we presume a few
more divorces among that group in the years that follow this is the factual basis for
the claim you sometimes hear that half of all marriages will end in divorce.
But that statistic only applies to those married in the 1970s.
If you look for example at those married in the decade of the 1950s only about twenty
percent had divorced after twenty five years.
And for those with a first marriage in the 1960s about thirty five percent had divorced
after twenty five years.
Now it's obviously hard to tell about those married more recently.
Obviously for those married in the last ten years last fifteen years we don't have twenty
five years of experience yet to know what's happened but we can look at the level and
the pattern of divorces for more recent marriages so far and we can compare it to the pattern
a few years after marriage for earlier groups and the evolving pattern here is fewer divorces.
Those married in the nineteen nineties are on a track, the track could change but they're
on a track where they will have more divorces than those who married in the nineteen sixties
after twenty five years.
That is after twenty five years more than thirty five percent of first marriages will
end the divorce but it's well below the level of divorces for those married in the nineteen
seventies.
Definitely fewer than half of those married in the nineteen nineties seem to be headed
toward divorce.
What about if we think about marriage by age pattern?
Along with thinking about overall changes in marriage and divorce rates there's a shifting
pattern over time of whether you're married at a certain age and you can look at census
data here over the twentieth century on the share of population that's married during
any given year to get these kinds of numbers.
From about ages thirty to fifty five, rough numbers, about seventy percent of the adults
in that age bracket are married.
After that age, death and divorce begin to take something of a toll and by the time you
look at eighty year olds only about a quarter of them are married.
There are two exceptions to this broad pattern I just described.
In the nineteen sixty census, the share of twenty five to thirty five year olds married
was a lot higher than average.
Remember this is right after the high marriage rates that followed World War II was up around
eighty percent.
The other big exception interestingly enough is the two thousand census.
After the high divorce rates of the nineteen seventies and nineteen eighties and slowly
declining marriage rate, the result tended to be that fewer people were married in adulthood.
If you look at the age group from about thirty to fifty five, only about sixty percent of
them were married in the year two thousand.
Compared with that historical figure, remember that it had been about seventy percent or
maybe even a little bit more in nineteen sixty.
However in the two thousand census, it's also true that older people are more likely
to be married.
If you look at eighty year olds in the two thousand census for example, about forty
percent of them are married which is much higher than the twenty five percent or so rate that
was common through a lot of the twentieth century.
There's also some question and interesting evidence about what are sometimes called in
the department of the census, POSLQs.
POSLQ is P-O-S-S-L-Q and it stands for persons of the opposite sex sharing living quarters.
In other words people living together but who aren't actually married.
That number is not well measured but it does seem from the little bit of evidence we've
got that it may be rising over time.
In that way the United States is becoming more like some European countries that typically
have had lower rates of marriage and lower rates of divorce but relatively high rates
of cohabitation.
Now evidently the market for marriage in the last ten maybe fifteen or twenty years is
working differently than it used to.
Lower marriage rates, lower divorce rates, different age distribution of marriage.
Why might these sorts of changes be happening?
Let's think about what's affecting the marriage market and look at the possible economic gains
that people get from marriage.
The gains from marriage can be divided into three categories.
We'll call them in economists speak, production complementarities, consumption complementarities
and risk pooling.
So let's talk about what these terms mean and how we would understand what they are.
Production complementarities first.
Look at the household as needing to generate a lot of output.
Now some of that output can be purchased in the market.
You can buy things that you want to consume but some of the output needs to be produced
at home.
So for example you typically buy housing in the market, you don't build your own house
but there are a lot of services like some of the cooking, the cleaning up, the laundry,
raising children.
That happens to some extent as production in the home.
These tasks often take a lot of time rather than money.
Of course if you have enough money you can pay others to do them or to do some of them.
The idea of production complementarities is that it makes economic sense to have a division
of labor in splitting up some of these tasks.
One person in the couple can focus on earning income.
The other person in a marriage can focus on non-market tasks around the home.
Now of course it's true that in some great theory of egalitarianism everyone might do
exactly half of everything, half of the market work, half of the non-market work.
But in the real world we all specialize to some extent and you can make an argument that
at least to some extent it makes sense to specialize in household production as well.
Now of course this division of labor might also be reinforced by a healthy dash of outright
gender stereotyping and prejudice.
But in addition to the stereotyping and prejudice which is real, the advantages of specialization
in economic terms can also be real and they can be part of the economic advantages of
marriage.
A second idea is consumption complementarities.
The idea of consumption complementarities is to think about household as consuming stuff.
Consuming housing, consuming food, consuming transportation, consuming vacations.
You can imagine that for some of these things that households consume it might be possible
for two to do it more cheaply than one or for a family of three or four to do it more
cheaply than one.
Or even if it's not more cheaply in monetary terms there might be more pleasure in doing
it as a group than just as one person.
So there are complementarities in consumption.
Now this isn't true for everything.
Of course most couples probably don't share a lot of clothing on a regular basis for example.
But things like living space, food, transportation, entertainment, vacations, all the ways in
which it's either less expensive on a per person basis or more enjoyable to do it with
someone you love, those all involve consumption complementarities.
Indeed I sometimes say that the economist language for I love you is really something
like I want to share consumption complementarities with you.
A final set of economic reasons for having a life partner is pooling risk.
In everyday life things go wrong sometimes.
Health goes bad and who's going to look after you?
Your job goes bad, who's going to pay the rent while you look for another one?
Your car breaks down, who has another car to maybe help shuttle things around.
Your child gets sick, who's going to be able to help to cover up while that's going wrong.
Now sure if things get bad enough there's often some government program out there that
can help but those tend to be for those who are really hurting and really poor.
For a lot of the day to day bumps and bruises of everyday life and for a lot of the big
things too it really helps to have a little two person insurance arrangement to pool the
risks.
Now here's the key point in thinking about the marriage market.
A lot of shifts have occurred over the last few decades which have altered the sources
of these gains from marriage.
A number of the economic shifts over the second half of the 20th century have reduced the
potential advantages from production complementarities and increased the advantages of consumption
complementarities and the underlying gains from marriage in the marriage market have
shifted some as a result.
Let me try and list out some of these economic shifts that have happened.
As a first change let me talk about changes in household technology.
Technology for household production changed dramatically.
There was an especially huge jump in the 1950s and 1960s when freezers, washing machines,
dryers, steam irons, dishwashers, all of those become common and available.
And after that of course there are things like microwaves and coffee makers.
The result of all these kinds of changes was that the time needed to do household tasks
dropped by a lot.
By one estimate for example it took about four hours of continuous labor to do a load
of laundry by hand.
That is putting it through soapy water, rubbing it on a scrub board, rinsing by hand, drying
on a line.
With a washer and dryer the time to load and unload the machines might be more like half
an hour and you can walk away and do something else in between.
Food has also changed home production.
There are so many products that are much more cheap and available than they used to be.
And so in all of these ways instead of building up skills in household production that has
become a much less valuable skill than it once was.
In fact I've heard it argued that the single biggest step toward women's liberation wasn't
some famous speech somebody gave or even getting the vote for women but it was the combination
of widespread electricity and home appliances that freed up women's time from doing household
production tasks all the time.
A second big change over the last few decades has been a drop in fertility.
I'll talk more about fertility choices in parenthood in the next lecture.
Here I just want to emphasize kids are just so much less central to marriage than they
used to be.
In 1880 going way way back 75% of married people lived in a household in which their
own children were present.
Now with longer life expectancies fewer children per family choosing to marry later in life
only about 40% of married people live in a home where their own children are present
and on average fewer children are present too.
So with fewer kids and fewer households with kids specializing in household production
is again less valuable than it used to be.
The shifting divorce laws have also changed incentives for marriage.
There are lots of specific changes but the real change I want to focus on is this movement
toward no fault divorce.
When you had to give a reason for a divorce you had to say whose fault it was.
It was often possible for one side or the other to block a divorce by refusing to agree
to the reason for the divorce.
If you don't need to give a reason if it's no fault either party can exit the marriage
fairly easily if they wish to do so and that shifts the bargaining power within the marriage.
Under the old rule the fault divorce rules back in the 1950s the person who wanted to
save the marriage most had the greatest power.
They could keep the marriage active legally if they wanted to.
Under the no fault rules from the 1970s on the person who wants to end the marriage most
has the greatest power.
Now that's going to change the willingness of people to specialize in particular for
women who had been specializing in home production.
It used to be that if you were a woman and you did all the housework for years then
your husband could have a really hard time divorcing you unless you more or less wanted
it to happen or agreed to it in some way.
Now a woman who does housework for years knows that her husband can get a divorce pretty much
any time and there's a lot more of a feeling you need to keep that work for pay career
option open because really who knows what's going to happen 5, 10, 15, 20 years off in
the future.
Another big shift is a change in work patterns.
Women used to have a labor force participation rate back in 1950 of about 33%.
That is a third of all adult women worked for pay in the paid labor market.
But that rose over time.
By 1980 the labor force participation rate for women was up to 50%.
By 1990 it was up to 60% and it stayed roughly at that level with modest changes up and down
ever since.
Now that change resulted from many factors but one of the things it shows is that women
are concentrating less on household production so that marriage would be more about shared
consumption of goods purchased in the market than about shared production.
A longer run change in labor markets is that a century ago the standard paying work week
which the time mainly applied to men was often a 60 hour week.
There were longer days, 5 days a week and people often worked half a day on Saturday.
Now the typical work week is closer to 40 hours for most people.
You have more weekends, holidays, leisure and again there's much more emphasis on shared
consumption rather than on production.
One more shift is that there's far greater average income.
The average person today is much better off than 50 or 100 years ago.
It's not just that they have more income although that's true, there's an incredible array
of entertainment available.
Television for example became widespread in the 1950s and 60s and now we have the magic
of networked communications and entertainment.
People in the 1950s didn't typically take say vacations on cruise ships in the Caribbean
where they ate a wide variety of foods while communicating with friends at home by phone
and email.
Again, there's a change here which emphasizes shared consumption rather than shared production.
And finally one more change here is that shifts in education, work and technology have altered
how couples meet in ways that tend to confirm this emphasis on complementary consumption.
In 1960 there were 1.6 male college students for every female college student.
Now the basic math tells you in that situation a lot of college educated men were not going
to meet their wife in college.
That's now flip-flopped.
It's now true that there are about 1.4 female college students for every male college student.
And again, basic math tells you an awful lot of college men are going to marry a college
educated woman.
They're going to meet romantic partners in the workforce as well.
The matching process of men to women is changing in that way.
Terry McKinnish who's a professor of economics at the University of Colorado did a study
which showed that people who work in an industry or occupation which had a greater share of
members of the opposite sex tended, when they were married, to be more likely to end up
divorced.
If you're exposed to more professional women of the opposite gender, men are more likely
to divorce and the same is true for women.
She called this another form of on-the-job search.
Another change in how couples meet is online dating services.
I'm afraid I'm the kind of middle-aged guy who was already married before online
personals were possible so I have no real experience here.
But my sense is that it's pretty rare to see a woman who says in an advertisement, I run
a household really well.
I'm good at cooking, cleaning, laundry, household organization, managing the household budget
and repairs and I would be excellent at raising children.
That's not how you attract a spouse in the 21st century.
Instead it's all about consumption complementaries.
Do I like hiking and concerts and travel?
It's like that old song, do you like pina coladas and getting caught in the rain?
Personal ads in this way are reflecting the overall result of all these other changes.
Now, these factors that have affected and reshaped the benefits of marriage can help
to explain the patterns of marriage and divorce over time.
Marriage is happening later and less often, but there's also less divorce.
The basis for the gains from marriage has shifted from production complementaries more
to consumption complementaries.
The gains from having one person in the marriage do childcare and home production are down.
The gains from marrying someone with what looks like a really stable income and career
path are way up.
So there's an emphasis on education and career building rather than starting a household
and raising kids as the foundation for the marriage.
Americans are waiting to marry later.
In 1950, the typical age at first marriage was a shade over 20 years for women, a shade
under 23 years for men.
It's not too different from that up to about 1970, but after that age at first marriage
starts rising steadily.
It's now about 26 years is typical for a first marriage for women and 28 years is typical
for a first marriage for men.
It also seems to be leading at least to slightly more stable marriages than for those who say
they were married back in the 1970s.
The divorce rate is trending down and marriages seem more likely to last than they were for
those getting married in the 1970s.
All these trends together combine to what economists have referred to as assortative
mating.
Assortative mating just refers to how the marriage market is sorting people out differently
than before.
And the main change is that men and women with similar backgrounds, particularly educational
backgrounds, are increasingly likely to marry each other.
College graduates in particular are increasingly likely to marry each other rather than someone
with less education, and this happens as more and more women have been attending college.
In the late 19th century, there weren't that many college-educated women, but of those
who were college-educated women, about half never married at all.
In the 1960s census of college-educated women who were in their 60s, 29% had never married.
But by the 2000 census of college-educated women in their 60s, only 8% had never married.
There's been just a huge shift here.
It used to be that college-educated women were just less likely to marry than women
without a college education, especially through their 20s.
Now college-educated women are more likely to marry than women who don't have a college
education.
When you get into the age bracket of the late 30s, college-educated are just much more likely
to be married than women without a college degree.
In that way, college-educated women are the cutting edge of that trend of marrying later,
marrying when your career is established and you're going to have fewer kids, but then
staying married on through much of the rest of your life.
As a final example of how the marriage market sorts, let me offer an example many people
have noticed, my wife and I have noticed.
As we look around among our friends, we know a fair number of women in the say 35-55 age
group who are not married, and they seem to us at least like they're really good catches.
They're nice people, they've got nice lives, good careers, but we don't know an equivalent
number of men in the 35-55 age bracket who are single and really good catches.
Why not?
A financial journalist named Mark Guinean was looking at some economics articles on what's
called the theory of asymmetric bidding, where you have an auction with some bidders who
are stronger than others, and this suggested to him an answer for this particular question.
Now here's a plausible story about how a sorting market works.
Imagine you could rank all men at age 20 or 25 according to their attractiveness for
marriage, and you can also rank all women in the same way according to their attractiveness
for marriage.
Let's hypothesize, this is probably true, that women are ultimately the ones in our
society who choose whether a romance happens and whether marriage occurs.
So there are some women who go through the early years of teenage hood in their early
20s with the experience they are highly attractive candidates for marriage.
There are lots of options available to them, and they put off choosing in ways both subtle
and direct, they delay or postpone some men who would like to marry them.
There are other women, more in the middle or lower end of the range of candidates for
marriage, and they see that they have options, but not necessarily as many options.
Those women are more likely to try and seek out someone who is a few notches ahead of
them on the marriage attractiveness distribution, and marry that person.
If that pattern happens, what's the result?
A bunch of women in the middle of the distribution married up a little bit in the distribution.
While women who seemed like highly attractive candidates for marriage, when they get ready
to settle down in their mid 30s, late 30s, they look around, and they find that the available
men all seem to be closer to the bottom of the desirability distribution than they really
had in mind.
They feel, after years of being the very attractive one, that they would be marrying down, and
many of them choose to not get married.
Marriage as a search process has some happy outcomes, like really knowing more about who
you are when you're marrying and who the person you're marrying is really what they're really
going to be like.
It also has some potentially unhappy outcomes, like all those men and women who decide to
keep searching and searching and searching for a marriage partner, and they end up regretting
the one that got away when they were in their early 20s.
I like to believe in true love, but I'm someone who married at age 30 to a woman who was 28.
Both of us had college degrees, both of us ended up with advanced degrees, and when we
met, both of us had jobs, and both of us kept those jobs.
I didn't have my first child until I was 37.
This pattern seems more or less natural and normal to me.
Maybe it's a little slow on the parental activity, but I have friends who got married both earlier
and later.
I have friends who had kids later than I did.
Now, I take a half step back, though, and I put on my social scientist hat.
I can see that thinking of these decisions as normal is just heavily shaped by the fact
that I was born in 1960 instead of, say, being born in 1940 or 1990.
One lesson from social science and from thinking about marriage markets is that more than most
of us would really like to believe, we're really all creatures of our times.
