Even a decade into the 21st century, African Americans as a group continue to be worse
off than the U.S. average on a wide range of socioeconomic measures.
For someone like me, numbers often tell the story, and although I follow this data enough,
the numbers don't surprise me.
They never lose their power to create shock and a certain sense of discomfort.
Here are a few examples of the current situation of African Americans, all taken from standard
U.S. government's statistical sources.
Poverty Rates
In 2008, the overall poverty rate in the United States, that is the share of the population
below the official poverty line, was 13 percent.
For blacks, it was 25 percent.
If you just look at children, 18 percent of all children in the U.S. were in households
below the poverty line in 2008.
For African American children, 34 percent, that is about one in three, were below the
poverty line in 2008.
What about unemployment?
Unemployment rates are consistently higher for African Americans.
Back in the recession of 1982, national unemployment topped out about 10 percent, but among African
Americans, it hit 20 percent.
In the recession of 2007 to 2009, the national unemployment rate again reached nearly 10
percent.
Among African Americans, it was at 15 percent.
You can also look at numbers of about marriage in children.
Among whites in 2009, 27 percent of men and 20 percent of women had never been married.
Among blacks in 2009, 43 percent of men and 41 percent of women had never been married.
If you look at family groups, among whites, 25 percent of all families with kids were
families with a single parent.
Among African American families in 2009, 60 percent of all families with kids had a
single parent.
You can look at education.
In 2009, 29 percent of the overall population had a college degree or more education than
that.
However, only 19 percent of African Americans fell into that category.
You can look at life expectancy.
Life expectancy at birth for white men in 2007 was 76 years.
For black men, it was only 70 years.
You can look at many other economic, health, social and other characteristics, who is victimized
by crime and who is locked up in prison.
Again, none of these statistics is the least bit controversial, though they are all from
standard sources.
The controversy lies in how you interpret their underlying causes and what policy recommendations
one draws from them.
Of course, it's undeniable that African Americans are not alone in having experienced discrimination
in America.
Southern Europeans, like Italians and Greeks, certainly faced their share of ethnic slurs.
Many German immigrants didn't have an easy time of it, especially around the time of
World War I.
There was a time in U.S. history when it was common to see signs that said no Irish need
apply when Japanese Americans who were U.S. citizens were locked up in internment camps.
Native Americans have certainly faced their share of bias.
There have been outbreaks of anti-Jewish prejudice, anti-Catholic prejudice, prejudice against
Hispanics.
Discrimination against women is another huge category.
All around the globe, there are all sorts of religious discrimination, ethnic discrimination,
and I'm sure I'm failing to list many other examples.
But in this lecture, for the sake of focus, I'm going to focus on African Americans, the
only group systematically held in slavery in the United States.
Slavery has sometimes been called America's original sin because of how directly it conflicts
with the idea of America as a nation of free people.
Of course, it's true that anti-discrimination laws apply to all of these groups, but let's
really focus in here on the situation of African Americans.
This is a group which needed the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of
Education because of government school segregation aimed at African Americans.
It's a group that needed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which was primarily passed to
overcome legal discrimination against African Americans.
Now, it may seem to non-economists that racial prejudice should be analyzed essentially as
a moral sin and as an issue of justice, and that's true, of course.
One thinks back to the ugliness of the Jim Crow laws, the signs like whites-only drinking
fountains and bathrooms, and the many much worse indignities and unfairnesses and outright
violence suffered by African Americans for so long.
But it's also true that many of the day-to-day manifestations of discrimination play out
in the economic arena.
After all, slavery itself is an economic institution, buying and selling human beings for use in
production of goods that were then sold in markets.
African Americans have long suffered discrimination in hiring for certain jobs and being steered
to housing in certain neighborhoods, discrimination in hotel and restaurant accommodations or
in getting bank loans.
With changes in laws since the 1960s, these kinds of economic discrimination have certainly
diminished, although the evidence we'll talk about suggests they haven't really gone away
yet.
So, the most obvious evidence is done through what are called audit studies.
You send pairs of people who have essentially identical resumes, say, to interview for a
job or to get a bank loan, one black, one white, or you could just send out pairs of resumes
with essentially equal qualifications, but one name that's identifiably African American
and another name that's not.
You can send out pairs of people to look at rental apartments or to buy houses, one black,
one white, who give the same family circumstances and financial history.
And what you'll find when you do that is consistently the African American group is not treated equally
on average.
There are also statistical approaches for looking at discrimination.
You try to account for all the other characteristics you can measure, like age, job experience,
education, test scores, grades, marital status, anything.
And what you still tend to find after you've adjusted for everything else is that blacks
are typically paid less than otherwise equivalent whites, especially among men.
This interaction of players in a market which leads to discrimination has not been an easy
business for economists to sort out.
The great economist Gary Becker, who's been based for many years at the University of
Chicago, back in 1957 wrote a pioneering work on the economics of discrimination.
This was originally his doctoral dissertation, then it turned into a book.
Becker got the Nobel Prize in economics in 1992, so this kind of work is clearly central
to what economists do.
Becker started off with a basic idea of expanding economic theory, so that some players in the
economy had a preference for discrimination.
He then tried to systematically think through what the outcomes might arise as a result
of such a preference.
One lesson, for example, is that markets might force those with a preference for discrimination
to pay a price.
Imagine the situation of someone who's running a company, but they have a taste for discrimination,
and they won't pay equal wages to those with darker skin, maybe African Americans, immigrants
from India, China, anyone.
They won't be able to hire those workers, because those workers will go to other employers,
and as a result, that person will be cut off from a possible source of talent.
They'll also lose co-workers who dislike the attitude of management, and customers perhaps
as well who dislike that attitude of management.
So it is possible, at least, to suffer from having discriminatory attitudes.
A restaurant owner who won't serve someone loses that person's business, perhaps the
business of others as well.
In short, the profit motive could, in theory, in certain circumstances, lead employers or
people who provide a service to want to cross discriminatory lines so they could make more
money.
On the other side, what might stop markets from acting to break down discriminatory barriers?
As Becker and others have argued since, if discrimination is very widespread among employers
and those attitudes are very widely shared, then no one really loses by the act of discriminating,
because the minority talent just doesn't get hired, or will only get hired at a lower discriminatory
wage.
In addition, if discrimination is widely reinforced by many co-workers and many customers, then,
if you're running a company even if you're not big at it, you might lose money by trying
to fight the trend.
If you try to treat minorities fairly, African Americans fairly, you might suffer through
loss of customers or loss of other potentially talented workers.
At this point in U.S. history, it's probably true most of the time that discrimination
by customers and co-workers is a bigger problem than discriminatory beliefs by a few business
managers.
And the reason I make that claim is, if you have a few discriminatory managers, but customers
and co-workers on the whole mostly don't want to discriminate, those discriminatory managers
are going to be overridden.
They're going to be people who lose money, and ultimately, they're going to be out of
business.
On the other side, if managers are fair-minded, but they're surrounded by customers and co-workers
who want to discriminate, then that manager, even if they want to be fair-minded, they're
likely to be overridden by the social forces around them.
In other words, discrimination really works most powerfully through the broad society of
customers and co-workers rather than through attitudes of just a few business executives.
However, if discrimination is reinforced by law, then the discriminators won't suffer
either because they can't be undercut by others who don't discriminate.
Another possibility that arises out of Becker's style analysis is the possibility of segregated
markets.
Consider a situation which one group doesn't want to deal with another, but that other
group can set up a sort of parallel economy with its own businesses and stores and banks
and housing and the rest.
A rough example of this pattern in U.S. history might be the situation of the Harlem neighborhood
of New York City in the 1920s and 1930s.
It was definitely segregated, but it had a very large range of skills and backgrounds,
business people, lawyers, doctors, rich, middle-class, poor.
You could end up, at least in a theoretical economic model, with a situation where two
groups don't intermix, but they sort of operate as two separate economies.
And if in each of those economies, skills are more or less rewarded according to productivity,
then there may not be a lot of wage differences between those two different groups.
Yet another situation that could arise is a situation in which, say, bigoted customers
refuse to let some minorities do a job directly.
They don't want to see minority folks doing that job, but they're willing to buy what
minorities make, maybe in some faraway factory.
This can lead to a sort of segregation in which minority groups are pushed into certain
economic roles, often roles that aren't so highly visible, depending on the kind of bias
in the society.
As a theoretical result, it would be possible to end up with a situation where minorities
get equal rewards for whatever skills they have, but they have a very limited choice
of jobs.
The broader point I'm trying to make here is that a preference for discrimination can
interact with markets in a lot of different ways.
Some of those interactions could make the existing level of discrimination worse and
reinforce it.
In other situations, market could create pressure against discrimination, or it could lead to
different kinds of geographic or job segregation.
Final interesting lesson from this kind of analysis is whether a dominant group harms
itself by discriminating.
In a broad sense, yes, they do harm themselves, because it's better to have the other citizens
of your country be well educated and working to their full potential, makes your national
economy stronger.
However, in a situation where the dominant group is very large, the loss to that group
might not be so great from discriminating against a minority.
Now there are some historical settings, like South Africa in the time of the apartheid regime,
where the dominant group was relatively small in size, and it probably did make itself worse
off in the long run in the sense of limiting that country's overall economic growth by
limiting the productivity and education and the potential of the non-white population.
Essentially, whites in South Africa chose to be a big fish in a deliberately small pond,
rather than choosing to be medium fish in what was potentially a much bigger pond.
Other approaches to discrimination have shown how relatively small amounts of discrimination
can lead one step at a time to more extreme results.
Thomas Schelling is a Nobel Laureate in Economics.
He won the prize in 2005 for his working gain theory, how strategic decisions can interact
with each other.
One of his best known analyses was about residential segregation.
It was developed and worked on mostly in the 1970s.
You can actually do this kind of analysis with a computer simulation, but for purposes
of intuition, you can think about it as a checkerboard.
Each square on the checkerboard represents where somebody lives, and coins on the checkerboard
can represent either the majority group, which could be the heads, or the minority group,
which we call tails.
Each group can have a preference for discrimination, that is, would that group be content in a
square with one neighbor from the other group, or would they move if that happened?
What if there were two neighbors from another group, or what if more than half their neighbors
were from another group?
Will they move and under what circumstances?
So you lay out all the coins at random, start from different configurations, give them different
kinds of preferences, and then let folks move in random order until they settle into some
kind of a pattern.
Now a finding from this kind of simulation is, say everyone on the checkerboard is okay
with say one or two from the other group living next door, but if it's half or more from the
group living next door around them on the checkerboard, then they'll move.
In a way, this is kind of a mild form of discrimination.
It's not saying we'll avoid all contact.
It's just avoiding being outnumbered.
But if both groups have that set of preferences, then as folks move, move, and move, the ultimate
result is typically total segregation of the two groups.
You can apply this kind of a theory to real life.
Surveys of African Americans in recent decades have often found they would find it desirable
to live in a 50-50 black-white neighborhood, but they do have some sense in survey data
that living in an all-white neighborhood might feel uncomfortable to them.
Their survey results from whites suggesting that they would be okay, say about 60% of
whites would be okay with a neighborhood that was up to about one-third black, but above
that level, it might be uncomfortable for a large share of the white population.
And in both cases, probably part of what's going on here, of course, is that a preference
for being a majority suggests that that group can elect government figures from its own
group and essentially rule the group in some ways through majority rule.
Now, when these, again, somewhat mild preferences interact, the result is much more extreme residential
segregation.
One study of Chicago, Cleveland, and Detroit found that only about 3% of blacks in those
cities were living in neighborhoods that were anywhere between 40% and 60% black.
Most blacks were living in areas with a much, much higher proportion of blacks.
So, the general segregation overall is down a little bit since the 1960s, but at least
up through the data of the 2010 census, it's not down a whole lot.
The general lesson here is that even relatively small amounts of discrimination building on
other decisions can lead to quite dramatic segregation actually happening, one step,
one step, one step at a time.
For example, let's start with an all-white neighborhood.
When there's some residents who are willing to tolerate a maximum of, say, 5% black neighbors,
others might tolerate 10%, 20%, and so on.
When some black residents move into the neighborhood, those with the lowest tolerance for having
black neighbors will move out.
That'll create more openings.
If those openings are filled by more blacks, then that will trigger the next group of whites
to move out, and eventually this process, one little step at a time, may result in a
neighborhood that is predominantly black, even though that wasn't the original goal
or the original situation.
Another way of thinking about how discrimination can propagate itself, from small roots to
bigger issues, is the theory of statistical discrimination, which is associated with yet
another great name in economics.
Kenneth Arrow won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1972.
Ken is one of the truly great economists of the 20th century, or frankly any time frame.
He could have won the Nobel Prize for several different things, but he published the particular
work I'm about to discuss a year after winning his Nobel Prize.
The theory of statistical discrimination is a story of how behavior that looks like discrimination
can arise without starting off with a preference for discrimination, as was true in Gary Becker's
work or Thomas Schelling's checkerboard models.
Instead, Arrow said, let's start by just assuming that a certain fact pattern exists.
Let's say two groups differ in their productivity in the workforce.
Now the underlying cause of this difference could be anything.
It could be quality of education or nutrition or quality of parental care or environmental
factors, a legacy of poverty or slavery.
In this theory, the underlying cause doesn't matter.
When employers try to decide who to hire, they're going to want to hire workers who
will be more productive, but they don't know, without hiring people, exactly who's going
to be more productive.
So they're going to try and look at the background of workers and see any factors that are somewhat
connected or correlated with productivity.
So they look at test scores and grades and recommendations, and together with this, they
will also look at whether a person is a member of a group which on average has low productivity.
With this statistical logic, they will discriminate against all members of the low productivity
group.
The employer can reason in some level, why take a chance?
I know on average, the group isn't going to do as well.
You can imagine the same logic applying not just to race, but say to older workers or
other situations like that.
Now there's a kicker here.
When a group suffers from statistical discrimination, the incentive of members of that group to
make the education and job experience investments that lead to higher productivity, their incentive
to make those investments drops because those incentives are less likely to end up being
rewarded in the market.
So statistical discrimination, whatever its original cause, creates a vicious circle.
Less incentive to become productive, therefore less productive, therefore the basis for statistical
discrimination continues into the future.
You can hear echoes of this kind of cycle in concerns that certain parts of the African
American community don't see an incentive for high academic achievement.
After all, in a discriminatory America, what will it get you?
Why study hard and try to succeed?
That's one of the ways in which statistical discrimination and low productivity can start
reinforcing each other.
Overall, the lessons that emerge from the economics of discrimination is that discrimination
matters a lot if it's widespread across employers, customers, and coworkers.
And small differences in the preference for discrimination can add up to really big gaps
in discrimination happening across the economy.
Evidence of segregation can be a vicious cycle, reducing incentives, leading to less
reason to invest in human capital, and then reinforcing the statistical discrimination.
In economic terms, the hope of anti-discrimination law is that it will break through these kinds
of patterns.
The most prominent anti-discrimination act in the U.S. is the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
It's been studied by a number of prominent economists.
How did it work in breaking patterns of discrimination?
The U.S. Civil Rights Act banned racial discrimination in a number of areas with a focus on employment
and places offering public accommodations like hotels, restaurants, hospitals, and others.
Of course, the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education had banned segregation
of schools, and there was other legislation that banned discrimination in voting rights
and in certain other areas.
What's interesting about these laws is that when you look at the effects of any law, what
you're trying to look for is there a pattern where there's a trend that's happening, and
then when the law passes, there's a sharp break in the trend.
For example, you can compare the wages of full-time black male workers and full-time
white male workers and see what happened after the Civil Rights Act passed.
In 1964, on average, a black male worker earned 62 cents for every dollar earned by a white
male, and that's roughly what the level had been for several decades.
But by 1972, that ratio jumps up to earning 72 cents for every dollar earned by a white
male, and has more or less stayed at that level ever since.
Now, the Civil Rights Act didn't equalize wages, given all the other legacies of lack
of education and disparities in skills and problems of low-wage workers in the U.S. economy
in recent decades.
The Civil Rights Act wasn't going to fix everything, but there was a large and permanent
change in wage gaps that happened right after the law passed.
These higher wages for blacks arose in large part because of shifts in employment patterns.
The southern textile industry was almost all-white up until the 1960s, but it was 20% black workers
by 1970 and one-third black workers by 1980.
There was also pressure from government contracts.
Some textile executives actually said that they really liked the Civil Rights law because
it took the decision off their back.
They could say with prejudiced co-workers, this isn't my choice, the federal government
is making me do it, and that let them do in a way what they wanted to do already.
More broadly, southern manufacturing opened up to African Americans in the 1950s.
Back in the 1950s, it had been common to see job advertisements that explicitly said they
were for whites only, or for men only, or for women only, for that matter.
After that, that wasn't possible anymore.
There was an enormous change in education, too, as school desegregation laws were enforced
much more vigorously.
In 1968, 80% of black students were in schools that were more than 90% black in the south.
In just four years later, by 1972, that proportion had dropped to 25%.
There were huge changes in resources per student and substantial gains in achievement.
If you look at the share of blacks in the south, ages 20 to 24 who were high school graduates.
That group was 35% high school graduates in 1960, 57% high school graduates in 1970, and
71% high school graduates by 1977.
This led, in turn, to a sharp rise in the number of black college students just a few
years later.
Even factors like infant mortality changed a lot after the passage of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964.
The black infant mortality rate fell by about one third, from about four deaths for every
hundred live births in 1965 to 2.8 deaths for every live birth in 1971.
It's the one time after World War II that the black infant mortality rate improved much
faster than the white rate, and part of the reason was the Civil Rights Act forced the
integration of public hospitals.
That was aggressively enforced.
There were threats to withhold government funding if they continued to segregate, as
a lot of southern hospitals did, especially in the early 1960s.
One more sign of the effects of changes from the Civil Rights Act is changes in U.S. migration
patterns.
Before the 1960s, there had been about 50 years of out migration by blacks leaving the
south.
Since about 1970, the pattern has been in migration of blacks returning to the region
of the south.
It's interesting that if you survey people about whether racism has diminished in the
U.S. since the 1960s, especially if you ask African Americans, you often get answers like,
well, discrimination hasn't changed all that much, there's still a lot of it.
It seems to me this answer is really wrong at some basic level.
I think it often comes out of a fear that if you say things are a little bit better,
then you'll be interpreted as saying, well, everything is just fine and nothing else needs
to be done.
You often get sort of a weird situation where the same people will say, Martin Luther King
and the Civil Rights Movement were a great and important part of U.S. history, and then
they'll turn around and say, well, but nothing has really changed, and I don't think you
can have both of those positions logically.
Of course, there's frustration.
There hasn't been more progress since the 1970s for African Americans.
There's no question that low skilled men of all races have had a hard time in the U.S.
economy since the 1970s.
But the evidence is very strong that the Civil Rights Act and other moves toward making racial
discrimination illegal have been a dramatic and powerful success.
And by success, just to be clear, I don't mean it took us into some sort of non-discriminatory
utopia, just that it made a whole lot of factors noticeably better for a lot of people in a
short time.
And while politics isn't really my subject here, it's clear that drawing districts and
having voting rights for blacks really led to blacks being elected to legislatures in
much greater numbers.
So overall, I think the Civil Rights Revolution has contributed not just to improvements for
blacks, improvements to politics, but probably also as a contributor to the overall economic
growth in the American South in recent decades as well.
This lecture is more about understanding the economics of discrimination than about advocating
particular policies, but it's perhaps useful to talk just a bit about the sorts of policy
perspectives that we have on discrimination.
The starting point is, despite the gains of the Civil Rights Act and the other related
legislation and court decisions, the statistics about the experience of African Americans
in the U.S. economy are grim.
That's just a fact.
How do we deal with these facts?
There are essentially three approaches.
You can call them equality of result, equality of treatment, and equality of opportunity.
Equality of result policies are sometimes called affirmative action.
The notion is that when making a hiring decision or a college admissions decision or a loan
decision, look at the overall number and percentage of minorities who've gotten whatever it is
you're handing out.
And if the percentage seems too low, change your decision.
Now, you could either lean a little bit in that direction, or you could have a firm quote
of how many minorities you need to choose.
It's not a bad thing to check your own perceptions and make sure that there aren't enormous
numerical differences.
But the harder the quota you set, the more questions get raised.
What if, for this particular job or opportunity in a certain city or area, there just aren't
enough people in the minority group with the qualifications you're looking for?
Will it be assumed, if you go ahead and hire people in that situation from a minority group,
that they were only hired because of the quota, and really they're not all that good?
Now, these questions have possible answers, of course.
I'm just laying them out there to suggest why these kinds of steps can be so controversial.
Equality of treatment starts from the idea that in every group, there's a broad distribution
of possibilities.
For example, it's true that on average, test scores for African-American high school
grads are lower than those for whites, but some African-Americans score very high and
some whites score very low.
If you rule out someone because of group membership, you're not treating them equally by the observable
characteristics that matter.
The kind of agenda you get from this insight is aggressive enforcement of anti-discrimination
laws, which exist in employment, bank credit, car sales, housing.
You basically want to look at those with the same measured traits and make sure they're
being treated equally.
We know from the economics of discrimination that even seemingly small preferences can
aggregate up into large results.
We know there can be a vicious cycle.
But we still have the problem that if a group has, on average, lower qualifications, treating
them equally won't be enough, because treating them equally means those who are behind will
remain behind.
This takes us to a final area, equality of opportunity.
The U.S. Constitution is about pursuit of happiness, after all, not about equal outcome.
Notion is that everyone gets an opportunity, but no one is guaranteed a certain result.
One striking statement of this point was from President Lyndon Johnson at a commencement
address at Howard University in 1965.
He said, you do not take a person who for years has been hobbled by chains and liberate
him, bringing him up to the starting line of a race, and then say, you are free to compete
with all the others and still justly believe you've been completely fair.
Taking a child who grew up in a family below the poverty line, maybe a single parent who
had to work, they went to schools where many of the students weren't arriving every day,
maybe they dropped out of high school, they live in a neighborhood with a lot of crime
and other difficulties, this child is just going to have a difficult time as they approach
the future.
Saying to that person that now you can't discriminate on the basis of race is really
just a small slice of the problem, if the difficulty is all of people's lives through
childhood leading up to when they are adults, which mean they aren't going to be equally
qualified when the job or the opportunity comes along.
To me, a bigger slice of the equal opportunity problem is early in life.
If equal opportunity is going to mean something, it can't mean people have equal opportunity
to get a job when they become adults, instead it has to focus on helping disadvantaged children
and not just in narrow ways, preschool, regular school, health, diet, exercise, neighborhood
safety, adult and community mentors, all disadvantaged children need this kind of help.
And if you had a broad policy to look at all disadvantaged children, it would disproportionately
help African Americans because a higher proportion of that group is poor.
It's certainly true that discrimination has been widespread throughout U.S. history and
throughout the world.
The economics of discrimination helps to explain why it could be that small bits of
discrimination wherever they start can turn to something worse and they suggest we need
to remain vigilant against discrimination in the future.
