It may seem that the basic approach of economics doesn't fit well with considerations of fairness.
In fact, the two may seem almost like opposites.
After all, economics is based on the working assumption that behavior and choices can be explained
under the assumption that people make self-interested and purposeful choices in a world of trade-offs and constraints.
In contrast, fairness is about how a process or outcome fits with an acceptable standard,
whether that's a social rule or a legal rule.
There certainly are historical examples of exceptionally brutal market-oriented behavior.
For example, someone who had to work in a factory for 60 hours every week breathing pollution,
drinking pollution, always at risk of losing a hand or your foot or your life if you slip and fall too close to the machinery.
But it's worth saying that this kind of mall treatment of workers and citizens happens under a lot of economic arrangements.
Not just capitalist systems, but also systems that would have called themselves socialist or communist,
as well as long-ago monarchies and even situations where government barely functions at all.
Of course, for some people in low-income countries today, mistreatment of workers and citizens is happening now,
not 100 or 300 years ago.
There are also milder examples of where economics and fairness seem to come into conflict.
Imagine, say, that there's a store owner who hears that there's a big hurricane or a big snowstorm coming.
And that person runs off to the store they own and raises the price on all the batteries and canned goods and aspirin and antibiotics.
Now, this may be completely understandable as a self-interested choice,
and at least in some jurisdictions it's not illegal if the store isn't a monopoly,
but it's certainly likely to be perceived as unfair.
It may lead to a situation of bad feeling where people won't buy from that store in the future.
But economics is broad enough to encompass the idea of fairness in a structured way,
and this example hints at how that can be done.
The idea is that when making decisions, people need to recognize that other people they're dealing with have fairness in mind.
If you act in a way that seems unfair, those other people will punish you in one way or another.
Now, some make the argument that this sense of fairness is an evolutionary trait
from back in the days of the hunter-gatherer tribes.
You needed the tribe, you needed others in the tribe to follow rules,
not cheat by doing too little or taking too much,
and so there needed to be developed a sense that it was worthwhile punishing those who did cheat.
Now, I don't have a strong view about whether this sociobiology explanation is true,
but it certainly is true that for whatever reason, people really do feel strongly about fairness.
So in pursuing your own self-interest, you don't just want to trample over the fairness expectations of others,
or you may pay a price.
Now, this idea may seem a little theoretical, so let's get more concrete and specific
about how economists might look for fairness behavior
and test the situation and the conditions under whether and when it's important.
One of the most prominent tools that economists have used to explore fairness
is called the ultimatum game.
It was first used by several German economists back in the early 1980s,
and since then it's become sort of a cottage industry among academic researchers.
The ultimatum game is an actual game that researchers set up and have people play.
Each round of the game works this way.
Imagine you've got two players, call one the proposer and one the responder,
and the experimenter puts some amount of money on the table between the two of them.
Game then goes as follows.
The proposer makes an offer about how to divide up that money that's on the table.
The responder says yes or no to that offer.
Now, if the responder accepts the offer, then the money is divided as the proposer suggested.
If the responder says no, however, then neither player gets anything.
So, to make that concrete, say the experimenter puts $20 in the middle of the table.
The proposer might say, I get $15, you get $5.
The responder could say yes, the money's handed out.
The responder could say no, and neither person gets anything.
So you can see why it's called an ultimatum game.
Now, pause for a second here.
Think to yourself, what would you do in this situation?
If you were proposing to split up the pie, what share of the pie would you offer if you were the proposer?
If you're the responder and you're thinking about what you might be offered, what's your strategy?
When are you going to accept the offer? When are you going to turn it down?
Now, as you think about that, you begin to come up with some other ideas.
Imagine what you would do as the proposer.
If you were playing against a responder who you knew was totally rational, maybe even a computer.
Does your strategy differ if you're playing against a responder who has strong feelings
and maybe gets upset easily as against someone who's very coldly rational?
This is a situation where your best strategy may differ depending on your estimate of who you're playing against
and how that person feels about a faired vision of the amount on the table.
Let's start off with the idea that both players are strictly rational.
Let each know that the other player is strictly rational too.
Then the hyperlogical proposer will offer only a tiny portion of the money to the responder.
The hyperlogical responder says, well, here's my choice.
I'll take either a small proportion or nothing at all and will accept that tiny offer.
So, say there's $20 on the table, the proposer might offer one penny.
The responder says, well, better a penny than nothing. I've got no feelings to hurt. I'll take it.
So, the pure rational prediction in this setting is for the division of money to be quite uneven
and for a responder to accept any offer, any offer at all, because after all, it's better than ending up with nothing.
But what do the players actually do?
In practice, responders don't like being offered only a small share.
When they're offered much less than half, many responders refuse to accept the offer.
Now, this is a standard result that comes out of hundreds of times this experiment has been done in different contexts and settings.
But in general, if the proposer offers less than 20% of what's on the table, the proposer gets turned down about half the time.
They offer much less than 20%, they get turned down much of the time.
So, if the proposer is foolish enough to pretend that everyone in this game is perfectly rational and doesn't care about fairness,
that proposer ends up getting nothing.
The vast majority of proposer offers are in the range of 40% or 50% of the total.
That is, the proposer doesn't always offer half, but typically not a whole lot less than half, and these kinds of offers are typically accepted.
So, think this through.
If a proposer tries to act in a way that assumes pure self-interest and no concern about fairness,
that proposer ends up with a good chance of getting nothing.
But a proposer who takes into account how others feel about fairness almost certainly gets the offer accepted.
It turns out that if you play an ultimatum game many, many times, matching lots of different players against other kinds of players,
the proposers who take fairness into account actually end up doing better in terms of their own self-interest.
Now, let me say that again, because it can sound like a bit of a paradox.
When you act in a way that seems fair, you may lose out a little bit in the short run,
but over time, in this ultimatum game, you end up doing better in terms of self-interest.
Conversely, if you act in a way that seems unfair, maybe you gain a bit in the short run,
but over time, when you act unfairly, you are acting against your own self-interest.
Now, a number of researchers have followed up on the ultimatum game
by looking at variations in how you could play the game in a number of different ways.
The result of these variations is that fairness considerations do matter,
but some interesting differences and distinctions emerge.
For example, one obvious question is, what about if there was more money on the table?
Maybe if we're splitting $20, the responder doesn't mind turning down five bucks.
But what if we were splitting $100 or $5,000?
Would a responder be so quick to turn down an unequal offer if it was worth a few hundred dollars?
Now, you can try to study this in various ways.
One thing is you can vary the stakes at a fairly small level.
You can do an ultimatum game with $10 and with $100 and see if there's some difference that emerges.
You can play the game with much larger amounts like $1,000 or something like that,
but you could announce in advance that some share maybe only one tenth of the players
will actually get paid with real money at the end.
Try and sort of trick their perceptions in that way.
In studies done in other countries, you can take moderate amounts of a few hundred dollars
and play the game.
In those countries, these moderate amounts might be equal to a week of average salary
or even a month of average salary.
In Indonesia, for example, some experimenters didn't ultimatum game
with an amount that was equal to three months' average salary.
And in that situation, proposers seemed to offer about the same percentages.
Respondents were a bit less likely to turn down uneven offers, but not much less likely.
Now, it's probably true for some super large stake that unfair offers would be accepted.
If there was a $10 million pie and I was offered $1 million of it, I might take the million dollars.
But think about it from the proposer's point of view for a moment.
If it was a $10 million pie, would you really want to take the risk of ticking off the respondent
and maybe losing an enormous amount?
Or would you offer four or five million just to be sure that you get a large amount of the reward as well?
There are many different ways to run an ultimatum game.
They typically have the sorts of effects you might expect.
If you make people more aware of the dynamics of the game, more sensitized to the fairness concerns,
then the proposers tend to offer more, more like half,
and the respondents are more likely to punish if it seems unfair to them.
You can do this game in a million ways.
You can play multiple rounds.
You can have people alternate back and forth between being proposer and responder.
You can have a little game like a coin flip or something where the proposers are chosen.
It turns out that proposers chosen at random will act more generously
than those who win some kind of a little game and feel like they deserve to be the proposer.
You can play with people face to face.
You can play with people in remote locations.
You can play against computers.
You can give different kinds of instructions to players,
like they should try to maximize their winnings,
or you can just let them play and see what happens.
Many of these experiments are done with groups of students,
so there's a natural question as to whether they're representative of the broader population.
But experiments with people of other ages and situations
don't seem to make much difference in the results.
There are some interesting gender differences.
When the woman is the respondent, both men and women tend to offer less.
When the woman is the proposer,
both men and women are more likely to accept a low offer from that proposer.
I'll leave it to you to interpret if those patterns have a deeper meaning.
Are there cultural differences?
Ultimatum research has been carried out in a number of different countries,
including Japan, China, South Korea, Israel, Slovenia and many places in the United States.
Across those countries, it's common to offer around half or a bit less.
It's true that a couple of countries, Israel and Japan,
it's a little more likely to offer 40% than 50%,
and it's a little more true that these kinds of offers were likely to be accepted.
It seems as if in most countries, people are responding to a norm of fairness,
and they understand that fairness might vary a little bit in that given society.
There was one really interesting study that looked at 15 small societies across five continents,
including tribal cultures in Papua New Guinea, in Paraguay,
a Peruvian tribe, whale hunters on an island on the Pacific coast.
Many of these groups looked more or less standard.
The proposers offered half or a little less, and those offers were commonly accepted.
But there were a couple of really intriguing counter examples.
This whale hunting tribe out in the Pacific, for example,
is a society that has a lot of complicated sharing rules,
which is what happens when a lot of the wealth in your society occurs
because everyone gets together, sends out a small group to try and catch a whale,
and then has to divide it up.
In that group, it was common to offer more than half.
Even 60% offers were very common.
There was another tribe in Peru where the society didn't show much cooperative behavior in general
outside of immediate family.
In that society, the average offer was only about 30%,
and lots of people in that society didn't offer to share at all.
There's some tribes in Papua New Guinea that have a tradition of competitive gift giving.
That is, you give large gifts back and forth trying to outdo each other.
In those kinds of societies, when they played the ultimatum game,
it was common for the proposer to offer more than half,
and it was fairly common for the respondent to reject the offer of more than half
as not being big enough.
Again, this pattern emphasizes that fairness is socially determined,
and those within a certain society need to have a pretty good idea
of what fairness means to all of those around them.
The ultimatum game is just one example of a number of games
that economists can ask subjects to play.
These games can shed light on different aspects of motivation and expectation,
so I want to give you a sense of what some of these other games are like.
For example, how much of the ultimatum game is about altruism and fairness,
and how much of it is a fear of being turned down by the respondent?
To tackle this question, you can set up and play what's called a dictator game.
Now, this is really a simple game.
Again, you've got two players, proposer, respondent.
The first player is given some amount, say it's $10,
and it has to decide how much to give to the other player.
The second player gets whatever is given, end of game.
As I said, a really simple game.
But here's the question economists ask.
In this situation of a dictator game, why would a rational proposer give anything?
But nonetheless, the findings are that 60% of the players in a dictator game
do send along a positive amount, often 10 or 25% of the total.
It's true that a larger number gives zero than in the ultimatum game
when you're in a dictator game, but it's interesting that a decent-sized minority,
even in a dictator game, still gives half.
That gives you a strong sense that fairness is a very strong consideration here.
It's not just concern over being turned down.
With an outside third party, choose to punish someone who is acting selfishly,
even if it costs that third party some money.
This is called the punishment game, and the punishment game involves three players.
I'll call them A, B, and C. Not much creativity in the names, I'm afraid.
A and B start off by playing a dictator game.
That is, say, A proposes how to split up $20, B has to accept.
But now player C enters the picture.
That player C is given half as much as player A,
so if A had $20 to start off, C has $10, and C is the punisher.
C can punish A, but C has to pay for doing so.
The way that works is, say that C wants to punish by $1,
then C has to give up $1, but A would lose $3 of what they kept.
Now, again, a basic theory of rationality says C will never punish A.
I mean, after all, C loses money by punishing, and it hurts A.
It doesn't help B. Why bother?
If A has divided up the money 50-50 in the dictator game, they're almost never punished.
But when A offers zero in a dictator game,
the typical punishment is that C gives up about 15% of the original amount that C has,
and thus imposes a cost on A of three times as much.
Now, this is sometimes played where C first starts off as B.
That is the one who gets dictated to in a dictator game,
and then later on gets to be the punisher C.
And not surprisingly, when that happens, when you've had to be on the receiving end of the dictator game,
you punish more afterwards.
So this suggests that in the ultimatum game,
it's not just responders who will react against what's perceived to be unfair,
but third parties react that way too, even when the third parties have to pay some cost.
What if the rules of the game allow the respondent not just to punish the proposer,
like by turning down the proposed split,
but to reward the proposer for making an especially good offer?
This kind of game is called a trust game.
You can imagine here that the proposer starts off with some amount,
again, let's just call it $20, and gives some amount to the respondent.
Now, at this point, the rule of the game is that whatever the proposer gives to the respondent
is tripled by the experimenter.
So if the proposer gives, say, $10, the respondent receives $30.
And the respondent can give some amount back to the proposer,
and that's the end of the game.
Now, if the players really trust each other,
the proposer will give all of the money to the respondent, watch it triple,
and the respondent will give back a large part to the proposer.
But purely rational players with no trust will play the game differently.
The proposer will expect the respondent won't give anything back,
so the proposer won't give anything to the respondent in the first place.
What actually happens in a trust game?
Well, the proposer is put in about half of the original stake, on average.
The respondents give back enough so the proposer comes out, on average,
a little bit ahead from the trust, but doesn't benefit a whole heck of a lot.
Yet another variant of these games is called a gift exchange game.
In this kind of a game, the proposer starts off with some amount,
let's again call it $20, and gives some amount to the respondent.
The respondent gives some back to the proposer,
but this time the experimenter triples what goes back to the proposer.
Now, again, in a rational world, a world of pure self-interest and no concerns about fairness,
the proposer expects the respondent won't give anything back,
so the proposer will give the bare minimum.
In a gift exchange world, the more the proposer gives, the more the respondent gives back.
You can think of this in a way as a situation between an employer and a worker.
An employer can offer a pay level with a little bit extra,
and then the worker gives back some extra effort so that higher pay is worthwhile.
The higher pay for a worker runs the risk of not getting anything back,
but it can encourage more effort and thus pay for itself in that way.
You're getting the idea, I hope, that there are just lots and lots of variants of these kinds of games.
Each one aimed at sorting out a particular kind of motivation.
Here's one last one, and it's called the power to take game.
Now, there are two players, A and B, I've been calling them proposer and responder.
In this game, they each have some money.
The proposer says what share of the respondent's money is the proposer going to take.
Then the respondent says what share of income will the respondent destroy?
So let me think that through in a little more concrete terms.
Let's say they each start off with $20.
The proposer says I'll take half of yours.
The respondent might answer I'm destroying all of mine so you get nothing.
Now, the pattern in this kind of game is that the more the proposer takes,
the more the respondent destroys.
A typical finding is if the proposer says I'm going to take four-fifths of what you've got,
the respondent destroys half.
Now, as in the original Ultimatum game, the interesting lesson here is that if the respondent doesn't feel like they're being treated fairly,
they're willing to impose costs on their proposer,
even if it means the responder has to bear some of those costs directly.
At this point, you should have a sense of how this research literature works.
You think about whether motivations are responding to feelings about inequality,
or kindness, or revenge, or openness, or honesty,
or dealing with someone face-to-face,
and then you try to design an experimental setting that would be a plausible way
of invoking these very specific feelings and you see what happens.
There are just lots more of these kinds of games in the economics literature,
and psychologists sometimes do these sorts of exercises too.
It may seem like these kinds of games aren't really economics somehow.
I mean, after all, we're not looking at data on gross domestic product,
or prices in markets, or what's happening inside of companies.
It might seem that this is somehow really a branch of psychology or sociology,
but these kinds of game setups have a name in the economics profession.
They're called laboratory economics.
They're extremely well-established and well-respected in the economics profession.
Indeed, a very prominent economist named Vernon Smith shared the Nobel Prize in economics in 2002,
for, and I'll quote from his Nobel citation here,
for having established laboratory experiments as a tool in empirical economic analysis,
especially in the study of alternative market mechanisms.
Now, just to be clear, Vernon Smith wasn't doing ultimatum games.
He was actually doing a kinds of different supply and demand games in a range of different situations and settings
to explore how the market outcomes might be affected.
But this idea of getting a bunch of people in a room and running controlled exercises and experiments
is absolutely certainly a central part of the study of economics.
It's also, interestingly, increasingly become part of how economics is taught, at least at the college level.
You have your students play these kinds of games, and then you talk through the underlying logic and implications with them.
It's actually quite a powerful tool for getting students to think about what motivates people and how strategic behavior works.
The ultimatum game and its offshoots are a way of getting at something fundamental in markets
that isn't obviously visible in prices or quantities sold.
Lots of economic exchanges have the property that both buyer and seller feel as if they're getting a good deal.
In the jargon we use in economics, both sides feel that they are receiving a surplus from the transaction.
Now, here's an example from my own experience.
Say I go to a restaurant and have a pretty good meal, and I think, would I come back to this restaurant again?
Well, the economist in me has to compare the meal with the price that I've paid.
I want enough pleasure in the meal that it feels to me like I got a good deal, a deal that was sort of better than the price.
A term that economists use here is consumer surplus.
I sometimes find myself thinking, well, you know, that was really a good meal, but, you know, for the price it needed to be better than just good.
It needed to be excellent.
If I feel like I didn't get enough surplus value, I'm likely to look for a different restaurant next time.
Now, just to be clear, this doesn't mean I only order cheap food.
There's a lot of cheap food I avoid because even at the cheap price, it's not worth it to me.
There are also some expensive restaurants.
I'll go back to repeatedly, at least when I've got a good excuse to do so.
I'm talking about an internal sense of what's fair to pay.
And what's fair to pay in my mind is an amount that gives me a certain amount of surplus from the transaction.
This is going to work the same way on the producer's side of markets, especially you can think about a lot of service occupations.
Imagine some job where you're the producer and you're just uncertain about really whether it's worth your time.
Maybe if the hourly pay went down by not very much, 20 or 30 cents an hour, you'd quit the job.
You're not getting very much surplus from that job and you're probably pretty unhappy with the job.
You want to feel like the job is really worth doing even if you got paid a little bit less because it's just there's some surplus to you in doing it.
In labor markets, this idea of surplus on both sides is sometimes called a gift exchange model of labor markets.
The gift exchange idea works this way.
Employers in markets, at least in a lot of successful and well-established companies, often pay the employees a little more than maybe they really need to pay.
And when business turns down, these employers try not to fire people right away.
Instead, in bad times, they just sort of stop hiring and let employment shrink by attrition rather than doing mass layoffs unless they really need to do the layoffs.
In exchange, in these kinds of workplaces, employees give some extra energy and some extra loyalty to the employer that goes beyond the basic job description.
They maybe work a little bit extra when they need to. They don't quit without giving a little bit of notice.
They don't steal from the equipment room.
A place that's a nice place to work has a strong element of this gift exchange happening.
Both employer and employee are giving each other more than the bare minimum, more than they absolutely need to give.
Like the trust game and the gift exchange game, the result is that the overall pie, the overall amount of production, the overall amount of surplus is made bigger as a result of these gifts going back and forth.
Conversely, if you're in a workplace that has no gift exchange, where the employer treats everyone as a disposable part doing the absolute minimum for everyone and the workers do as little as their job description allows, well, that's a pretty unpleasant place to work.
Both sides are trying to grab all the surplus from each other, and as both sides try and grab, there's a lack of trust, a lack of concern over fairness, and everyone ends up less happy as a result.
While this phenomenon is common enough in labor markets, the point is a broader one.
If every buyer or seller really consistently pushed right up to the very, very edge of what they're willing to do to try and grab all the surplus for themselves, the result is that within that market, they're likely to be a lot of unhappy players.
It's likely to drive a hard deal once or maybe a few times.
It's possible to be the proposer in the ultimatum game and say, I want it all, and every now and then you get away with it.
Maybe there are a few people who even get away with this kind of behavior their whole lives, over and over and over.
But on average, it's probably true that those who always try to demand everything for themselves and all the surplus for themselves end up being shut out of arrangements they could otherwise have made.
Others don't give them the same kind of flexibility.
Those people operate in a way in a more pinched and narrow world.
And of course, this tends to confirm their view that the world is taking advantage of them and they need to try and grab everything they can.
It may seem odd for an economist to say, but a world in which all parties are trying to scrape the last dime out of each other's pockets is a world in which both parties are perpetually suspicious about each other and perpetually peeved with each other as well.
When difficulties arrive in that kind of a world, neither side is likely to go above and beyond the bare minimum to try and make things work.
As a result of this suspicion, this fear of being exploited, the surplus for everyone is likely to end up being lower.
To put it differently, an economy in which people ignore concerns of fairness and pursue their own self-interest as hard as they possibly can in every single transaction is probably an economy that doesn't work especially well.
