Most people in a number of health and medical organizations think about addiction as an
involuntary medical condition or as a disease.
At the extremes, if you think about someone who is addicted to crack cocaine or crystal
meth or heroin, you think about addiction to substances that really change their behavior.
Of course, that also applies to substances that are legal for ordinary use, like being
addicted to alcohol or to tobacco.
If you look at the definitions of the word addiction from reputable professional organizations
like the American Psychiatric Association, the World Health Organization, or the American
National Institute of Drug Abuse, they all tend to describe addiction using terms like
involuntary and compulsive and chronic disease.
But at least to me and to a number of other economists, this idea of addiction as an involuntary
chronic disease doesn't seem quite right.
True enough, when thinking about addictive behaviors, they do seem to have an element
of compulsiveness in them, a sense that the person is trapped as if their free choice
isn't quite being allowed to operate.
But as a starting point, it's useful to note that while it's possible for you to quit addiction,
you can't quit a disease.
Gene Heyman, a psychologist at Harvard University, has looked at data on drug addicts, my way
of phrasing one of his central findings is that drug addicts can be divided into two
big groups.
One group of drug addicts are those we see in treatment facilities, in hospitals, maybe
on the street among the homeless.
But another group of drug addicts are those who are former addicts and who've given
it up.
We tend to focus on the first group, but if we're going to understand what's meant by
addiction, we need actually to understand what happens in both groups.
Being only at those who've been in treatment for a long period of time and ignoring all
the others would be an odd way to think about what it actually means to be addicted.
Heyman points out that every national survey of psychiatric disorders shows that most of
those who were addicts at one point in their life are now ex addicts.
In fact, about 75% of all drug addicts do quit.
Drug addiction mostly affects younger adults.
Most addicts quit using drugs by the time they reached an age of 30 to 35 years old.
These surveys also show that over 70% of addicts didn't seek help within the counseling or
healthcare system for quitting drugs.
In other words, they quit on their own.
What motivated them to quit?
New evidence suggests it was factors like money worries or pressure from family to quit
or worry about being able to keep a job.
To the ears of economists, what all of that sounds like is that a lot of addicts do respond
to the incentives that they face.
At least to me, this kind of evidence has a ring of truth to it.
It fits with other studies I remember reading.
For example, one study by a psychiatrist found that half of US soldiers used heroin or opium
while in Vietnam, but 90% of them stopped upon returning to the United States.
And I know, I suspect a lot of us know, people who got drunk almost every weekend or smoked
a lot of pot in high school or in college, but they didn't become permanently addicted.
At some point, maybe in their later teens or their 20s, they somehow gave it up.
So if we're going to keep our mental categories straight, it's important to keep clear on
what an actual disease looks like.
Nobody just quits being a schizophrenic one day.
Nobody just quits having Alzheimer's disease one day or Parkinson's disease or epilepsy
or cerebral palsy.
You don't just get up one day and kick them aside.
In that sense, calling addiction a disease isn't quite right.
Involuntary isn't quite right either.
Being an alcoholic has its own set of problems, but it just isn't the same thing as having
cerebral palsy.
When arguing that addiction is not about choice, a common argument is to point out that people
with an addiction seem to have lives that have a much lower quality as a result.
You look at someone who's addicted and who's dropped out of school or committed petty crimes
for money or ended up entangled in violence or done jail time, maybe broke up a marriage,
lost touch with their kids, and then you say, why would anyone make a choice like that?
How could that be a rational decision?
These kinds of stories can be genuinely heart-rending, but the social scientist in me looks at cause
and effect with my head, not my heart.
Imagine, for example, that someone is depressed or bipolar or schizophrenic, and that person
then becomes addicted to drugs.
All sorts of terrible stuff might happen in their life, but it might be that the drug
addiction is a symptom of the depression or other mental illness, rather than the drug
addiction being the cause of all the other poor outcomes.
Figuring out which is cause and which in effect needs actual study and actual evidence.
You certainly can't just assume that when you see a drug addict who's having a terrible
life, if it wasn't for the drugs, everything else in their life would have turned out just
fine.
Moreover, many people make choices that don't turn out well, but they're still choices.
People make choices to drop out of high school, or to commit crimes, or to get intoxicated
short-term and do something foolish or violent or both, or to engage in risky sexual activity,
or to drive all night without enough sleep.
These things are all still, at some level, choices.
Pushing an addiction shapes choices in various ways, to be sure, but remember that most addicts
do drop their habit and do it on their own.
Addicts may have their choices shaped in various ways, but it seems to me that saying addicts
aren't affected by incentives is pushing that definition of what it means to be involuntary
or compulsive or chronic disease just a little bit too far.
I want to present an alternative view of addiction, an economic viewpoint, which is known as the
theory of rational addiction.
I found that even saying something like rational addiction is the sort of phrase that makes
non-economists roll up their eyes.
I confess up front, there's controversy within the economics profession about whether one
can reasonably apply a framework of rational choice to the idea of addiction.
There's probably even more controversy once you step outside the economics profession
and you talk with psychiatrists and social workers.
I'll talk more about all of these controversies toward the end of the lecture.
The idea of rational choice of addiction raises some interesting questions about what we mean
by voluntary choice.
It's also worth saying that, at least for some economists, they kind of like waving that
word rational like a red flag and seeing who gets upset about it.
But let's here take a grip on the idea of rational addiction, just talk through what the theory
means and also about the quality of evidence that supports it.
Let me start by saying more clearly what's meant by addiction and let's start by defining
addiction in some way that doesn't make a judgment about the cause of addiction, even
about whether it's good or bad.
Let's say that the cause could be involuntary chronic disease rooted in heredity and brain
chemistry, or it could be a process involving a substantial element of choice in a world
of trade-offs.
For starters, I just want to sidestep that question and just think about what are the
patterns of behavior that define addiction?
And studies by psychologists would argue that addictive behavior really has three factors.
One factor is reinforcement.
That is, consuming more of the good in the present means consuming more in the future.
The second factor is tolerance.
When past consumption is large, a given level of current consumption is less satisfying.
And the third factor is withdrawal.
That is, when consumption is reduced, there are negative physical or psychological reactions.
Now notice this definition is in some sense value-neutral.
It applies to being an alcoholic, but it could also apply to certain kinds of positive addictions
that share these sorts of traits.
If you talk to a compulsive jogger, for example, you'll see a lot of these kinds of traits.
You could argue that being a workaholic or perhaps even certain kinds of church attendance
have some of these traits.
Although arguably, positive traits may have more reinforcement, that is, consuming now
means more in the future, and withdrawal, that is, when you stop, it's painful.
But they don't quite seem to have that problem of tolerance.
They don't seem to have to keep ramping up more and more and more over the time to get
the same satisfaction.
All of that said, the question for economists is, is there a way of thinking about people
trying to figure out which choices they desire and then pursuing those choices in a world
of trade-offs and scarcity that might lead at least some people with some kinds of preferences
to engage in addictive behavior?
And as with many topics, addiction and habit formation come up in the writings of economists
from time to time over the decades.
But the work in the last few decades is typically dated back to some work by Gary Becker and
several prestigious co-authors who developed these arguments in a series of papers written
in the late 1980s and into the early 1990s.
Now, you might remember that Gary Becker's name has come up before in these lectures.
He won his Nobel Prize for applying economics in all sorts of areas that had not been previously
expected like crime and racial discrimination, and addiction is just one more example of
his multifaceted work.
The basic theory of rational addiction looks something like this.
Addiction is an issue, pretty much by definition, not because of behavior that happens once,
but because it's behavior that continues over time, and these traits of reinforcement,
tolerance, and withdrawal all involve how levels of consumption or satisfaction from
consumption are related to each other over time.
Thus, a rational perspective on addiction would need to take into account thinking over time.
You have to start off with someone who thinks about addiction not just in the moment, like
it's a short run choice, but who thinks about becoming addicted as a long run choice.
Now that kind of person would look at the benefits of addiction over time and weigh them
against the costs.
Now, I can almost hear voices in my ear, maybe the voice of my junior high school health
teacher saying something like, what do you mean the benefits of addiction?
That's crazy talk, there are no benefits of addiction, there are only costs.
My economist background forces me to differ here, and perhaps I should emphasize, I'm
speaking here as someone whose non-prescription drug experience is that I might have a glass
of wine with dinner sometimes.
I'm someone who avoids taking aspirin because it makes my mind feel uncomfortably fuzzy.
However, I do recognize that for a lot of people, being intoxicated apparently feels
really good, they view it as a benefit, they talk about it with pleasure.
If you're going to talk about people who weigh benefits and costs, it seems to me there's
no getting around the fact that for a lot of people, getting smashed or high or taking
certain kinds of drugs seems to them like a really good time.
Let me turn to an expert witness here, the actor Charlie Sheen, who has a well-documented
history of what would usually be called addictive behavior.
Sheen said in an interview in 2011, I was sober for five years a long time ago, and
I was just bored out of my tree, it's inauthentic, it's not who I am.
I didn't drink for 12 years, and man, that first one, wow.
Now I repeat, this is not my thing, I'm not recommending it, but there are a lot of things
human beings do that aren't my thing, and if I'm putting on my economist hat about costs
and benefits, I don't do much judging about right and wrong.
In addition, it might be that for a number of people who use intoxicating substances,
it's part of a ritual of group belonging.
I'm probably not the only one who's had an experience of being the only one or one
or two or three people in a room who isn't smoking pot or who isn't pouring beer down
their throat, and it can make you feel a little bit out of place.
It may be that people are just different in this way, some really like getting high and
some don't, and variations like this are of course normal for lots of consumer goods.
Some people really like music and spend a lot of money on it, some don't.
Some really like clothes and spend a lot of money on them, some don't.
Some like travel, some don't.
The fact that a smaller group really likes something doesn't make that group irrational.
It just means they have different preferences.
The fact that addiction turns out badly in some cases doesn't prove anything by itself.
It could be that those who are thinking about addiction recognize there are several possibilities
that could result.
For example, one possibility is they could be addicted for a time, enjoy the addiction
while it lasts, and then stop.
Another possibility is that they might feel like the benefits of getting high over that
time offset the chance that this pattern of behavior turns out really badly in the long
run.
After all, people do make choices that turn out badly over time, but again that doesn't
prove they aren't making choices.
The possible costs of addiction are clear enough, as we've talked about already.
There can be personal costs in terms of alienating friends and family, there can be health costs
to your body, and there can be financial costs in terms of lost jobs, lost income, and just
all the parts of life that moved on by when you were drunk or high or stoned.
The theory of rational addiction says some people, in weighing the risks of these costs
against the benefits, choose addiction.
Now, anybody can make up a theory.
Interesting part is figuring out if that theory has some implications that we could test against
data and find out whether the theory really has some empirical support.
The first prediction to be tested against evidence for the rational addiction theory,
do addicts react to prices?
If addicts do react to prices, then there is some element of choice involved, and addiction
isn't just a sickness or a craving that can't be stopped at any price.
It certainly does seem true that when crack cocaine spreads so quickly and destructively
in the early 1990s, one big reason was, it was cheap.
When the price goes up of alcohol or tobacco or other illegal drugs, consumption does seem
to draw.
In addition, if consumption in the present is based in part on what happens in the past,
and in turn, consumption in the future is based on consumption in the present for addictive
substances, then the reaction to changes in current price may not be very large.
After all, addicts are reacting to the established pattern of the past, and they're also reacting
to what's expected in the future.
So you wouldn't necessarily expect to see a price change right now cause an enormous
change in their behavior.
Now, all these predictions are interesting, but in a way, they're not surprising.
I mean, after all, economists think consumption of just about everything reacts to price.
And in general, adjustments to changes in price often are relatively small in the short run,
smaller than in the long run, so these predictions don't necessarily separate out a theory of
rational addiction from other kinds of behavioral choices people might make.
However, the specific theory of rational addiction makes a more intriguing prediction.
And those who are addicted have a long-term perspective.
They should react in the present to whether prices are expected to change in the future.
If the price of what they consume is expected to get higher in the future, it will be less
attractive to become addicted now.
If the price is expected to drop in the future, then it would be more attractive to become
addicted now.
So you can test this prediction against the evidence.
And this prediction does seem to hold up in some areas.
When states announce future increases in cigarette taxes, consumption of cigarettes drops in
the present.
There was another study that looked at racetrack betting and the share of betting that goes
to the track which varies across states.
They find that when states start taking a bigger share from racetrack betting, there's
less betting in the past.
That is, in anticipation of what was to come, betting went down.
And there's also less betting in the future because fewer people get the habit of betting
established.
Another possible implication of the theory of rational addiction is that if addicts
are balancing costs and benefits, then those who have lower personal costs of addiction
should be more likely to become addicted.
Thus, those who are poor or young or less educated face less of a trade-off with addictive
behavior.
The jobs they're missing out on, for example, would pay them less.
We talked about how as people move on in life, they hit age maybe 30, it doesn't seem as
worthwhile to be addicted anymore.
That may well be because the trade-offs people face have changed.
So you're more likely to engage in such behavior when you're young.
Again, if addiction is a disease or a sickness, you would need to explain why it affects these
particular groups more than others.
Alzheimer's doesn't exactly play favorites.
Why should addiction?
Of all the drug-dependent or drug-abusing folks, survey evidence says about 60% are single,
maybe 25% are married, the rest are divorced or cohabitating.
This is consistent with the idea that you have more to lose in personal terms if addiction
wrecks your marriage.
In this way and in other ways, marriage can be viewed as a sort of self-controlled vice
that stops you from undertaking certain behaviors.
It's also true that as information about the health effects of smoking came out, it had
a much bigger effect in reducing smoking use among the well-educated, who do have better
job prospects than among the less well-educated.
And again, this sort of pattern is consistent with the idea that people are making a choice
about smoking.
At this point, it's hard to believe that any adult in the United States doesn't know
something about the health costs of smoking, but health costs matter more if you're giving
up more.
Another prediction of rational addiction theory is that it will be some sort of mixture when
people try to give up smoking or other drugs of binge behavior and cold turkey stopping.
So people will first use the drug heavily and then they'll stop cold.
Why will this happen?
Well, remember addiction involves links from past consumption to present and future consumption.
If you consume in the past, you tend to get into a binge situation or you keep consuming
more and more and more because of tolerance you ramp up over time.
You need more of what you're addicted to to get the same boost.
But if at some point you stop and don't consume in the past, then you don't consume in the
immediate future.
In the jargon of economics, they sometimes call this an unstable, steady state.
There are jumps where at some times you're consuming very, very heavily and there's binge
behavior and at other times you're not consuming at all.
Now if addiction is just a habit or an involuntary disease, it's not obvious why you should have
this kind of behavior.
Why shouldn't you just have steady consumption of the addictive good at all times or get as
much as possible of it at any given time?
Why would you go through periods of binge and then periods of stopping?
Now again, there's some evidence on this.
When cigarette taxes go up, the quantity of cigarette smoke diminishes as we talked about.
A lot of that effect is teens who presumably perhaps aren't quite hooked yet and moreover,
as they look ahead to a long lifetime of smoking, the lifetime price of becoming addicted just
went up.
On adult smokers, though, there's an interesting pattern that emerges.
More than half of the effect of higher cigarette taxes is that smokers become non-smokers.
In other words, smokers don't just cut back by 10 or 20 or 30 percent.
Some don't cut back much and a bunch totally quit.
When you're looking at alcohol, you don't want to look at overall consumption of alcohol
because there are too many social drinkers who really aren't addicted by any definition
of the word.
So studies in rational addiction tend to look at cases of cirrhosis of the liver as a measure
of really heavy alcohol use.
Studies show that when U.S. counties raised taxes on alcohol, liver cirrhosis fell more
sharply than overall consumption of alcohol did, again suggesting it was those with extremely
heavy consumption, potential alcoholics, who cut back the most.
Mark Twain used to tell a story about a doctor who told him he needed to cut back on smoking
cigars and drinking whiskey.
Twain said to the doctor something like, I can't cut back.
I don't have the willpower to cut back, but I can give them up completely.
That's a good description of addictive behavior.
Twain also said something like, it's easy to give up smoking.
I've done it hundreds of times.
There are similar sentiments for many people who are addicted.
They don't trim back.
They don't have the willpower to trim back, but under certain circumstances, they can
give it up completely.
Now my point here isn't that you need to buy rational addiction theory as true.
As I said at the start, a lot of economists and medical people in the field are dubious
too.
But a point often made by economists is, it takes a theory to beat a theory.
The explanation for addiction can't just point out many addicts say they would prefer to
quit, or some addicts have made a mess of their lives.
You also need to cover the other facts.
Most addicts do quit and on their own.
They quit at a time of life when it seems like the costs of addiction are rising and
the benefits are not.
Addicts respond to present prices, they respond to future prices, and the demographic pattern
of addiction matches those who have lower costs from becoming addicted and are more
likely to do so.
Addicts don't consume steadily.
They tend to binge and then they tend to stop.
Now it could be that for some hardcore addicts, mental health problems lead to their addiction
rather than the other way around.
When thinking through this kind of evidence and trying to understand what addiction really
is, let me give you the line of argument that often starts to emerge.
The typical line of argument is something like, addiction, okay, might be to some degree
a choice for some people, but not for others.
For those others, addiction might be genetic, something that switches on in their brain.
Or it might be people who have extremely short time horizons, they take short term pleasure
without worrying about the cost.
And others maybe are not that way.
And this argument is interesting to me because it's always interesting when you're discussing
something and then the person you're arguing or discussing with shifts their argument.
Because this line of argument, if you make it, admits that lots and lots of people who
look drug dependent, who look addicted and act addicted, somehow weren't really addicted.
It redefines the problem of addiction to refer only to the hardest of the hardcore, those
who are especially susceptible.
And it has a perhaps unintended implication.
It suggests that there are a whole bunch of people out there who could abuse drugs all
the time and could handle it pretty well.
After all, they don't have the genetic thing or the thing in their brain that would lead
them to addiction and they wouldn't need to worry about it.
That takes us into an interesting and difficult set of questions that in one way or another
has been coming up in many of these lectures.
What is voluntary in voluntary choice?
What's not voluntary?
And in the case of addiction, what do these thoughts have as implications for public policy?
I hope at this point I've convinced you that addiction has at least an element of choice,
even if it's a constrained and limited sort of choice.
To illustrate this point, think about the U.S. government bureaucracies involved in
thinking about addiction.
On one side, there's the Drug Enforcement Administration, Law and Order and Punishment.
And on the other side, there's the National Institute on Drug Abuse, which is part of
the National Institutes of Health, with an annual budget of a billion dollars or so.
That's about health.
That's an unusual sort of behavior, where our social reaction is both legal punishment
and incarceration and also medical treatment at the same time.
But if drug addiction isn't a choice, then what is it?
Is it, for example, genetic?
Well, it certainly has a genetic component.
In fact, there's growing evidence that genetics affects a lot of things.
It can affect a tendency to overeating and being quick to anger and hyperactivity probably
affects intelligence to some extent, as well as tastes for foods or colors or activities.
There's even some evidence genetics affect social attitudes, like religious belief.
A lot of these studies come for twins or siblings who are separated at birth.
They're brought up in different settings, but they have similar or the same genetic background.
They often have some amazing commonalities.
But it would be weird to say that all inheritable behaviors are diseases.
With most of them, there's a predisposition to something happening, but there's also
a possibility of encouraging that predisposition or not.
A large element of choice remains.
Does addiction change the brain in a sort of ratchet effect?
Sometimes you hear the argument that addiction happens because it leads to the release of
a chemical in the brain.
Often dopamine is what people talk about.
But there are lots of activities that raise the dopamine in your brain.
Painting exercise, even watching cartoons, even short episodes of pain like getting pinched
raise the dopamine in your brain, and it would be foolish to say all of these are addictions.
Certainly, there are all sorts of activities that change the brain.
There's evidence that athletics changes the brain, or studying, or exposure to music,
and taking drugs as well.
Again, it's hard to say that because something changes the brain, therefore it should be
treated as a disease.
Also, if addiction is a brain chemistry thing, then how come so many people can try drugs
and not get addicted?
Saying, some people can handle it, some can't is just not a great answer.
If it's involuntary brain chemistry for some people, why isn't it involuntary brain chemistry
for other people?
Ultimately, a lot of these arguments about addiction and choice come down to statements
by addicts who say they want to quit and they don't like their situation.
And again, they'll say, how can it be a choice if I want to choose something else?
But it's maybe worth pointing out a lot of us have situations in life where we say one
thing and do another.
It's not clear how to interpret these sorts of statements.
Maybe addiction is a way of saying, it's really genuinely harder for me than for a person
who isn't addicted to not start down the road of consuming this product.
And if I do start down this road, it's really genuinely harder for me than for a person
who isn't addicted or isn't prone to addiction to stop.
You can imagine someone saying, I wish it was easier for me to not start.
Or having started, I wish it was easier for me to stop.
I wish I wasn't in a social or family setting where the addictive choices are somehow supported
or reinforced.
I wish I was in a different setting.
In that sense, my choices are genuinely harder than those a lot of other people face.
Now I'm sympathetic with this view, but what it really seems to say to me is that we are
all shaped by our background.
In some sense, none of us has full independent personal choice.
It might be true, for example, that some people have almost no room for personal choice because
of their upbringing and genetics and background.
But for most of us, if we're unhappy about who we are, we try to find the self-control
to alter that behavior.
And you seek out support from those around you to support you in making the change that
you seek.
The evidence shows that most of those we call addicts actually do find a way to do this.
They make a choice to halt their addiction.
