The economics of natural disasters begins with the insight that even though the events
of nature are not under human control, the effects of those events on people can be much
worse or much better as a result of economic decisions made by people.
An early classic statement of this insight came in the aftermath of the Great Lisbon
earthquake of 1755.
In 1755 a huge earthquake hit Lisbon, one of the biggest cities in Europe at that time,
now of course the capital and largest city in Portugal.
The epicenter of the quake was in the Atlantic Ocean about 100 miles off the coast.
By current estimates, the earthquake measured about a nine on the Richter scale, and it's
always worth remembering the Richter scale is logarithmic, that is, an earthquake at
level six is ten times as big as five, seven is ten times as big as six, eight is ten times
as big as seven, and so on.
I was living in Northern California at the time of what came to be called the Loma Prieta
Quake of 1989, which was about a seven on the Richter scale.
You could feel the ground rolling under your feet in waves.
A quake 100 times larger than that would be a nightmare come to life.
The story is that when the quake hit, 15 foot wide cracks opened in the middle of the city
of Lisbon.
All the water rushed out of the harbor, and then it all came back as a tsunami that went
through the town.
Out of a total population of perhaps 300,000 people, one fifth or so died outright, and
no one really knows the toll of the injured or those who died later.
In the aftermath of the quake, the French author and philosopher Voltaire wrote a poem
of lament.
Of course, because this was Voltaire, it had to have a philosophical theme.
Now, not many people read a lot of Voltaire anymore, but most people recognize the famous
line from his short novel, Candide.
That novel has a character named Pangloss, who keeps saying things like, all is for the
best in this best of all possible worlds, even when terrible stuff is happening.
Our word, Panglossian, refers to this sort of impenetrably stupid optimism.
The title character, a young man named Candide, is much less certain, and his motto seems
to be, we must cultivate our garden.
So you can imagine what Voltaire would think about the Lisbon earthquake.
We live in the best of all possible worlds, ha, this terrible tragedy just proves how
right I've been in my philosophy all along.
Let's write a poem.
I should say this isn't a great poem to begin with, and it's not improved in translation
to English, but it ends something like this.
What crime, what sin, had those young hearts conceived, that lie bleeding and torn on mother's
breast, did fallen Lisbon drink deeper a vice than London, Paris, or Sunlit Madrid, in these
men dance, at Lisbon yawns the abyss?
Voltaire is basically saying, it's basically just terrible natural disasters that happen.
It's the nature of humign existence.
There's nothing particular anyone can do about it.
It's just the situation we all live in.
Now Voltaire's poem provoked response from Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who's maybe best known
today for his political philosophy, the social contract and the discourses, but he was also
a novelist and essayist in his own right.
I want to quote a few excerpts from the letter Rousseau wrote to Voltaire, dated August 18th,
1756.
Instead of the consolations I expected, you only vex me.
It might be said you fear I don't feel my unhappiness enough, and that you are trying
to soothe me by proving all is bad.
Without departing from your subject of Lisbon, admit for example, nature did not construct
20,000 houses of six to seven stories there, and if the inhabitants of this great city
had been more equally spread out and more lightly lodged, the damage would have been
much less, and perhaps of no account.
Rousseau was really making a broader point.
The point is that bad things don't just happen by cosmic accident.
They happen as part of an interaction with people.
The Lisbon quake was so bad because people had built dense housing in that certain place.
If the quake had hit elsewhere, it wouldn't have caused so much damage.
Now let's flash forward to a modern example that makes a similar point.
The earthquakes in Haiti and in Chile in early 2010.
In January 2010, Haiti experienced a devastating earthquake.
It was 7.1 on the Richter scale and centered very near the capital city of Port-au-Prince.
There were 200,000 people dead, hundreds of thousands more stranded and affected in different
ways.
The city was devastated.
It looks it might take years or even decades to fully rebuild it.
Only a month later in February 2010, Chile experienced a huge earthquake.
It was a magnitude of 8.8 on the Richter scale, and again this is a log scale so it's a vastly
more powerful earthquake.
The center of the quake wasn't right in a big city, it was a couple of hundred miles
from Santiago, but the dead were numbered in the hundreds, not the hundreds of thousands.
Just to be clear, there was lots and lots of physical damage from the earthquake in Chile.
Hundreds of thousands of people were stranded, there were problems with roads, bridges and
the like, but Chile seemed able to deal with it at some basic level.
Why the difference?
Well, Haiti and Chile have lots of differences, but the ones that matter most in this case
have to do with economics and to some extent with governance.
To put it bluntly, Chile is a country with a functional economy and a fairly competent
government, and Haiti isn't.
On measures of how corrupt the country is, done by an organization called Transparency
International, Haiti ranks near the bottom of the world, if all the countries in the
world on corruption rankings.
Chile isn't right at the top, but it's quite respectfully ranked about 25th for not having
a whole lot of corruption.
Chile has building codes.
It has an economy to afford building better things at higher standards.
It has a government to enforce building more strongly.
In Haiti, even back in 2008, there was a case where a school building collapsed, killing
almost a hundred.
It turned out the contractor there had basically just laid concrete bricks, one on top of another
without actually using mortar to hold them together, and at some point the whole building
just tipped over.
Now, it may seem unfair to blame Haiti for its poverty and poor governance.
After all, people there have suffered so much.
You don't want to be in a situation of blaming the victims.
It's true that Haiti hadn't had a big earthquake for a couple of hundred years, so it had some
reason for not being all that prepared.
The soil under the capital city was especially soft, which means an earthquake spreads more
and makes the soil move more and does more damage.
I'd be the first to admit, some countries are dealt a better hand by history and climate
than others.
But Chile hasn't always been a country with a great economy either.
In fact, it was under a military dictatorship during much of the 1970s and 1980s.
My point is that the results of the earthquakes in these two countries weren't just about
the magnitude of the earthquake or its location.
The results were also about the characteristics of the economy and government in the countries
themselves.
After all, international aid agencies can only do so much after a disaster has occurred.
Chile had developed already a set of economic and political and legal institutions that
worked fairly well, so it was less vulnerable to natural disaster, even to a larger earthquake.
The key starting point for modern economists to study these issues of the effects of natural
disasters is that a natural disaster is an event within nature, but the effect of that
disaster on people is a matter of trends and policies that have a strong economic component.
In particular, the effects of any natural disaster on humans can be thought of as a combination
of three factors.
First, the natural disaster event itself, that is the size of the earthquake or the tsunami
or the hurricane or the drought.
Now, I won't have lots to say about the prevalence of these effects in the abstract, but at a
minimum, I'll say, there is no reason to think these kinds of giant natural disasters are
getting less likely over time.
Second factor is the number of people exposed to the event.
Now we're getting into an economic factor.
Population in the world as a whole has been growing larger over time.
It's often you have big cities on coastlines where storms and tidal waves make them especially
vulnerable.
In fact, lots of the world's population growth is in areas that are more exposed to disasters,
especially, say, in Asia.
They're either coastal areas or they're near a tectonic plate where an earthquake might
happen or both.
Third factor is the vulnerability of that population.
Now the vulnerability of a population to a natural disaster as a deliberately broad
term has to do with things like whether people are dependent on local agriculture for food
and income, and thus they would especially suffer if a drought occurred, or it might
reflect whether people are living in tall buildings near a coastline, or whether they
live in a country with building codes and transportation escape routes and the ability
to do some disaster relief.
If you're dependent on agriculture, living in a drought area, you're going to be very
subject to what could go wrong if a drought happens.
So whether a society as a whole has the capacity to react through its government, its neighborhoods,
its nonprofits, and its vulnerability to disaster are all part of what's included in this idea
of vulnerability.
Now let's take a half step back at this point, and as you'd probably guess, economists and
other scientists who study natural disasters want to have some data about trends and costs
in natural disasters.
So let me describe that data for you, and then we'll sort of be able to move into policy
reactions to natural disasters.
A standard source on the number of natural disasters is something called the Emergency
Events Database, which is maintained by the Center for Research on the Epidemiology of
Disasters, which is at the University of Leuven in Belgium.
You can of course look this up on the web if you like.
They look at natural events, including earthquakes, floods, storms, drought, and the like.
They define a disaster as something that has at least one of the following criteria.
10 or more people reported killed, 100 or more people reported affected, injured, and
are homeless.
The government declares a state of emergency or requests international assistance.
Now obviously this measure is imperfect in various ways.
There's an emphasis on how many are reported killed or injured, which in some countries
may be a lot fewer than are actually killed or injured.
After all, the level of reporting is different at different times and different places.
But again, the key fact to remember here is that a natural disaster can't really be defined
just as about nature.
A natural disaster for our purposes is defined in this data as being about harm to people.
And that said, the data shows some interesting patterns over the last few decades.
For example, the number of natural disasters is trending up over time.
Their database has about 100 to 150 natural disasters per year in the late 1970s.
By 2010, it's more like in an average year about 400 to 450 natural disasters per year.
Again, this doesn't mean that physically speaking, there are more disasters.
Remember, natural disaster is defined in terms of its human effects.
So with the growth in world population, the growth in number of people living near the
coasts and thus exposed to hurricanes, the growth in the number of people living around
the Pacific Rim and thus exposed to earthquakes and tsunamis, you're going to see a growth
in natural disasters over time.
A second set of facts involve the number of people killed.
The number of people killed in natural disasters is extremely volatile from year to year.
In years with an extremely bad drought, in say, in Africa or Asia, or the 2004 tsunami
in the Indian Ocean that hit all sorts of countries all over Southeast Asia, you can
have 200,000 dead in a year, even 300,000.
In years when the world has mercifully spared titanic disasters of this type, instead maybe
it's 10,000 or 20,000 who die in that year.
But although there's a lot of volatility year to year, there is something of a downward
trend in the data.
In the late 1970s, about 100,000 to 150,000 people were dying on average each year in
natural disasters, and the average has fallen gradually over time, again with some big spikes.
From 2005 to 2010, the average number killed each year by natural disasters is more like
50,000 people per year.
Now this is interesting in that the media coverage of these deaths don't treat all deaths
from natural disasters as equivalent.
For example, earthquakes are a really good topic for media coverage, apparently, while
droughts are not.
One study found that for every person who dies in an earthquake, more than 19,000 people
must die of food shortages to receive the same expected media coverage, with other factors
like what part of the world and so on held equal.
So we're seeing more natural disasters, but at the same time on average a lower death toll.
That suggests something here is being done right, and we need to get into what might
be being done right later on.
A third set of facts refer to the total number of people affected by natural disasters.
This is also a volatile number over time, but it seems to in some ways be rising over
time.
In the late 1970s, there were under 100 million people affected each year by natural disasters.
By the first decade of the 21st century, it tended to be more like 300 million people
per year affected by natural disasters.
Droughts and storms or tidal waves tend to be the most deadly, however floods tend to
affect the most people.
Final measure of natural disasters is the amount of property damage that's done.
Over the last few decades, property damages often are around 50 or 100 billion dollars
a year.
In a really bad year, you can have up to about 200 billion dollars in property damage.
Other economic losses are also large, but it's hard to measure.
For example, imagine an earthquake or a flood or a hurricane is followed by a lot of relief
aid, which then goes into rebuilding.
It might look as if that area had a surge of economic activity, but this would clearly
be wrong to think that a natural disaster benefited you because you have to rebuild later.
Economists sometimes call this the broken window fallacy.
If I break a window, have I actually benefited the economy by creating jobs for those who
make glass and install new windows?
The answer is clearly no.
If you first destroy value and then buy it back, you don't come out ahead at the end
of the day.
This entangling whether an economy is really better off after a natural disaster or whether
it's just a broken windows issue of activity from rebuilding can be a tricky business.
Now I want to talk about the ways of addressing natural disasters, which can be broadly divided
into two categories, preparation and response.
Let's talk about preparation first.
One obvious preparation step to avoid damage from storms, floods, tidal waves and so on
is to warn people and evacuate.
It's so much easier to do this now than it was a few decades ago.
There have been major breakthroughs in weather satellites so you can watch things happening
in real time and also communications technology has improved so you can get through to people
much more easily.
Warnings and evacuations can be both a really good thing and on the other side also not
nearly enough.
Another example was Hurricane Katrina when it hit New Orleans in August 2005.
About 70 or 80% of the residents of New Orleans evacuated before the storm hit, but of course
it was still a horrible disaster with enormous flooding nearly 2,000 people dead.
If it hadn't been evacuated, it could have been even worse.
But for us the key question is, could it have been evacuated better?
The answer is yes, but it's always hard to get that last 10 or 20% of people out of their
homes.
Those last 10 or 20% are often those who have the fewest resources and the fewest places
to go.
It's comforting to know that the U.S. did better when Hurricane Rita approached Houston
the very next month in September 2005.
Texas evacuated more than 3 million people from the Houston area and part of the way
they did that was getting people out every way they could.
They sent buses around and they also had places for everybody to go.
What about evacuation in low income countries?
It can work there too.
The point there is you have to have a plan in place.
One example is Cyclone Sidur, which hit Bangladesh in November 2007.
It was an enormous storm, but you had 6 days of notice and Bangladesh already had a plan
in place, including 40,000 volunteers who already knew pretty much what to do.
They were able to issue a number of warnings and evacuate roughly 3 million people from
homes.
They had shelter space all set for 1.5 million people.
Now that Cyclone still caused more than 3,000 people dead in very high costs to property,
but the casualties were much lower than they would have been without that warning system.
An example of what can happen without sufficient warning was the huge tsunami that hit the
Indian Ocean in December 2004.
It killed almost a quarter of a million people.
Now in theory there is an early warning system for tidal waves, but it didn't yet cover that
part of the world very well and so there wasn't a whole lot of warning for people there.
Since then that system has been beefed up considerably and the hope is that you could
have evacuations happening before the next tsunami of that size.
But overall, weather information and disaster planning is really dirt cheap compared to the
costs of a natural disaster.
Indeed, it's worth doing a lot of this planning even in a world that didn't have any natural
disasters because you need weather information for all kinds of reasons and you can also
use disaster planning for all kinds of problems like industrial accidents or bridge collapses
or huge traffic accidents, a boat or a plane crash.
Planning these capabilities in place can be enormously helpful in lots of settings.
Another method of preparation to reduce the costs of natural disasters is through building
codes.
This works even with natural disasters that don't offer much warning and earthquakes sometimes
don't.
There's a long tradition of building codes out there.
For example, Hammurabi's code back in ancient Mesopotamia 1750 BC had building codes and
it's clear they can make a huge difference when natural disasters occur.
One reason there was so much greater destruction in the earthquake in Haiti compared to the
one in Chile was that Chile had building codes in place that really worked and buildings
were a lot less likely to come tumbling down as a result.
Building codes, however, face a big problem, especially in lower income countries which
is enforcement.
It often seems to be true in the aftermath of earthquakes that private sector buildings
remain standing, while public sector buildings which were more susceptible to graft in the
contracting process come down.
This process has been observed for a long time.
For example, in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, lots of the big private sector buildings stayed
up in 1906 and City Hall came down.
Similar stories were told after the earthquake in Sichuan in China in 2008.
School buildings collapsed, but commercial buildings that had gone up at the same time
didn't collapse.
Well, how do you do building codes in lower income countries that don't really have building
inspectors?
One potential model in the aftermath of the large earthquake of Pakistan in October 2005
was they knew something needed to be different.
That earthquake killed over 70,000 people and displaced another 3.5 million.
There was a huge rebuilding effort needed for maybe half a million homes or more.
There was a building code, but realistically, Pakistan didn't have the kind of functioning
government that was going to send out a bunch of impartial building inspectors throughout
the country and the government knew it.
So Pakistan took a different route.
It instead started classes that would teach earthquake resistant building techniques,
and they ran those classes for 300,000 people over the next three years.
Big tips for these classes are things like, have lighter ceilings and roofs so that when
they fall, they're less likely to injure people.
Use concrete block so that it crumbles during an earthquake instead of caving in.
They educated customers on good and bad building materials, and a later survey found that of
the 400,000 homes built after the quake, about 90% of them met a reasonable standard of safety.
Now of course, having 10% of those homes, 40,000 homes after all, not meeting the standards
isn't a good thing, but it's still an awful lot better than it might have been.
A final step in preparing for natural disasters is to value your natural buffers.
Areas that are susceptible to storms and flooding often have natural marshes and streams and
ponds and wetlands that can be filled in for development purposes, and when they are filled
in, they're not there to limit floods into buffer cities from weather.
Deforestation is another big problem, especially in low income countries.
You can chop down trees for many reasons, charcoal for fuel, wood for building materials,
to create grazing land for animals.
In Haiti, deforested hillsides meant that after the earthquake happened, there were
many more mudslides and greater destruction.
In fact, if you look at the island Haiti is on, Haiti is on one side of the island, the
Dominican Republic is on the other side.
The hillsides on the Haiti side are deforested.
The hillsides on the Dominican Republic side are green.
A deforestation, getting rid of your natural buffers makes drought worse.
It makes flooding worse.
It can turn earthquakes into landslide problems.
There are lots of sound environmental and economic reasons to prevent, protect wetlands
and to discourage deforestation, but protection from natural disasters is just one more justification
for doing so.
Now, preparation for natural disasters can help, but when a disaster hits, you still
need to respond and rebuild, and one hopes that some of your preparation and planning
is thinking about what that immediate response will look like.
Reacting to natural disasters can happen through insurance programs, either at the national
level or through international aid.
Now, for economists, when you're thinking about recovery after a disaster, you automatically
think about insurance.
I mean, after all, is an insurance a way to deal with risk?
But problems arise in thinking that way.
Think for example about some terrible storm that only happens once every 50 or 100 years.
People might not be willing to pay for insurance for decades and decades so that 50 years from
now or 100 years from now, they'll be covered when or they'll think if it ever hits.
Insurance companies would be in the awkward position of charging for years and years and
building up humongous reserves that they're only going to pay out once every 50 or 100
years.
This is probably not a business model that works very well in either economic or political
terms.
It's true that there are often pressures to buy insurance.
For example, in a U.S. context, banks typically require that when they give you a mortgage,
you have to buy home insurance.
A lot of people might not get home insurance otherwise.
But private markets don't provide insurance against the most enormous natural disasters.
In the U.S. we've had since the 1960s a national flood insurance program to provide government
backed insurance against floods.
If you live in an area defined as a flood risk, government effectively subsidizes the
provision of flood insurance.
It's worked fairly well over the years as a self-supporting agency with insurance premiums
coming in and losses being paid out.
But when Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005, it just blew an enormous hole in the balance
sheet.
Even a government backed insurance program wasn't able to prepare for a disaster of
that size.
You can encourage private insurance all you want, but at some point government probably
needs to step in to provide the ultimate coverage when natural disasters occur.
One interesting recent innovation is called the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility.
Basically, there's money from aid agencies in this insurance fund and also payments from
16 different countries.
Now, the fund itself isn't huge, but for example, after the Haiti earthquake, they were paid
$7 million out of that fund.
Small countries could buy insurance directly in that way.
Another national insurance approach is called a catastrophe bond.
To understand how it works, think about a standard corporate bond.
That is, a company sells the bond, it gets some money now, it uses that money to build
a factory or something like that, it pays interest to those who buy the bond, and eventually
it repays the principal.
Now, a catastrophe bond is just a bit different.
A country sells the bond, but it doesn't actually get any money right away.
Instead, it gets a promise that if there is a catastrophe, then it will get the money.
In the meantime, the country pays interest to the investors.
If there's no catastrophe, the country just pays interest and nothing happens.
That's of course what happens with insurance too.
But if there is a catastrophe, then there's this fund of money to draw on all of a sudden.
There have been efforts to do other things like issue bonds that are linked to weather.
If you have a good growing season, you pay back the bond.
If you have floods, maybe you don't need to pay back the bond in full.
There's a certain amount of experimentation with those kinds of tools.
International aid can also fill an important role after disasters occur, but it has some
shortcomings.
Historically, the US government is the single biggest source of disaster aid of the countries
in the world.
The countries of the European Union as a whole, however, do give more.
It's often crucial to get aid moving really quickly, but there are difficulties with that.
Here's an example from David Stromberg, an economist at Stockholm University in Sweden,
who tells a story of four floods that happened in 2001.
One flood in Poland had 30 people dead and affected 15,000 people.
They got $15 million in international aid.
A second flood in Brazil had 50 dead and affected another 2,000 people.
They didn't get 15 million, they got $230,000 in international aid.
Another flood that year in Angola had 50 dead and affected 40,000 people and they got $75,000
in international aid.
And yet another flood in Thailand that same year had 100 dead and 450,000 affected and
they got $25,000 in international aid.
The lesson that Stromberg and others teach is that international aid is typically given
according to some sense of closeness of the donor and the recipient country, where closeness
is measured by geography, colonial ties, common language, and also just what the ties have
been between people of those countries over time.
The amount given for disaster rate is also linked to media coverage and whether there's
a storyline, whether the world is paying attention.
One study found that disasters which happen at a time when the world media is already
busy, like during the Olympics, tend to get less international aid than others.
Now predicting future disasters isn't my line of work, but it's a safe bet that world
population is going to keep rising and keep clustering in vulnerable places.
Half the world's people now live in cities, up from 30% back in 1950, and most large and
rapidly growing cities in poor countries struggle to provide public services, including preventing
disasters or reacting to them after they've occurred.
I know we aren't going to stop, droughts, floods, earthquakes, hurricanes, tropical
cyclones, tornadoes, tidal waves, and all the rest of what Mother Nature can throw at us.
But the damage that natural disasters do to people and to property is not just a matter
of fate.
In many ways, the ultimate effects of any natural disaster will be strongly influenced
by a set of economic questions, and in turn, these involve making the socially appropriate
investments in advanced planning and in preparing for a rapid response.
