America's Declaration of Independence famously refers to people having inalienable rights,
and among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
This was an idea in the air around the 18th century.
The great utilitarian philosopher and economist Jeremy Bentham famously argued in 1776 that
the greatest happiness of the greatest number is the foundation of all morals and legislation.
It's worth noting for a moment what a radical idea this idea of happiness was then and now.
He was not saying the happiness of royalty counted more than peasants.
Not saying the happiness of the rich counted more than the poor.
Not saying the happiness of men counted more than that of women.
Not saying the happiness of prisoners could be ignored.
Or saying that any ethnic or racial or geographic group was left out.
This is not a guarantee that anyone or everyone will get happiness, of course.
Just saying that everyone counts equally in morals and legislation.
This idea of the pursuit of happiness seems linked to some basic ideas in economics, like
the notion that people are pursuing their own self-interest.
But we know the pursuit of happiness can be a very tricky business.
Happiness can be short-term or long-term, and sometimes those might conflict with each other.
My happiness might come from stealing from you or imposing costs on you.
We might have trouble coordinating with each other, or we might run with a herd thinking
that we're pursuing happiness, but end up going over a cliff.
Given everything that can go wrong with the pursuit of happiness, and more broadly what
can go wrong in a market economy or in government programs, some economists and social scientists
have gone with a simpler idea.
Let's just measure if people are actually happy.
How might we think about doing this?
Well back in the second half of the 19th century, as social science disciplines of economics
and psychology began to emerge, there was some hope that science would someday be able
to measure happiness directly.
There was an area of study at that time called psychophysics, and they did experiments like
having people stand blindfolded, slowly add weights to their hands, and the people would
say how heavy it felt.
For example, they found out that as you have more and more weight in your hands, you don't
notice quite as much when additional weight is added, and they hoped in time to be able
to measure happiness directly.
Famous economist Francis Edgeworth wrote in 1881 about a machine, a hypothetical machine,
called a headnimeter for measuring the level of happiness.
His idea was people could be hooked up to this machine, and he says you could imagine
a piece of paper scrolling by.
These days, of course, it would be a line on a computer screen, and it would show on
a continual basis how happy you are.
Edgeworth wrote, from moment to moment, the headnimeter varies, the delicate index now
flickering with the flutter of the passions now steadied by intellectual activity, low
sunk whole hours in the neighborhood of zero, or momentarily springing upwards towards infinity.
But a true headnimeter for measuring happiness was never actually invented.
In modern brain science research, there's some hope they could find a way of measuring
happiness through brain activity, that however that ends up turning out, economics has gone
down something of a different path.
Rather than trying to measure happiness directly, it tends to infer happiness from people's
actions.
When people make a voluntary decision to buy or sell, they are in effect saying they're
happier making that exchange.
When consumers react to a higher price by buying somewhat less, or a lower price by buying
somewhat more, you can get a sense of what happiness value they're placing on the things
that they buy.
The same occurs when people react to higher or lower wages, or higher or lower interest
rates.
Most of the edifice of modern economics was built on what people call revealed preference,
an idea formalized by the famous economist Paul Samuelson in the middle of the 20th century,
which basically says we aren't going to measure preferences directly, but we're going to see
people's preferences revealed by the actions that they take in the market.
To be a little more blunt about it, this approach has come down in time as saying, don't trust
whether people tell you they're happy.
Surveys might lie, people don't necessarily think about these things.
If they tell you a clean environment makes them happy, but they buy cars and consumer
products that lead to a dirty environment, their happiness is about what they do, not
about what they say.
This is a bit in some ways like the perspective we explored about addiction, here looking
at choices more generally, that what people do is what we should really trust, is that
what they want.
But this perspective from economists hasn't stopped survey researchers from asking about
happiness.
There's now survey data on happiness for many countries around the world over the last
few decades, and economists have begun to dig into that survey research in their own
way.
In the United States, the most often used survey data on happiness comes from the National
Opinion Research Center, an organization based at the University of Chicago.
One of its surveys, the General Social Survey, is funded by the National Science Foundation,
and it asks lots of questions about all sorts of stuff.
But starting back in 1972, the General Social Survey has always asked, taken all together,
how would you say things are these days?
Would you say you are very happy, pretty happy, or not too happy?
And before that, there are similar surveys going back to the 1940s, done by the American
Institute for Public Opinion and the Gallup Poll in some cases.
There's also international data on happiness levels, available through something called
the World Values Survey, through international Gallup Polls, and in some cases through surveys
done by specific countries.
The World Values Survey, for example, is conducted by a network of academics around
the world every few years.
It covers more than 80 countries that include about 85% of the world's population.
The Gallup Poll Organization does a world poll.
In 2006, for example, Gallup did a world poll using samples in 132 countries, where you
are supposed to rate your life satisfaction on a scale from 0 to 10.
And some individual countries do this as well.
Haiti has a happiness survey going back to 1985.
A 2010 study using the German data, which is done by an economist named Bruce Haiti
at the University of Melbourne, found that happiness depends substantially on life choices
like your spouse having a desired work-life balance, pursuing altruistic and family goals,
and involvement in social community and religious activities.
The basic pattern from this kind of international data is that countries that have higher incomes
and less poverty, and also countries that are smaller and thus tend to have more homogeneity,
tend to rank higher in happiness surveys.
For example, Denmark is often very near the top of these surveys, as is Switzerland.
The U.S. tends to rank about 20th, and the lowest countries in terms of happiness are
ones you might expect, like Zimbabwe in recent years, where the economy and the government
and public health all seem to be melting down.
It's possible to get more immediate data about happiness than this national level data.
One approach involves having people carry around a little handheld computer that prompts
you several times a day to report on what you're doing and how happy it makes you.
These are sometimes called the experience sampling method, and studies like this have
been done since the mid-1990s.
You get a set of menus on your computer, your location, your activity, who you're doing
it with, what feelings you're having, how strong these feelings are.
In a way, this all begins to sound a little bit like the headnimeter from long ago, doesn't
it?
In the last few years, there's also been studies using what's called the day reconstruction
method.
At the end of the day, you select activities from a list.
You say when you did them where, with whom, how you felt, and you ranked the strength
of your various feelings.
You can get some very fine-grained detail this way about happiness with specific experiences.
Through the day, mornings, afternoons, all sorts of different patterns.
Why do economists do with his work about happiness?
Well, a lot of the economic work on happiness starts with the work of an economist named
Richard Easterlin, who spent much of his early career at the University of Pennsylvania,
but has been out at the University of Southern California the last few decades.
Easterlin wrote a paper back in 1974 in which he pointed out that the average level of happiness
was not increasing over the decades, even as the economy grows.
In one of his papers, he pointed out that Japan's average level of happiness reported
in the survey data didn't rise between 1958 and 1987, even though Japan had explosive
economic growth over that time.
Incomes in Japan over that 30-year period quintupled.
Since then, this general pattern continues to be true.
There's lots of evidence about it in other countries.
Japan also pointed out that at a certain point in time, those with high incomes consistently
report greater happiness than those with lower incomes, and these patterns taken together
all raise a question.
If greater consumption raises happiness, shouldn't average happiness be rising over time as an
economy grows?
Or is it true that happiness, mainly, is just relative to being better off than others?
Some have interpreted this second piece of evidence to argue that economic growth doesn't
bring happiness.
In other words, if we just didn't have economic growth, we would all be reporting just about
the same level of happiness as we've been reporting with it.
But there is an alternative explanation.
When someone says their average happy this year, and someone else says their average
level of happiness in 1970, that doesn't mean the person in 1970 wouldn't be happy having
all the stuff from the present, or the person from this year would be happy going back to
the standard of living in 1970.
Compared to the past, the economy is much larger.
There's all sorts of new technology, larger houses, more education and healthcare, longer
lives.
Some of the most noxious forms of air and water pollution have been reduced or cleaned up.
What seems to happen in happiness surveys is that people answer them in the context of
a certain place and time, and they adapt their expectations to that place and time.
Now let's hold on to this idea that happiness levels adapt to changing circumstances, because
we'll be coming back to it in a moment or two.
If you look at international data, the data of happiness of people in high income countries
and low income countries at a point in time seems to show that as you get to richer and
richer countries, there is no evidence that the increase in income at any point stops
making people happier.
Of course it takes more money to raise the happiness of a rich person than a poor one,
but in proportional terms the effect is fairly similar.
For example, a 10% increase in income seems to give about the same increase in happiness,
whether it's from a base of a country that has $40,000 in economic output per person
or $10,000 per person or $2,000 per person.
The fact that average happiness doesn't rise over time is evidence that people adapt to
changes.
It doesn't mean people don't want those changes.
Now these patterns of adaptation can be pretty extreme.
There was a classic study in the 1970s which looked at extreme life events like winning
the lottery or becoming a paraplegic, and they looked at happiness data from those sorts
of people.
In both cases they found the event caused a change in reported happiness in the short
run.
It was also found a year or two down the road, you were largely back to the original level
of happiness before the event had occurred.
People adapt.
Similarly, happiness tends to rise in the year just before marriage and in the first
year of marriage, but then it returns mostly, maybe not completely, to the previous level
after that honeymoon period.
Certain other life happenings like unemployment or chronic pain adapt some, but they don't
fully adapt back to the earlier level.
There's actually a basic lesson here that a lot of us know from our own lives.
Some people are basically pretty happy, and they have some ups and downs, but outside
of extreme events like prolonged unemployment or chronic pain, they basically stay happy.
Other people are basically not so happy, and they may have ups and downs, but they seem
to go back to being unhappy.
Back to their earlier level.
Now, someone who is deeply unhappy might think, oh, if I could just get X, if I could just
get Y, that's all I need, and then I would be happy.
But unfortunately, that's probably wrong.
Something deeper has to change in your mindset if you want to move from being consistently
unhappy to consistently happy.
And there's some evidence from these kinds of happiness surveys that you can fight the
process of adaptation by keeping a time diary, a diary which is focused on things you could
be grateful for, a gratitude journal.
You essentially count your blessings, and if you do that over and over, it can actually
make you a happier person, in a sense you're more likely to answer that you're happy in
survey data.
Another difficulty with using happiness data is that reported happiness can vary according
to whether the survey asks about an event before it happened, when it happened, or after
it happened.
For example, there's some studies here that involve listening to political debates with
a dial.
You can turn the dial to positive or negative about your different responses as you listen.
So at the end, you can look at the overall continual response, and at the end, you ask
people for their overall reaction.
You compare the overall reaction to what was continuously reported while the debate went
on.
What you find is there's not a big connection between these two.
People's overall impression tends to be what they were thinking at the very end of the
debate, not so much what might have happened in the beginning, in the middle.
In healthcare, there are studies of men getting a colonoscopy, one of those necessary but
uncomfortable things, and afterwards they had men rate the discomfort that they went
through.
Now, everyone had a colonoscopy in this experiment, but for half the group, when the exam was
over, they just waited 60 seconds and didn't do anything before taking out the scope.
The movement of the scope is what causes most of the physical discomfort.
If the scope isn't moving around, it's not so bad.
So what tends to happen, remember, is that people remember the most recent event.
It turns out that those who had a colonoscopy and had the extra minute of nothing happening
would report later that the colonoscopy was less unpleasant.
And that's important because then they were more willing to have another one in the future
when it was needed.
There have been other studies that focus on before and after too.
For example, one study done before the 2005 Super Bowl, which was the Philadelphia Eagles
and the New England Patriots, asked a bunch of Philadelphia fans how they would feel if
they lost, and then afterwards they asked how they did feel when they had actually lost.
A similar study before the 2008 election asked a group of McCain supporters how upset will
you be if Obama wins, and soon afterwards asked how upset they actually were.
Well it's worth remembering here what we said in our earlier lectures about myopia.
In general, people are not that great at predicting how they will feel.
Often, the pattern in these kinds of studies is that people predict they will feel terribly,
terribly bad, but then, when what they'll feel bad about actually happens, they report
it doesn't actually bother them all that much in the long term.
Now, this is difficult for studies of happiness because you have to answer the question, what
matters most?
What if people say they'll be really upset if something happens, but we know from experience
they probably won't be?
What if people are upset when something actually happens and the event seems pretty bad?
But we know from experience that in the future, it won't really matter to them all that much
because they'll adapt.
Should we focus on the real-time measure as the one that's important, or on some mixture
of expectation of what happened in real-time and what happens in memory?
I have no good answer to this question, but thinking about how people focus on what's
really important is crucial to thinking about how you will evaluate happiness data.
Happiness studies allow looking at a variety of events, times and places, and comparing
the level of happiness at those different times and places.
Let me mention a few examples, and of course I can't quite resist offering some interpretations
here and there.
When you look at diaries of happiness, what you tend to find is that leisure and social
activities rank quite high.
People tend to give the lowest happiness rankings when they're engaged in market work.
Jobs with the greatest happiness rankings are often jobs that involve helping others,
and those would be jobs like clergy, firefighters and physical therapists.
Jobs ranking lowest are often people who do things like food prep or being waiters.
Often people who do roofing work often report very high levels of unhappiness.
Other low happiness activities are dealing with financial issues or house cleaning.
Also people really downright hate commuting to their job, especially heading to work in
the morning.
Some patterns like this make intuitive sense to me, some don't make quite as much sense.
For example, one that makes sense is that African Americans in general are more happy.
There used to be a huge happiness gap between African Americans and the rest of the population
in the early 1970s.
There's still some gap, but it's much smaller now, and that makes sense to me given changes
in America's racial climate over the decades.
On the other hand, women in general report less happiness now than they used to back
in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Obviously, the status of women has changed in many ways over those decades, but I tend
to think of the changes as fundamentally positive.
More options about work and marriage, more options about motherhood and when or if to
become a parent.
Happiness status suggests these greater possibilities have also brought a high level of stress,
which comes out when women are asked if they're happy.
Another unexpected pattern, at least to me, is that when people have kids, their reported
happiness tends to fall, and when the kids leave home, their reported happiness tends
to rise.
People with teenage kids seem more unhappy.
Another unexpected finding, at least somewhat unexpected, you might think that older people
are less happy because after all, they're past what we sometimes call the prime of life.
But leaving this issue of kids aside, there's some evidence that most people follow a U-shaped
happiness pattern during their life.
They're happy when they're young adults, they're less happy in their 30s and 40s,
and then after that, they become happier.
The Economist magazine ran a cover story on this phenomenon in late 2010.
Their cover story was called Life Begins at 46.
Just to be clear, while the specific yearly low point varies a lot across people and places,
this general U-shaped pattern of happiness holds strongly over time.
It holds for different people born at different times and different generations over the 40
or so years of data we've got.
It holds for people with kids and without kids.
It holds in international data.
It holds for high income countries and low income countries.
Again, the exact lowest point in the U-shaped varies, but this pattern of U-shaped happiness
over one's lifetime does seem to be a fairly robust pattern.
Why is it that people get happier as they age?
Well, a lot of it seems to be a better ability to manage your emotional state.
Again, happiness isn't so much about what's happening to you, but about yourself and how
you react to it.
This is sort of a cheerful result for those of us on the other side of our 40s.
Maybe that describes you as well as me.
And for those in their late 30s and early 40s feeling grim about life, we can say that
on average, at least, you will feel better about it in the future.
In these kinds of studies, there are lots of quirky stuff as well that affects happiness.
For example, one study asked people to fill out a happiness survey, but before doing so,
it asked them to photocopy something.
When the people went off to the photocopy machine, half of the people found a dime sitting
on the machine, and they typically took it and kept it.
Those people, with their dime, reported higher satisfaction with life on the survey.
Similarly, weather influences happiness surveys.
And you can push a happiness result up or down by asking about good events first or
bad events first.
There's a lot of work being done on happiness issues.
That said, I think all of this work faces an unavoidable limitation, which is that the
goal of happiness itself probably isn't a sufficient way of phrasing the goal that most
people really have for their lives.
Let's reflect together for a moment on the question, are you pursuing happiness?
Think of the activities in your life, work, friends, marriage, parenthood, community.
Is happiness the right description for what you seek in those areas?
Definitions of happiness in dictionaries tend to use terms like contentment, joy and pleasure.
The problem is there are a lot of ways of getting contentment, and a lot of possible
roads to travel.
Some of those roads can be a little bit rocky along the way.
I mean, if you ever wondered if your life might be happier if you found a job that was
simpler and had less responsibility, maybe you could just do your job and spend as much
of your income on entertainment and travel as possible, or maybe on trying to help others.
When you think about going through dating and marriage with all the ups and downs along
the way, it seems reasonable to ask, is this really about my happiness?
When you think about parenthood, sure it can be a source of contentment, joy and pleasure,
but when you're neck deep in helping a child through an infinitely long science project
some evening, or some even harder problem, is it really about your happiness there?
A lot of days, if you were to ask me if my day was a happy one, it might be hard for
me to say yes.
I had too much to do, I didn't feel like it got done well, at the end of it all I'm
tired.
Sure, I try to have a sense of humor about it, but if someone said rank your happiness
on a scale from one to ten, I might not give a very high number, or the number might vary
a lot according to other, fairly trivial influences.
These sorts of questions matter for economics and economic policy, because they go to the
question of in what ways or how much should we pay attention to the results from happiness
research when we think about public policy.
Government by survey, especially a survey based on the word happiness, seems fraught
with difficulties.
Maybe the best known example here is from the country of Bhutan, it's a country with
fewer than one million people, but they have announced that as their official policy, instead
of having gross domestic product, or GDP, they will measure gross happiness product.
Now this is one of those proposals that makes economists roll their eyes a bit, because it
involves so much conceptual confusion, it's almost hard to figure out.
The idea of gross happiness, not GDP, is a bit like saying for weather reports, let's
not do statistics on temperature and precipitation and humidity in storms, let's just measure
if the weather is good or not.
Now there is some value to this, it's good not to focus on a single statistic.
Gross domestic product is clearly inadequate as a measure of national well-being, in fact
any single measure is going to be inadequate.
There's nothing wrong with having a lot of different complementary statistics, including
statistics on the environment, health, education, workplace, leisure and others.
Indeed the U.S. government and many others do what are called satellite accounts, that
is they publish statistics on economic output and they also put together statistics on
environment, infrastructure, health, education and so on, and they leave it up to people
who are reading these statistics.
Do you want to try and combine these with economic output or not?
After all, reality is multi-dimensional, statistics can be multi-dimensional too.
From this point of view, there's certainly nothing wrong with having some measure included
which would be a survey measure of subjective well-being added to the rest of the pile.
Certain national governments, including the United Kingdom and Australia, are committed
to producing national measures of subjective well-being in this spirit as a satellite and
a supplement to more conventional economic statistics.
But as you do that, it's important to remember measures of happiness are inadequate in a
different way as well.
Happiness as a general concept is so broad and uncertain that it's just not clear what's
being captured by that measure.
Also survey data in many countries is tricky to interpret.
Call me a cynic, but if the people of Bhutan report in a survey that they are incredibly
happy, how much do I trust that?
I don't mean to pick on Bhutan, I'd probably trust a survey in Bhutan ahead of a lot of
places, but still, you just have to always wonder about survey data.
Happiness, at least as that idea is captured in survey data, is probably too shallow a
concept to represent what most people hope to really achieve in their lives.
This has long been recognized, of course.
Back in the world of the 18th and 19th century philosophers and economists like John Stuart
Mill, they wrote about utilitarianism, this idea of the greatest happiness of the greatest
number.
And John Stuart Mill made an extended argument that pleasure wasn't enough.
He said, for example, we wouldn't agree to be a dog because dogs are so happy, or we
wouldn't agree to be someone who is happy because they have no conscience.
Mill wrote, it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied.
It is better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.
The modern economist and philosopher who's probably considered these questions most deeply
is Amartya Sen, who won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1998.
Sen pioneered the idea of thinking about economic development, not in terms of gross domestic
product, but in terms of what he called functional capabilities.
How much education do you have?
Health.
Is your work interesting?
What are your leisure and recreation opportunities?
Your freedom?
Your personal autonomy?
Your opportunities for participation in public life, family life, spiritual life, and more.
This idea of capabilities gets away from thinking about economic output as the main goal of
society, but it also avoids depending just on survey data about whether people say they're
happy or not.
In fact, Sen's work inspired work from the United Nations Development Office called the
Human Development Index, which has now been compiled since 1990.
The Human Development Index gives a multi-dimensional view and an ongoing reminder that you should
look not just at output, but at education and health and other statistics.
For example, here's a comment from the Human Development Index report in 2010.
Human development is the expansion of people's freedoms to live long, healthy, and creative
lives.
To advance other goals they have reason to value, and to engage actively in shaping
development equitably and sustainably on a shared planet.
And so, as we finish our time together, I do not wish you happiness, at least not exactly,
but rather I wish you that you experience a further flowering of your functional capabilities.
I hope I've persuaded you that a number of unexpected subjects are actually at the heart
of economics.
The economy is a subject area that has a lot of overlap with economics, but economics
isn't the economy.
Business and financial investing are also areas that have considerable overlap with economics,
but economics is much more than business and finance.
Before you started these lectures, the topics you saw might not have seemed much like economics,
things like religious participation, crime, marriage, and parenthood, cooperation, charity,
voting, natural disasters, and others, but top level economists have been working on
these sorts of issues for decades.
Nobel Prizes have been one for work in these fields.
For modern economists, the subjects of these lectures are not the fringe of studying economics,
but along with a number of other topics, they really are genuinely near the center of the
field.
Further, I hope I've given you a sense that when economics is at its best, it has an
ecumenical and open-minded spirit.
After all, along with economic insights, these lectures have also drawn on psychology, history,
political science, philosophy, brain science, statistics, game theory, and all sorts of
other areas.
At its best, economics will seek out and embrace evidence from unexpected sources, because
at its best, all of economics is rooted in seeking to understand the decisions of actual
human beings, and how those decisions interact in the world around us.
Finally, I hope I've persuaded you that economics has some unexpected insights across many
of these subjects, insights that may be able to inform your own thinking, both now and
in years to come, as all of us grapple for understanding with the world around us.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
