Think of someone that you know.
It might be a friend of yours, it might be a relative, or it might be a colleague at
the office.
Got that person in mind?
Now think of someone that this person knows that you don't know very well.
This might be a friend of a friend, a relative of a relative, or a colleague at the office
old colleague.
Now that you've got that person in mind, and I know it's tough, I want you to think
about a third person.
Think of someone that that second person knows that you might not know at all, or you barely
know at all.
Your friend's cousin's roommate, for example, or your colleague's sister's boyfriend.
Could that person's behavior influence your own behavior?
Could what that person does affect what you end up doing?
Quite simply, you might think the answer is no.
Of course not.
I've barely interacted with this person.
How could that person affect my behavior?
But let's think about a behavior like quitting smoking, for example.
When researchers looked at whether or not people quit smoking, they found that people
were 36% more likely to quit if other people, if their friend, had quit, someone that they
were personally tied to.
And this makes a lot of sense.
If you smoke, and you have a friend that smokes, and you guys are smoking buddies, and you
often go smoke together, then if they quit, you don't have a buddy anymore.
You don't have anybody to go smoking with.
So you might be more likely to quit yourself.
But interestingly, it doesn't stop there.
Sure people are more likely to quit if their friend quits, but that second person, that
friend of a friend, is also affecting their behavior.
People are not as likely to quit as if their friend had quit, but they're still about
29% more likely to quit if a friend of a friend quits.
And that third degree of separation, that has less of an impact, but it still has an impact.
People are about 10% more likely to quit if a friend of a friend of a friend quits.
Or let's think about obesity, gaining a lot of weight.
Well, people are about 60% more likely to become obese if a friend becomes obese.
And that, again, makes sense.
If you have a friend that loves going to the local buffet, and they drag you along, and
you guys are buffet buddies, then if they become obese, you're going to become obese, too.
You're getting the same thing together through social influence.
But it spreads even further.
Beyond that friend influence of your behavior, a friend of a friend can also affect your behavior.
People are 20% more likely to become obese if a friend of a friend becomes obese.
And it even spreads to a third degree.
People are 10% more likely to become obese if a friend of a friend of a friend becomes
obese.
And so put simply, your friend's husband's coworker might make you fat, and your sister's
friend's boyfriend might make you thin.
Why?
Why might someone who you have no connection to actually impact your behavior?
So far, we've talked a lot about individual psychology, or how people perceive and remember
things.
And we've also talked a bit about social influence, or when and why one person's behavior
might influence another's.
But in these final set of three lectures, we'll get a bit more macro, a bit larger, and we'll
think about the channels through which information and influence spread.
In this section, we'll talk about the power of social networks, we'll talk about what
social networks are and how they shape the spread of information, and we'll talk about
different types of ties and how those types of ties impact what people share, the jobs
we get, and their life more broadly.
To begin to think about this question of social networks, I want you to think about a website
called the Oracle of Bacon.
No, it's not bacon the food, though an oracle of bacon the food would be delicious.
But Kevin Bacon, the actor, and what you can do on this website is type in the name of
any actor or actress that you like and see the shortest path between them and prolific
Hollywood actor Kevin Bacon.
If an actor or actress has been in the same movie with Kevin Bacon, for example, then
their bacon number is one.
They're one degree of separation away from Kevin Bacon.
Take Tom Cruise, for example.
He was in A Few Good Men with Kevin Bacon, so his bacon number is one.
If an actor or actress has not been in a movie with Kevin Bacon, then the site finds the
closest number of hops between them.
Will Smith, for example, has never been in a movie with Kevin Bacon, but he was in Welcome
to Hollywood with actress Jane Jenkins, who was in Apollo 13, with Kevin Bacon.
So Will Smith is not directly connected, but he's two steps away.
Will Smith's bacon number is two.
In general, the site describes the number of degrees of separation any or actor or actress
is away from Kevin Bacon, or really any actor or actress at all.
So let's say you wanted to find somebody that was further away from Kevin Bacon, even more
than two degrees, say three degrees or four degrees.
How would you do it?
How would you think about something that's further away in social space?
Well, you might start by thinking about distance.
What makes an actor further away?
Maybe something like an international actor.
After all, a Bollywood star or a French actress probably hasn't been in as many U.S. movies,
and so might not have as many ties with Kevin Bacon.
Take Gerard Depardieu, for example.
He's mostly appeared in French films, so you might think he's further away.
Nope, his bacon number is also two.
He was in Bogus with Frankie Medrano, who was in Sleepers with Kevin Bacon.
Well, okay, let's try a different dimension.
How about the number of movies that someone has been in?
Maybe if they haven't been in very many movies, just a couple, then it would be tougher for
their bacon number to be very high.
There wouldn't be many connections.
Take Miley Cyrus, for example.
She's more known for her music than for acting skills.
She hasn't done more than a handful of films, so she should be further away, right?
Well, no, no again.
Miley's bacon number is two.
She was in Big Fish with Allison Lohman, who was in Where the Truth Lies with Kevin Bacon.
What about time?
What if we pick an actor from a long, long time ago?
It's unlike they overlapped with Kevin Bacon, so maybe that distance on a different dimension,
not geography, but time, might lead that number to be higher.
Take actress Mary Pickford, for example.
She was one of the earliest actresses and helped found the Academy of Motion Picture,
Arts and Sciences.
She seems far away from bacon.
And indeed, if you look at that website, she is.
Pickford has a bacon number of three.
She was in Coquette with Louise Beavers, who was in All the Fine Young Cannibals with
Robert Wagner, who was in The Wild Things with Kevin Bacon.
Now, this game is a lot of fun.
If it's a rainy day and you're looking for something to do or you're looking for something
to do at the office, play around at the website.
It's a lot of fun.
But it's more than that, because this website gives you a bit of intuition behind networks.
As we've been talking about, networks are composed of nodes.
In this case, a node is an actor or an actress, and the ties or connections between those
nodes.
In this case, whether two people appeared in the same movie together.
Depending on the pattern of ties, certain nodes are closer and others are further away.
Two people that work together on the same movie and are more closely connected, for
example, than two people that did not.
And two people who worked on completely different movies should be further away than people
who worked on similar films.
Now, social networks aren't exactly the same, but they're very similar.
They're composed of nodes and of connections between those nodes.
Take online social media networks, for example.
Well, they're composed of people or nodes who are friends or at least know one another.
You could take those same nodes, though, and draw a completely different set of connections.
If ties represented people that work together, for example, well, the network might look
a little different.
Or if ties represented people that have ever talked on the phone, the network might look
different as well.
Some people have many friends, might have few work colleagues, and vice versa, so the patterns
might look a bit different.
When we think about networks, there are a few key characteristics to keep in mind.
One is popularity, or the number of ties that people have.
Certain actors, for example, might be in lots of movies with lots of other actors, while
other actors might be in few movies with fewer actors.
The same can be said for online social networks.
Some people have more ties or friends, while other people have few.
Or offline networks as well.
Some people have many offline connections, and others have few.
Not just popularity, though, another measure is position.
Certain people, for example, are more central in their network, while others are more on
the periphery.
If you think about who is most connected in the Kevin Bacon game, for instance, Kevin
Bacon isn't even the most central actor in the network.
He doesn't even make the top 100.
People like Dennis Hopper and Karen Black are actually more central.
And what central means is they're more connected to more connected people in the network.
It's almost like living in the suburbs versus living in the city.
Other people in the network are in the middle of it all.
They're very connected to other people that are very connected.
There are few hops to get from them to any other place in the network.
And even beyond the sheer number, again, some areas of the network are more densely connected
than others.
If all of your friends are friends with all of your other friends, then one might say
that your network is densely connected.
This means that a piece of information can travel from one person you know to another
person you know very quickly.
It's just one short hop.
They know each other.
But if your network is less densely connected, it takes longer for information to get around
because it requires more hops.
Two people don't know each other.
They have to go through you or someone else in the network for information to get there.
Think for just a moment about your own social network.
What's your friends do you think have the most social ties?
How dense or interconnected are those social ties?
And are there certain pockets with high interconnections within but low connections between other
parts of the network?
This is often what social networks look like.
They're divided into different spheres of social life.
Our work colleagues, for example, might be densely interconnected to one another.
But they're over in one place where our friends or college friends are densely connected somewhere
else.
And there are very few ties or links between those two groups.
Similarly, while people from our last job might all know each other, none of them know
people at our current job who all know each other as well.
That changes, though, depending on certain characteristics.
For example, if people live in the same town they grew up in, their networks more likely
overlap.
If you went to college or in the same city where you work now or you work in a small industry
where people often move around, those interconnections between those two groups may be more frequent.
The networks start to overlap and are more densely connected.
So far in the course, we've focused on item characteristics.
We've talked about how a certain idea might be more contagious or more likely to spread
based on the characteristics of that idea itself.
It'll be more likely to spread throughout a group or social networks based on it and
its own characteristics.
But for things to catch on broadly, social network structure matters as well.
If there's no link between two people, for example, it's impossible for a piece of information
to spread from that one person to another.
It's very difficult for that one person to influence that other person.
Even if they're tied by two other people, the information can eventually get around.
But if there's no connection, it's impossible to make it work.
When I teach a group of students, for example, I often ask them what it would take for information
to go from our small class to make it to a totally different university.
Say for example, we wanted information from our class to get to Columbia University.
I ask if anyone in the class knows someone at Columbia, and I ask them to raise their
hand.
Inevitably, 10 or so hands go up.
And what that means is for information from our class to make it to that other group of
people, one of those 10 people needs to share it.
If they don't pass it on, it's going to be very difficult to make it to the other group.
Now notice this is not necessarily the most popular person or the best position in the
network, but they're key in this particular example.
For this information to spread in this case, they're a useful node in the network.
In other cases, I pick a different group.
Imagine we want the information to get, let's say, the University of British Columbia.
Well, who knows someone there?
In my class, a few hands go up, but it's always less than four Columbia University.
Now both have the word Columbia in it, but one's in New York, one's much further away
in Canada.
People have fewer social ties usually between the US and Canada.
Well, now these people in my class become very important, the ones that know someone
in this far away university, someone in Vancouver.
They become very important for the transmission of information.
If these people don't share, the information will never make it.
They might be the same people that got that information originally to the different university
or they might be a different set of people.
But depending on who they are, they're very influential in that information spreading.
In a sense then, network ties are the bridges that help information get off different islands.
We can think about those groups in our social network, our work group and our friends group
or our home group and our college group as different networks or areas of the world,
different geographies or islands of dense connections.
And if there are bridges between those connections, us, for example, or other friends, we can
carry information and influence from one group to another.
If something is very popular as caught on in one group, we or someone else can carry
that new product or idea to a different group.
But again, going back to that earlier question, is it possible to connect any two people in
the world?
We thought about actors, for example, if we picked Kevin Bacon, could he be connected
to any other actor or actress?
Or say in the actual world itself, imagine I picked someone in a far off country.
For example, like India or Kazakhstan, could I connect you to them by your social ties?
Are there actually paths that would do it?
Well, you might think no.
First, people don't know everyone.
We don't necessarily know people in that other country.
And second, there's not enough time, not enough time for the thing to get from one place to
another.
And third, there's so much geographic distance.
How could we get it from our place here to someplace that far away?
We think it's unlikely that it might happen.
Well, one of the first studies to look at how information spreads did something very similar
to this.
His name was Stanley Milgram, and we know him for his famous shock study where he shocked
people to look at the power of obedience and conformity.
But Stanley Milgram has also done some interesting research about social networks.
And his study that he did is called the Small World Study.
He was interested in whether any one person could be connected to any other person in
the world.
And if so, how many intermediary steps or hops it would take?
Just like connecting Kevin Bacon to another actor, how many steps would it take to connect
any two people in the world?
One possibility is that it's impossible.
The two groups are totally unconnected.
There's no way to get information from one to another.
Another possibility is possible, but it takes very long chains.
Well, to find out, Milgram gave packets to randomly selected people in Omaha, Nebraska,
and Wichita, Kansas.
And in the packet was a chain letter of sorts and information about a target person to get
that letter to in Boston, Massachusetts.
And he picked Boston because at the time in the late 60s, Boston was pretty far away from
the Midwest.
And he wasn't sure that people could get the packet from one place to another.
Now, if recipients personally knew that target, it was easy.
They could just send the packet directly to them.
But if not, that recipient of the letter, the person who lived in Wichita or Omaha,
was asked to put their name on the list within the packet and then think of a friend or relative
they knew personally who might know the target and forward the letter to them.
In a sense, he was trying to figure out how many hops it would take.
This new recipient, in turn, was asked the same set of questions.
You've now received this letter.
There's this person in Boston.
How can you get it there?
Who would you send it to that might get it there in the fewest number of ties?
That second person knew the eventual target.
They sent it directly.
If not, they added their name to the list and forward it along.
Now, while not all the letters reached their final destinations, of those that did, it
took about six degrees of separation, about five and a half or six degrees to go from
one person to the end person.
And that suggests that it's a pretty small world, that it's actually possible to go
from one end of the country, one part of the country, to another with only six steps.
Now, one interesting question is given the number of friends that people have, why did
it take the letter so long to get there?
I mean, if everyone knows 500 people, for example, and each of those people knows an
additional 500 and so on, wouldn't it more than cover the population of the United States
in four degrees of separation?
Why did it take a full five or six to get there?
Well, the first issue is that people may not know the shortest path.
While a computer like the Oracle of Bacon or an algorithm can figure out the quickest
connection between two actors or two people, we don't have that bird's eye view of our
own networks.
We may know 500 people who know 500, but we don't necessarily know which of the people
we know knows other people that might be helpful.
There might be someone we know who actually knows the end target, but if we don't realize
it, we're not going to pick the fastest path.
This is similar to the question of finding a contact at a company.
Say you wanted to connect to someone at Coca-Cola.
If you know someone who works there, it's easy.
Just call them up on the phone and you talk to them.
But if you don't know someone, you have to guess which of your social ties is most likely
to know someone there.
And you might be wrong.
This is one of the benefits of these social network sites like LinkedIn.
Rather than having to guess who our ties are connected to and who they're connected to,
the site easily maps the fastest path, letting us see the desired outcome more easily, letting
us find the shortest route.
Beyond knowledge, though, it's not just that.
Another reason the paths are so long is because not all connections are independent.
Sure, you may know 500 people, and each of your friends may know 500 people, but those
two sets of 500 are not completely distinct.
They're actually overlapping.
For most of the people you know, you know a number of their friends as well, and they
know a number of yours.
And groups of people tend to be interconnected where everyone knows everyone, at least a
decent number of people know one another.
Your best friends, for example, probably know one another, and the people you know
at the office likely know one another.
Thus, while you may have 500 friends, each of those friends may only have a couple hundred
of unique connections beyond the people you're connected to originally.
This interconnection idea points to the broader ideas in sociology called homophily.
People aren't randomly connected.
They're more likely to be friends with other people like them.
People that like golf, for example, don't play golf alone.
They play with other people that like golf.
And a Democrat is more likely to be friends with other Democrats than other Republicans.
Now, why does this happen?
Well, there are two key reasons.
The first is driven by something called biased interaction.
And that's the idea that a Democrat is much more likely to meet other Democrats than
other Republicans.
Because we tend to hang out with people that are like us.
We aren't equally likely to meet everyone in the world.
We're much more likely to meet other people that live near us, and among those people
that have similar interests to our own.
If you like playing basketball, for example, you tend to spend a lot of time at the gym
playing basketball, which makes you more likely to spend time with others that like playing
the sport, and so more likely to meet people that are like you.
Same with law.
If you're a lawyer who works at a law firm, you spend a lot of time around other lawyers,
which makes you more likely to become friends with people that are lawyers.
But even beyond this biased interaction, or the biased chance of meeting people, there's
also biased tie formation.
Sure, we're more likely to interact with other people like us.
But even among those like-minded individuals we meet, we're more likely to become friends
with others who have common interests.
If we're at the basketball court, we meet other people that play basketball.
But among those folks, we're particularly likely to make friends with those who like
the other things we like.
Same with law.
If you're at a law firm, you meet lots of other lawyers, but among them, you don't
pick them all with equal likelihood to become friends.
If you like comedy movies, and someone else is really into comedy movies, you're more
likely to bond over that and become friends.
And so all in all, of all the people in the world we could be friends with, of all the
people we could be connected to, we're much more likely to be friends with other people
like us.
And so when thinking about the small world study today, it's important to remember that
this study was originally done in the 1960s.
There was no internet.
People didn't travel as much for work or school.
But it's useful to think about the pattern of offline ties, because much of the insights
from this study, even though it was done many decades ago, still hold the day.
More recently, for example, a few researchers conducted the first large-scale replication
of Milgram's experiment, involving almost 25,000 email chains and 18 targets around
the world.
Rather than asking people to send an actual letter, they did an e-version of this where
you had to send an email to someone else to try to reach an eventual target.
They found that the mean chain length was roughly six, even after accounting for attrition.
Even in a world with email, it's a small world.
But the world doesn't seem to have gotten much smaller than it used to be.
Another important idea when we think about social networks is an idea of simple versus
complex contagions.
Simple contagions are things that take one dose of influence to adopt.
Some products or ideas we only require hearing about it once before we're willing to do
that particular thing.
You get a note in your inbox, for example, a friend of yours is suggesting you click
on a link.
You don't need to hear about that link from multiple people before you click.
It's pretty simple.
One dose of influence is enough to drive you to adopt.
But other cases require more influence to get you to do a particular thing.
For example, a new open heart procedure.
If you were to try that new procedure, you'd want to talk to not just one person, but a
few people before you went ahead and tried it.
And so these type of contagions are more complex.
They require multiple doses of influence before people are willing to do something.
Take for example, pickled pickles versus pickled broccoli.
I bet you only need to hear about pickled pickles from one friend, a new brand of pickles,
for you to try it.
But for you to try pickled broccoli, you'd have to hear about it from a couple of different
people.
And what's interesting about this idea of simple versus complex contagions is it has
interesting implications for why things spread.
Because if something is a simple contagion, information can be spread out in many places
and it'll spread very quickly.
People only need to hear about something from one friend before they adopt it.
Then that information can diffuse to a broad number of networks easily because you only
need to have heard from one other person.
But when we think about complex contagions, when you need multiple doses of influence
before you adopt something, there there needs to be more concentration of interest.
Because you need to hear about two friends within your social network about something
before you're willing to do it.
And each of them needed to hear from two friends and each of them needed to hear from two friends
and so on.
And so for that to happen, there must be much more interest in a concentrated area.
It's more of a waterfall rather than a sprinkler.
When there's a simple contagion, marketers can use a sprinkler strategy spreading out
their marketing efforts.
But when it's a complex contagion that needs multiple doses, there needs to be more of
a waterfall or concentration of effort in a particular region or demographic space.
Now we've also talked about network ties as bridges, but I want to give an important
caveat to that notion.
Say you learn about a new product, for example, or a new idea.
Do all your social ties find out?
If you think about it, not really.
More requires active sharing.
We need to actively decide to pass something on.
And so most information doesn't flow through like water through open channels.
Rather than a bridge analogy, it's useful to think of a drawbridge that opens and closes
depending on whether or not we want to share the information.
As we talked about in the last few lectures, one factor that impacts the impact of the
opening or closing of the drawbridge is the information itself.
We're more likely to share certain types of information rather than others.
But the end person, the audience for that message also matters.
If we think about it, who are we more likely to share information with?
One of the important dimensions to think about is tie strength.
Some of our connections are stronger ties, while other are weaker ties.
Strong ties are people that you talk to often, that you've known for a long period of time,
like good friends or family members.
Weak ties are more casual relationships, people you talk to not so often, more infrequently,
or acquaintances that you don't know very well.
It should be easy to identify one or the other in your own life.
How many strong ties most people have?
Well, think about it for a moment.
How many people do you talk to at least once a week, every week throughout the year?
At least once a week, 52 weeks a year.
How many people in your life are like that?
For most people, the number is definitely less than 10.
And around 10, maybe 8, 9 or 10, and those are people they describe as strong ties.
Looking online photos shows similar results.
So people take photos with all sorts of people, and they post them online.
But researchers have looked at how often you show up with the same people in particular
photos.
So not just do you show up with this person once, but you show up with this person in
multiple photos.
When researchers looked at the number of people like that, that repeatedly show up in your
photos online, they found that the numbers between 4 and 6, around 5 people repeatedly
show up in your photos.
Those, again, are your strong ties.
Or you can think about using phone calls to find a similar pattern.
We call lots of different people for a variety of different reasons.
Sometimes we call our friends, other times we call the repair shop to figure out when
our car will be ready.
But 80% of all phone calls, a person's phone calls, go to the same 4 people on average.
Again we communicate to a lot of different people, but with a small set of strong ties,
and less often with these other, more weak ties.
Now each type of tie provides a different sort of benefit.
One sociologist in his dissertation surveyed over 200 people to find out how most people
got jobs.
He asked these people who the contact person was in their social network that helped them
find a job, if there was one, and whether those connections were strong ties, or people
they saw often, or weak ties, others they might have seen less frequently.
And again, if you think about it, there are many reasons to think that strong ties would
be more effective in helping you get a job.
Think about your best friend.
Strong ties know us better, and they care a lot about our interests.
They care about our well-being.
Your best friend is more likely to know exactly what type of job you're looking for, and so
should be better equipped to find you something suitable.
Similarly, they care a lot about you, so they care more if you get hired.
They know whether or not you're looking, and they spend more time asking around for opportunities,
and more effort following up any opportunities that exist.
The quintessential strong tie in this situation is a parent.
When people are young and looking for a job, for example, their parents are often their
strongest advocate, talking to everyone they know, singing your praises, and trying to
find opportunities.
The same thing can be said for relationships.
If you've ever been single, for example, your parents may always try to find and set you
up with a particular potential mate.
But when the sociologist looked at the data, he found the opposite.
Not that strong ties were more useful, but that weak ties were more useful.
He found that people were more likely to get jobs through their weaker ties.
Why would this be?
Why would these weaker ties, who don't know us as well, and are less interested in our
own well-being, be more useful in getting us a job?
Well for two reasons.
First, they have access to different sorts of information than strong ties.
If you think about it again, as we talked earlier, people tend to be friends with other
people like them.
And this is particularly true with strong ties.
Our strong ties are similar to us in many, many ways.
They have similar interests, read similar publications, and may have the same set of
friends.
And what that means is they're drilling from the same wells of information that we are.
All the things that make them a particularly good friend for us also mean that they have
less access to novel information.
They know the same things we do, which doesn't allow us to get extra information from these
ties.
Weak ties, however, tend to be in totally different places from us.
They pull from different sources, they access different social networks, they know different
people.
In different regions of the country, they read different publications, they are interested
in different things.
Now this exact reason makes us less strong friends, maybe we have less in common, but
it makes them really useful at helping us get a job because they can tap these new social
networks and these new social sources of information to get us information we might not get otherwise.
In addition to different information, weak ties are also helpful simply because there
are more of them.
There's a small set of strong ties, but many, many more weak ties.
And so this strong number across many of them can help you get access to information.
The strength not only relates, though, to the access to information, it also influences
what we share.
Think for a moment about what you might share with strong ties versus what you might share
with weak ties.
Are they exactly the same things?
Would you tell just a casual acquaintance the same thing you would tell a strong tie,
your best friend?
Probably not.
We have a deep secret, for example, for something very personal or embarrassing, we might tell
our strong friends, but we wouldn't tell our weak ties.
Or for example, we found out about a really great deal that only a certain number of people
could get access to.
We'd probably tell the people we know really well, rather than the people we don't know
so well.
So the strength of tie not only impacts whether or not they're helpful to us, but what we
pass along to them.
So in summary, we've talked about the utility of social networks and how these ties between
people shape the spread of information and influence.
We tend to be connected to similar others.
It's not random who we're connected to, but those patterns of connections influence whether
things spread and catch on.
And different types of ties have different benefits.
Strong ties may be useful for some things, they care a lot about us, but weak ties might
have access to different information.
