In the late 2000s, one of the most popular reality shows on television was something
called The Jersey Shore, and one of its most popular characters was someone named Snooki.
Based in part on the show, she soon became a B-list celebrity.
She would show up on those supermarket tabloid magazines and the celebrity mags, and she
started finding out on TV shows and other sorts of small things.
She was on Dancing with the Stars and this and that, and eventually received a little
bit of attention.
A strong B-list celebrity.
And as a result, fashion houses started sending her free handbags.
Now, this makes sense.
Product placement is a standard marketing tactic that has been around for over a hundred years.
As we talked about before, one of the important ways to sell something is to get it in front
of people, to expose it to them, and so product placement is one way to do that.
And as a prominent TV star, Snooki was seen by millions of viewers every week.
So it makes sense that companies might send her a free product as a way to advertise their
brand and increase their sales.
A photo of her in People Magazine might be seen by millions of people, so getting their
handbag in the photo should be a great way to increase attention.
But here's the kicker.
Companies weren't sending Snooki some of their own handbags.
They were sending her bags from their competitors.
Not bags that they made, but bags from their direct companies that they were trying to
compete with.
Why would a company do something like that?
Why would they send someone something that would seemingly help their competitor?
The last lecture, we talked about the power of social influence.
How it leads people to do the same thing as others.
But social influence is also like a magnet.
It can attract, but it can also repel.
Sometimes it leads people to do the same thing as others, but sometimes it leads people to
diverge or do the opposite of what others are doing.
In this lecture, we'll talk about divergence and the meaning of consumption.
We'll talk about why some students major in finance when what they really love is marketing,
why you might have to pay more for products that actually have smaller logos, and why
people can form sometimes or do the same thing as others while diverging other times and
doing something different.
We'll talk about all these ideas to deepen our understanding of the power of word of
mouth and social influence.
Now, people often buy things for what they do.
We buy things for the functional benefit they provide.
Cars, for example, do a good job of getting us from point A to point B.
Food does a good job of keeping us full and ready to take action and engage in activities.
And clothes make sure that we're dressed appropriately.
We don't freeze to death, and we're dressed appropriately when we come to the office.
When people don't only do things for what they do, they also do things or buy things
for what they mean, what they communicate to others.
Take cars, for example.
Sure, people buy cars to get them from point A to point B, but they also buy cars for what
they signal about them to others.
If we want to show we're wealthy, maybe we buy a Mercedes or a BMW.
If we want to show we're rugged, maybe we buy a Jeep or a Subaru Outback.
Those cars signal something about us to other people.
Same with clothes.
What we wear is a signal of identity.
How we're dressed communicates about us something to other people.
Also with the music we listen to, if you've ever had someone get into your car or come
into your house and you're going to play some tunes on the radio, you think a lot about
what those music things will say about you to others.
Now what this means is that things not only are bought for their functional reason, but
also for the signal value they communicate.
Think for a moment about which style of dress you prefer.
I'm going to give you two different styles, and I want you to think about which one you
like better.
Now one, for example, is sort of a preppy look.
Something out of an ad for Ralph Lauren or Tommy Hilfiger.
Think of a polo shirt, khakis and maybe some boat shoes, leather shoes, maybe even a sweater
tied around your neck or around your waist.
The other look is a little more what some people might describe as hipster.
Imagine dressing like a bike messenger, or the guy or gal that works as a barista in
your local coffee shop.
They have tattoos and a big hole in their ear, masquerading is an earring.
Which one of those styles would you prefer?
To wear out, for example, to wear out for a night on the town or a night to hang out
with your friends.
Would you prefer that preppy look, that sort of polo khakis type look, or the more hipster
type look, more like a bike messenger or like a barista?
Now whichever one you choose, and either one is fine, you probably felt reasonably strongly
about it.
If you picked preppy, it was likely an easy choice.
There's no way you'd want to dress like a bike messenger, you thought to yourself.
Who in the world would want to dress like that?
But if you picked a hipster, if you picked that hipster style, you probably felt similarly
about the other style of dress.
Who in the world would dress preppy, you thought to yourself, why would I ever pick something
like that?
You have to be crazier, weird to want to dress like that.
Of course I picked the hipster.
But notice, while you have those strong preferences, there's not actually a right answer to this
question.
In fact, both styles are perfectly fine.
Both will keep you warm, both will keep you appropriately closed so you don't get arrested
for indecent exposure.
So if both are equally good, why do we feel so strongly about one versus the other?
Well the reason is the meaning, or what that style signals.
Even though both are great functionally, what they do for us, they suggest different types
of identities for the wearer.
One suggests preppy, and one suggests hipster.
And some people prefer to look like one, while some people prefer to look like the other.
Something matters even when students think about what to major in in graduate school.
Students often come to my office with questions about career advice.
Which companies in a given industry are the best ones to work for, and how can I get an
interview with some particular companies that I'm interested in?
How do I even know how to begin to think about careers and what I want to do with my life?
But recently I've had a number of students come in with the same, but very interesting
problem.
These students love marketing.
That's one of the reasons they're in my classes.
And it's an area they find interesting, so they'd love to pick it as their concentration.
There's only one small hitch.
They're worried about what that concentration will signal to others.
What other people will think about them, if that's what they do?
What will other people think?
What will other students think about me if I major in marketing?
What would signal about me when I go on the job market?
They like marketing a lot, but they're worried about how it's perceived.
Some people incorrectly think that marketing is fuzzy or not quantitative enough, and the
students don't want to seem like they can't hack the quant.
So some of them devised a very surprising and intriguing solution.
They double major in marketing and in finance.
Marketing because they like it, and finance because it shows that they can handle the math.
They like marketing, and many of them don't love finance.
In fact, they don't like finance at all, but they pick up the finance degree to show
that they can hack the numbers.
Even though they're picking something you don't like as much, they're doing it because
of what the signal means to others.
So let's step back for a second.
Signals matter, but where does signal value come from?
How does certain products, ideas, or even whole disciplines gain signal value, gain meaning?
What do those signals originate?
Well, one place is through marketing.
Companies spend millions of dollars designing ads, products, and stores that portray a particular
image.
Take Abercrombie and Fitch, for example.
Their ads often portray a certain lifestyle.
They show highly sexualized, black and white or grayscale photographs of fit teenagers
who look like they're having the happiest time of their lives.
Like they just got off the sports field, or just got off a wonderful boat ride around
the Caribbean.
Abercrombie stores convey that same exact image, dim lights, attractive salespeople,
and the smell of wealth and privilege that just emanate from the walls.
Every time you walk in there, you feel that identity.
Cars are exactly the same way.
When Honda launched a new compact crossover SUV called the Element, for example, they
spent a lot of time and money trying to appeal to the 20-somethings they hoped to attract.
They had done a lot of focus group research to figure out who to tailor the car to, and
they wanted to go after the 27-thing segment.
So the SUV was designed with those folks in mind, with space for kayaks and seats that
could be washed down.
And their ads were the same.
The ads showed cool 20 or 30-somethings surfing, snowboarding, and doing a variety of other
extreme sports.
All to the soundtrack of hip, loud music.
But here's the interesting point.
Companies don't totally control their image.
Sure what they do in their ads or what they do in the store partially conveys what it
means to wear Abercrombie or to drive an element.
In part it depends on that, but in part it depends on something else, the type of people
that are using the brand.
We've all heard of that idea of keeping up with the Joneses, that people engage in conspicuous
consumption to signal desired identities.
Most people would like to be a little richer, a little smarter, and a little more fitter
in shape than they actually are.
Geeks want to look cool.
Novices want to seem like experts, and low status people would generally prefer they
seem like high status.
So people adopt the brands, mannerisms, and signals that convey that desired identity.
People will lease expensive cars, even if they can't afford to buy them because they
want to seem like they've made it.
People buy lots of exercise or sporting gear to seem sporty, even if they never really
go outdoors on the weekend.
And people often adopt the lingo of experts to seem smart and in the know, even if they
don't actually know what they're supposed to know about.
The idea of aspiration groups has been around for a long time.
The idea that people imitate others that they want to look like, that they might aspire
to be like.
Sometimes it's about clothing, music, or even political positions to signal desired identities.
But what happens to the other side?
What happens to the group that's being copied?
What happens to a signal as a result of that adoption by people that aren't really part
of that group?
Abercrombie, for example, might have signaled hip, cool teenager, in part because they're
ads, and in part because lots of hip, cool teenagers buy the brand.
But what happens if that changes?
What happens if suddenly junior high school girls or overweight business executives start
wearing the brand in an attempt to seem hip or cool?
Suddenly now the signal may shift.
What it means to wear Abercrombie might change.
From signaling hip, cool teenager to seeming like a wannabe.
And the shift in meaning can happen even without wannabes in the first place.
Sometimes people don't want to look like anybody in particular.
They adopt the product for a different reason.
Honda, for example, pitched the element as a dorm room on wheels for college age folks
and 20-somethings looking to haul around their bikes and surfboards and other sorts of things.
But that wasn't the only demographic that that product appealed to.
The element ended up being just as popular with 30 and 40-somethings who loved it for
hauling around kids and groceries.
In fact, even senior citizens flocked to the SUV.
They loved it for its easy entry, the spacious interior, and the relatively low price tag.
Now, it wasn't that the seniors wanted to look like surfers.
The seniors could care less what they drove signaled to others.
But they bought the car because of the functionality.
The SUV fit their needs, so they bought it.
But as a result, notice what happened.
Suddenly now what it means to drive an element changed.
It started to shift.
Soon the element stopped being a signal of outdoorsiness and started being a signal of
something else.
So now we've talked about what causes a signal to shift.
Let's think about the consequence of that shift.
Because as a result, what signaled one thing may signal something else.
What are the original people that were originally doing it do at that point?
The people that might have originally been interested in the element, for example, started
looking elsewhere.
The 20 and 30-somethings that might have once considered that SUV ended up buying something
else that better communicated their desired identity.
Shifting the signal led them to diverge or avoid the SUV to avoid sending undesired signals
to others.
We tested this idea a few years ago in a study at Stanford University.
We went door-to-door on campus selling Yellow Livestrong wristbands to the students.
At the time the wristbands had just been introduced and we wore Yellow Livestrong shirts, handed
out flyers, and told the students that it was Wear Yellow Month on campus.
We were going around to raise money for cancer awareness and cancer research, and at the
end of the study we did donate all the money to the cause.
So we knocked on the door and we asked them where, in addition to supporting the cause,
they were willing to buy a Yellow wristband.
The wristbands were only a dollar and most students agreed.
Now to ensure that the students were actually wearing the wristbands, we had different people
follow up with them a few weeks later, as part of what seemed like an entirely unrelated
experiment.
Then, once we knew that a decent number of the students were wearing the wristband, we
did something different.
We sold those same wristbands to the geeky academic focus dorm next door.
Now, we picked that original dorm in particular because of its location.
It was a larger complex with a number of other dorms, small dorms, that all ate at the same
dining hall.
And in one of those dorms was the geeks.
For students in the regular classes who weren't interesting enough, they needed more of an
academic sort of push.
They could apply to live in a special academic focus dorm.
Applicants had to write an essay, and if accepted, they had to do additional readings, attend
additional lectures on relaxing topics like Indian mythology and Christianity in the middle
ages, and each fall the dorm performed a play from some of the Greek playwrights.
Now, let me tell you, I went to Stanford myself, and all Stanford students are pretty geeky.
I was one of those students, I'm happy to own up to it.
I was not the coolest kid in the world in college.
But in a sea of geeks, this dorm was seen as a cut above, as an extra geeky dorm on
an overall geeky campus.
Now, people were wearing the wristband.
They were happy to wear it, that original dorm was wearing the band.
But what would happen when the geeks adopted?
Would they keep wearing the wristband?
Conformity would say yes.
Sure, other people are doing it, what does it matter?
It's only more information that I should do the same thing.
Or might they abandon that wristband to avoid being thought of as a geek?
Well, when we crunched the data, we found that over a third of people abandoned the wristband
when it was adopted by the geeks.
They got rid of something they liked, and it worked just fine, just because of what
it might signal to others.
Similar behaviors happen all the time.
Men stopped buying Mazda Miata's, for example, when they became associated with women.
And Rich Britt stopped wearing Burberry clothes when the shavs or soccer hooligans with a
penchant for the bottle started adopting the brand.
Professionals stopped calling their children junior once the practice was adopted by the
working class.
And people ate 35% less candy when they saw an obese person take a lot.
People diverged why to be misidentified, to avoid that misidentification.
Teenagers don't want to look like their parents, Democrats don't want to look like Republicans,
and the jocks don't want to look like the geeks.
Take those wristbands from the Stanford study.
When people in that dorm started wearing them, that original dorm, the band sent a desired
signal.
It signaled dorm pride or cause supporter, so people in that dorm were willing to wear
the band.
It had a desired signal.
But once the geeks started doing it, once those geeks adopted the wristband, the signal
value changed.
The bands went from sending a desired signal to sending an undesired one.
Now someone who saw you wearing the band wouldn't know whether you were one of those first
dorm members or whether you were a geek.
So those original dorm members stopped wearing the band to avoid communicating the wrong thing.
Or take an indie band t-shirt.
If few people know about the band, then wearing that shirt with the name emblazoned across
the front is a great signal.
It helps you meet other people that like the same music and maybe even find the perfect
mate.
You like them too?
Well, we have a lot in common.
But think what happens when other people start wearing that t-shirt, that band t-shirt that
you and some of your indie friends loved.
If fashionistas start wearing the shirt because they've heard the band is the next big thing,
the t-shirt loses its value as an effective signal.
Observers don't know whether someone wearing the shirt is an indie rock fan or a fashionista.
Whether the person loves guitar riffs or Prada's new spring collection.
And as a result, indie rock fans who wear the shirt may be ignored by potential mates
and friends.
And they may have to endure people coming up to them wanting to talk about whether black
is really the new black.
It's clear that people diverge from others to avoid sending undesired signals, to avoid
signaling undesired identities.
But you might be wondering how that fits with all the research that we talked about just
a lecture ago, in that last lecture on conformity.
Didn't all that work with the length of lines and the other things suggest that people can
conform or do the same thing as others?
So when do people do one versus the other?
When do people conform versus when do people diverge?
Well, in our research, we found that it depends a lot on the domain or the area of life in
which that behavior is taking place.
Consider for a moment a study we conducted.
Imagine I gave you three types of music and you had to answer which type of music you
would prefer.
So if I gave you Mozart, Beethoven, and Bach, for example, which of those three artists
would you prefer?
No again, no right or wrong answer, just which one you like best.
Got one in mind?
Mozart, Beethoven, or Bach?
Okay.
Now which laundry detergent do you prefer?
Do you prefer tide, all, or bounty?
Got one in mind?
Tide, all, or bounty?
Okay, good.
You get a sense of what we did.
We did a study very similar to this with some Stanford undergraduates.
We gave them three options in a variety of domains and asked them to pick the option
that they preferred.
To encourage them to treat it like a real choice, we actually randomly picked one of
their choices and gave them what they chose.
For music example, we gave them a CD from whichever artist they picked.
And yes, at the time, these studies, we did something with CDs, though we did pick slightly
different music artists for the college crowd.
Rather than Beethoven and Mozart and Bach, we picked things like Dave Matthews' band
and Lady Gaga rather than classical composers.
But imagine that rather than just making that choice, that simple choice I gave you,
you got a little bit more information.
Imagine before choosing what music you liked or what detergent you preferred, you saw what
someone else had chosen previously.
Which music or detergent this prior person had selected?
Well, half of the participants just made choices, but the other half of the participants,
before they made their choices, they saw what other people had chosen previously.
We exposed them to quote unquote prior participants and what those people had chosen previously.
Now just like those prior studies I mentioned, we rigged the choices here.
When there was no actual prior participant, we just made it look like somebody else had
chosen particular things.
And we had them enter their own choices on an Excel spreadsheet with column one already
filled in with what seemed like a prior participant.
Further we made it seem like that prior participant was part of a social group that undergraduates
didn't want to look like.
Imagine making your choices after seeing what a group you didn't want to look like chose.
What would you choose if those others had chosen a particular thing?
For example, if people thought that those others preferred a certain music artist or
a certain detergent, how might that affect their own choice?
Would they pick the same item as those other people or something different?
What we found is that the answer depended a lot on the type of choice domain.
Sometimes people conformed and did the same thing as others and sometimes they diverged
or did something different.
And that's because of differences in the domain or the choice that people were making.
Some domains, like cars, clothes and music, are seen as more identity relevant or symbolic
than others.
People prefer a lot about someone based on the car they drive or the clothes they wear,
but much less about that person based on the type of detergent they use or the type of
bike light they ride to work with.
Some domains are more identity relevant and some are less so.
And we found this determines whether people conform or whether people diverge.
In more functional domains, like detergent or like bike lights, people chose mainly
based on functional value.
Is this thing good or not?
If more people like something, that suggests it's probably pretty good and that suggests
that you might want to do the same thing, all about that idea of informational influence
we talked about earlier.
And as a result, people conformed in these less identity relevant domains.
For things like detergent or for bike lights, people were more likely to choose something
if that other person seemed like they had chosen it previously.
But for more identity relevant choices, the pattern reversed.
For things like music or clothing, people were less likely to choose things.
They decreased their likelihood of choosing something if someone that they didn't want
to look like had chosen it previously.
In these identity relevant domains, we care not only about what things do or their functional
value but also what they mean or what identity they signal.
And as a result, we diverge when certain types of people adopt to avoid sending these
undersired signals.
In these identity relevant domains, we don't only care about whether other people are doing
something but also who those particular people are.
If they're like us, or people we want to seem like, then we're more likely to do what
they're doing.
We're more likely to buy a car if people like us tend to buy that car, or if it sends a
desired signal.
Same with music, clothing, and the other identity relevant domains we've talked about.
But if people we don't want to look like are doing it, well, then we tend to stay away.
We avoid products or ideas that are adopted by people we don't want to look like.
And we abandon things that we once liked if those people adopt them.
Even though the functional value may not have changed.
Even though that product is still good, it still works, the signal value has changed.
And as a result, we diverge.
Now thinking about identity signaling, divergence, helps us understand a number of puzzles that
we see in the world.
One for example is the cycles we often see in fads and fashions.
Sometimes things catch on, but almost as quickly they die out and become unpopular.
And one question is why?
Why do things that were once extremely popular die out and become unpopular?
Well one reason is around this idea of identity signaling.
If you're an insider and you start doing something, you might like it.
You're an indie band listener, you love rock music, you like a band, but once more people
start listening to that band, once it starts going mainstream, it no longer has that desired
signal of being ahead of the curve.
So those original adopters might abandon it to do something else.
But notice when they abandon it, the signal value changes as well.
The reason some of those later adopters or mainstream adopters started doing it was
because it seemed cool.
But once the cool people leave and move on to something else, it's not so cool to do
it anymore.
So those later folks leave.
And eventually once our grandparents start listening to music, the original adopters
may not listen to it anymore.
And so while something might have gotten very popular, with everyone following what the
original folks were doing, it also quickly becomes unpopular when people avoiding doing
things once the original folks have abandoned it and moved on to something else.
And so one reason we see these cycles of fads and fashions is people diverging to avoid
what other people are doing and abandoning things once the desired identities have been
lost.
Now, identity signaling also helps explain other types of things, like the types of signals
people prefer.
Think about a really expensive Mercedes, for example, a $200,000 or $300,000 car.
Why would people spend thousands of dollars on cars, clothes, or other things when something
one type, tenth the price, would work just as well?
Why pay so much when we could have gotten something cheap that has the same functional
value?
Well, this is pretty obvious, right?
As we've been talking about, the simple answer is to signal desired identities.
Brands often use large, visible logos to help people do this.
Cars have big emblems on the front, and clothing and handbags are often plastered with logos.
Such overt signals are common, but one place we might expect less overt signals is for
cheaper goods.
Sure, people might want to let others know that they bought an Armani shirt so they
broadcast it across the front, but they might be less keen on broadcasting that they bought
a shirt from Walmart.
Consequently, one might expect a somewhat different relationship between price and brand
prominence.
Cheaper goods should have a small, if any, logo, and more expensive stuff should have
a large and prominent logo.
The expensive stuff because people want to show it off, and the cheap stuff because people
don't want to show it off.
But when we analyzed hundreds of products, we found a very different pattern.
Rather than a positive relationship between price and brand prominence, bigger logos, larger
logos, and more expensive things, we actually found that it looked like an inverted U.
Sure enough, for cheap products, the brand was almost never identified.
For cheap sunglasses, for example, very small number actually contained a brand or logo.
And for mid-price products, sure enough, branding was more prominent.
Around 90% of sunglasses between $100 and $300, for example, were branded, had a large logo.
But as price increased even further, branding became less prominent.
For really expensive sunglasses, for example, over $500, only 30% display the brand name
or logo.
Why?
Because without logos, products are much harder to identify.
When we ask people to guess, for example, the price of different handbags or sunglasses,
logos and explicit identifiers like branding made all the difference.
If a product had a big or prominent logo, people could generally guess the price.
If something didn't have a larger prominent logo, people often got the price wrong.
In fact, for very expensive goods that didn't have logos, people couldn't tell the difference
from a Gucci bag to a less expensive or cheaper one from the gap.
Take away those obvious logos, and people had no idea.
They couldn't tell the difference between a bag that cost $2,000 or one that cost $20.
With logos, we can tell the difference without logos we can't.
Most people thought a $6,000 but take-of-an-ed-a-bag was something like a bag one might buy from
Walmart.
And so then if we think about it, why would consumers pay so much for products that are
hard to identify?
Sure I'd pay a lot for a logo so people know I can signal that I spent a lot of money,
but why would I be willing to pay so much money, the high end of that curve, for products
that are harder to identify?
In the absence of prominent branding, most observers will confuse expensive handbags,
shirts and other items for cheap generics.
So why would people spend extra money on products that most people would think were cheap?
Even premium products with no logos are hard to recognize.
Think about Mercedes cars, for example.
If you look, price and brand prominence are actually negatively correlated.
More expensive Mercedes have a smaller emblem or star on the front.
For every $5,000 increase in price, the logo shrinks by around a centimeter.
Gucci handbags and Louis Vuitton shoes show the same pattern.
Items that display the brand less prominently are more expensive.
Quieter signals cost more.
Now when we think about why, there are a couple explanations that jump to mind.
One could be that wealthy people just like logos.
Maybe wealthy people hate being a big broadcaster, they don't want a logo.
But might these findings say something deeper or more subtle about the communication of
identity?
We found that the answer lies in the power of subtle signals.
Things vary again in how explicitly branded they are.
Some products scream the brand in large letters for everyone to see, but other signals are
less blatant.
Common shoes, for example, have red soles and so are easy for people to see.
Certain shirts have distinctive patterns under the collar around the cuffs, and certain handbags
have a particular cross-hatched or other pattern, making them easy to identify.
But notice they're not easy for everyone to identify.
Because as noted earlier, more visible signals usually facilitate desired identification.
Explicit markers like obvious brand names and logos should be more effective signals
to the general audience, because they're easier for most people to see and identify.
Wearing a shirt that says Gucci, for example, makes it easy for people to see that, yeah,
you bought something expensive.
And more subtle signals like the color of the soles on your shoes or particular detailing
on your shirt may be missed.
In fact, in fashion, people call this dog whistle fashion.
It flies beneath the radar and may not be able to be decoded by most observers.
But while this inability to signal may seem like a downside, it also has a hidden benefit.
While explicit signals are easier to identify, as a result, they're more likely to be copied.
If you're a wealthy person, carrying a big handbag with a logo on it should make it easier
for people to recognize you.
But it also makes it easier for people who are not truly wealthy to poach that signal.
Outsiders who want to seem wealthy, even if they're not.
And so outsiders are more likely to poach signals that are more prominent or easy to see.
You can even see this effect, for example, by looking at which handbags get most counterfeited.
If you walk down Canal Street in New York City, for example, or browse websites that specialize
in counterfeit items, you'll notice that not all bags are represented.
Louder bags, ones with bigger logos, more prominent branding, are more likely to be copied.
Bags with larger logos, more explicit branding, are more likely to be pirated because customers
buying counterfeits are buying them not for their functional value, but for their signal
value.
They don't care as much about quality, they care about other people seeing that they bought
a certain type of bag.
As a result, insiders, more people who know a lot about a given domain, they actually
prefer subtle signals.
Things that are harder to see, like those colors on the bottom of the shoes or like
the detailing on the shirt.
Sure, these discrete markers aren't as widely observable, but they help distinguish
insiders from wannabes.
If everyone who wants to seem rich buys knockoff handbags bathed in Louis Vuitton logos, then
those bags are no longer a good signal of wealth and real rich people made diverge and
move on to something else.
Further, while not everyone can recognize them, subtle signals provide a covert communication
system with others in the know.
Many people would totally miss a crosshatch pattern on a handbag, but fashionistas have
the expertise to recognize those understated markings.
The same is true in all sorts of domains.
Rolex watches are a widely recognized status symbol, but because of that, true watch aficionados
usually prefer something a bit more under the radar.
A subtler brand that might actually be more expensive and more in demand among people
in the know, but not widely available to the broader public.
That signal will be invisible to most people, but other watch lovers will detect the signal
and admire the choice.
So in some, people don't only care what things do, they care about what they mean.
What things communicate determine what we choose, what things catch on, and why once
popular things die out.
