I want to start this lecture with a very simple question.
I'm going to list three products or brands, and I want you to think about which one you
think gets the most word of mouth.
Are you ready?
Which one of these three do you think gets talked about the most?
The first is Walt Disney World, the self-described place where dreams come true.
The second is Hunting Up Cheerios, the delicious breakfast cereal.
And last, but not least, is Scrubbing Bubbles, which is a bathroom cleaner.
You may not have heard of it before, but it's a great way to get your bathroom clean.
Now if you had to guess, which of these three products do you think gets talked about the
most?
Is it Disney?
Is it Cheerios?
Or is it Scrubbing Bubbles?
Think about it for a second.
Now I want to point out just a couple things from this little exercise.
First, if you had to think about it, it was sort of difficult to answer, right?
You might not have known which of these three get more word of mouth.
How would you have any idea?
And indeed, whether Disney or Cheerios or Scrubbing Bubbles gets more word of mouth,
probably doesn't matter much to you, because unless you work for Disney, or you work for
Cheerios, or you work for Bubbles, you're not trying to get word of mouth for one of
these rather than the other.
But the why is really important.
If we don't understand why people talk about and share these sorts of things, why one of
them gets talked about more than the other, it's going to be really hard to understand
why things catch on.
And that brings me to my second point.
If you had to guess, which one is it?
Is it Disney, is it Cheerios, or is it Scrubbing Bubbles?
Well, I've done this exercise a few times before.
And if you're like most people, you probably guessed Disney World.
Usually about 60 or 70% of people guessed Disney.
After all, it's a really fun and engaging experience.
Why wouldn't you talk about Disney World?
And maybe a few of you guessed Scrubbing Bubbles, maybe about 20% or 30%.
It's a new product, maybe you haven't heard of it before, it's useful.
It seems interesting, maybe that's what gets more word of mouth.
And a couple of you, probably 5% or 10%, might have guessed Honey Nett Cheerios.
Not the most exciting thing in the world, but maybe it gets some word of mouth as well.
Well, for those of you guessed Disney World, it's an excellent guess, but unfortunately,
it's wrong.
And for those of you guessed Bubbles, also excellent guess, also wrong.
The answer is Cheerios.
And what I think that points out is that sometimes our intuitions about what gets talked about
more, which stories get shared, which information gets passed on, might be wrong.
Our intuition about word of mouth might be incorrect.
Now last lecture, we talked about the power of word of mouth to drive all sorts of social
epidemics.
Why people trust word of mouth more than they trust advertising, and how word of mouth
leads all sorts of products and ideas to catch on.
From the products we buy, to the politicians we vote for, to the ideas that we adopt.
All about the power of word of mouth and how it drives human behavior.
But underlying that question is actually an earlier question.
Well, we know that word of mouth matters.
We know that interpersonal communication has a big impact on people's behavior.
But why do people talk in the first place?
Why do people talk about and share some things rather than others?
Now when we think about that question, usually if you thought about what makes things viral
or why things catch on, if you typed it in the web, you might have gotten a particular
answer.
Luck.
Well, that's random why people talk about some things rather than others.
It's luck why some things catch on and others fail.
Otherwise, you might have gotten a different answer.
Some people think it's very simple.
It's, well, cats.
People love sharing cat photos and cat videos, so cats must be the reason that content and
things get shared online.
If there were no cats, the internet would come to a grinding halt.
I mean, what would people have to share?
Google would go out of business.
Twitter would fail.
The whole internet would fall apart and be destroyed.
And suggesting cats drive sharing is a great theory, except for one small problem.
It's completely and utterly wrong.
Talking about cats doesn't explain why some cat photos or videos get shared more than others,
and it doesn't explain the millions of things that get shared every day that have nothing
to do with cats.
So rather than talk about cats, I'm going to talk about something else, science.
With a group of amazing colleagues, I've spent the last 10 years studying word of mouth,
why people talk and share, and why things catch on.
I've looked at thousands of pieces of online content, tens of thousands of brands, and
millions of purchases across the United States.
And again and again, we saw that, no, it wasn't luck, no, it wasn't chance, and no,
it's not random.
Oh, and by the way, it's not cats, sorry for those cat lovers out there.
There's a science behind why people talk and share.
In fact, six key factors kept coming up again and again.
Whether we looked at products, ideas, news, or rumors, the same six things seem to drive
people to talk and share.
And these are the six factors I'm going to talk about in the next two lectures.
Now I know that six things is a lot to remember.
We talked about in that lecture on simple, so to make them easier to remember, I put
them in a framework or an acronym that I call Steps.
Now you might be sitting there going, well, hold on, Steps has five letters.
You've said six.
This Steps has two P's.
So the first S is for social currency, the T is for triggers, the E is for emotion, the
P is public, the next P is practical value, and the last S is for stories.
And each of these six psychological factors is a principle that drives people to talk about
and share all sorts of information, to pass things on, to share it with their friends.
From the products we talk about, to the rumors we share around the water cooler, to the content
we pass along online.
Now you might say to yourself, hold on.
Is this about viral?
Is this why things go viral on the web?
And you'll note that each of the Steps that we'll talk about does explain why things
go viral.
But also a less exciting thing, why people share any sort of news or information with
a friend.
Because viral's gotten a lot of attention.
It's certainly an exciting term, and seeing a video get 10 million or 100 million views
is always amazing, lots of news articles written and lots of media coverage.
But most things, most things out there in the world don't go viral in a traditional
sense.
The disease analogy is a good one.
Something spreading from person to person, but only up to a certain point.
Because diseases spread from one person to another.
But the key difference is the length of that chain.
Because with diseases, one person can initiate a disease that spreads to a few people, and
a few more, and a few more until a large number of people have been infected.
We've all been in the office on a Monday when someone comes in rubbing their nose a little
bit and coughing and sneezing.
By Tuesday, five of our coworkers are infected.
By Wednesday, it's even more, and by Friday, half the office is missing.
One person caused this big thing to happen.
Due to that one individual, a large number of people got sick.
Long chains, however, not as common with ideas.
Sure people share news and information all the time, and they do.
But the likelihood that one person generates an extremely long chain is pretty small.
Further, very few things get tens of millions of views.
Sure, some things catch on that broadly, but even things that catch on at a local scale
are interesting.
So rather than focusing on huge hits, it's more interesting to think about why things
spread from one person to another, regardless of whether those things eventually generate
a long chain or infects an entire population.
So what we'll do in this lecture is we'll focus on why things get shared, again that
underlying behavioral science, whether something gets shared 10 million times or only 100.
So let's start with the first principle, social currency.
And to do that, I want to tell you a story of a hot dog restaurant.
Now imagine New York City, one weekend, you're there visiting some friends or maybe you're
there on business, you're walking around on the Lower East Side and your stomach is rumbling.
You are hungry, you've got to get something to eat.
In sightseeing all day, it's time to grab a bite.
When you notice a big hot dog shaped sign out in front of the restaurant with the words
eat me, written on it in what looked like mustard, you say to yourself, well, I haven't
had a hot dog in a while, I'll check this place out.
So you walk down a flight of stairs into a restaurant called Criff Dogs.
It's got gingham tablecloths over some nice picnic tables, got a little jukebox in the
back and a menu to die for.
If you like hot dogs, you will be in heaven.
Because this place, Criff Dogs has every hot dog you can imagine.
From a good morning hot dog with bacon, eggs and cheese, a little rough on the stomach,
but interesting nonetheless, a hot dog with green onion and pineapple and a traditional
New York style water dog with ketchup and mustard and sauerkraut and the like.
So you're sitting there, you're munching on your hot dog when you finish up, but then
you notice something unusual in the corner of the room.
Next to all the tables and chairs and the other sorts of things going on, in the corner
of that room is an unusual sight.
It almost looks like a phone booth, like one of those things that Clark Kent might jump
into to change into Superman.
You got a couple minutes on hand, so just for fun, slide open that door and walk inside.
It's pretty tight, it's a phone booth after all, not a lot of space in there, but on the
wall you'll notice something that many of you probably haven't seen in about 20 or 30 years.
The last time I saw one of these was at my grandmother's house, many, many a year ago.
A rotary dial phone, one of those types of phones you actually have to stick your finger
into and go around in a circle.
You got a couple minutes on your hand, why not?
Stick your finger in let's say the number three, go around in a circle and hold that
phone up to your ear.
Well, it'll go ring, ring, and then someone will pick up the other line and they'll ask
you whether you have a reservation, reservation, what do you mean?
I'm in a phone booth in the corner of a hot dog restaurant, what could I possibly have
a reservation for?
But if you're lucky, or they happen to have space, the back of that phone booth will open
and you'll be led into a secret bar called please don't tell.
Now please don't tell as violated a number of traditional laws of marketing.
No sign on the street, no sign inside the restaurant, in fact they've done everything
they can to make themselves difficult to find.
Yet they've never advertised and every day they're full.
Word of mouth helped them catch on.
By 3 p.m. phone lines open up, by 3.30 all the seats are gone.
You have to hit redial again and again and again trying to get through.
Actually took me two weeks to get through to this place the first time I wanted to go.
So if they've never advertised and they just spread by word of mouth, what they do right?
I mean there are dozens of bars within a couple block radius.
Why did this one in particular get so much discussion?
Well let me tell you they did something interesting.
They made themselves a secret and I'll tell you a little secret about secrets.
Think about the last time someone told you something and they told you not to tell anybody
else.
What's the first thing you then did with that information?
Well your secret's safe with me but if you're like most people you probably did something
in particular.
You told somebody else.
And that's because of having access to a secret, information that not everyone else knows makes
you look smart and makes you look in the know.
It gives you what I'll call social currency.
Just like the car we drive and the clothes we wear, the things we say and the things
we share affect how other people see us.
So one reason people talk about and share things is to get desired signals of identity.
To share things that make them look good rather than bad.
Let's spend a couple minutes drilling down into this idea.
And to do that I want to introduce you to a friend of mine.
Her name is Karla and she drives a minivan.
And I want to see how much you can guess about Karla based solely on this one piece of information.
All I'm going to tell you is the car that she drives.
If you had to guess for example, how old might you guess that Karla is?
Got a number in mind?
Maybe something between 35 and 45?
Okay.
She have any kids?
You'd probably say yes.
Do they play sports?
Well, yes.
What sport do they play?
What do you think?
Well, you might guess soccer, something along those lines.
How did I know what you were thinking?
How did I know for sure what you would think about Karla?
Well, let me tell you, I'm not a mind reader.
It's the products and choices that we make like the car we drive, signal identity.
The car we drive, also the clothes we wear.
I thought a lot today, for example, about what to wear to come talk to you guys.
I thought, hey, college professors, they're not known for being the snazziest dressers
in the world.
We're known for wearing things like elbow patches and the like.
So I put on a nice blazer to look smart and in the know.
But if I was wearing, say, shorts or maybe a Hawaiian shirt, would you be as likely to
take me as seriously?
Probably not.
Because what people wear is a signal of identity.
Well, what people talk about and what they share works the same way.
If we tell lots of stories about taking our kids to this practice or how well they did
in school, people will see us as a good parent.
If we talk a lot about new technology and the hottest, coolest thing in our industry,
people will think we know about that.
What people talk about and share is a signal just like the clothes they wear and the car
they drive.
So what gives people desired signals?
What leads them to talk about and share certain things rather than others?
Well, the first idea is something I'll call making people feel like insiders.
When people feel smart and in the know, when they feel special, not like everybody else,
they're much more likely to talk about and share information.
Please don't tell, for example, did a great job of that.
Hidden bar inside a hot dog restaurant?
Of course you're going to tell somebody about that, because it makes you look like you know
what's going on in town, like you're smart and in the know.
But it's not just please don't tell, LinkedIn did a great job of this.
They were trying to get people to spread the word about the service.
So rather than just sending out an email saying, hey, LinkedIn is great, you should use us,
they sent out a simple note to some of their subscribers that said something along the
lines of the following, hey, you special LinkedIn user, you have one of the top profiles on
the website, one of the top 5% or 10% of all profiles on the site.
Imagine getting that email.
Imagine being told you one of the most influential people on the LinkedIn website.
While people got that email, they felt pretty good.
They felt smart and in the know.
They padded themselves on the back, but they didn't just feel good.
They shared it with everyone else they knew because it made them look good.
Because it made them look smart and in the know, they wanted to share with others.
The second idea that I'll talk about here to get social currency is this idea of inner
remarkability.
Now, you might think that certain products are naturally remarkable and others are doomed
to fail.
That there's no way people would talk about mundane things like socks, toilet paper or
household appliances.
But let me tell you the story of how a company got over 200 million views for videos about
one of the most mundane products ever, a blender.
A guy named George Wright was a new marketing hire at a business in Utah.
He came into the office one of his first days at work and he noticed a big pile of sawdust
on the floor.
He said, that's weird.
Why is there sawdust on the floor?
So he talked to one of his coworkers and said, hey guys, what's going on?
What's with the sawdust?
Are we expanding the company?
His colleague said, no, the CEO is doing what he does every day, try to break blenders.
The CEO of this company called Blendtec wanted to build a really powerful blender.
So he'd take two by four pieces of wood, golf balls, big lighters, anything he could
find and toss it in the blender and see if the blender was tough enough to cut it.
My favorite video in this set, they have a series of over now 20 to even 30 videos of
them blending different things, but my favorite is them dropping an iPhone in the blender.
One dropping a cell phone in the blender and hitting, I don't know, the smoothie button.
And watching it slowly but surely, cut up slowly and surely until it turns into glass
and dust.
Small particles, almost like sand, nothing left, out comes eye dust when he's done.
Who would have thought a blender was this powerful?
Well, George Wright thought this was a marketing home run.
He saw what his CEO was doing, took a $50 marketing budget, filmed his CEO and put these
clips online.
And thousands of people, if not millions of people, have shared them.
The video I mentioned with the iPhone, over 10 million views.
The set, over 200 million.
Blender sales go up over 700% when these videos come out.
But the neatest thing for me is not just the sales increase.
That's definitely amazing.
What's particularly amazing is they did this for one of the least exciting products ever.
A blender.
Who would have even thought about a blender?
Nobody talks about a blender.
In fact, after hearing this segment, you may go into your kitchen and poke your blender
and go, can you do that little blender?
You've never thought about our blender before.
But Blendtec got people thinking and talking about blenders by finding that inner remarkably.
Because it's not that certain products are naturally remarkable and others will never
get talked about.
Anything can be made remarkable if we think about what makes it surprising, novel or interesting.
Just like that idea of unexpected that I talked about before.
And notice also, they didn't tell people how powerful the blender was because they told
people, hey, we make a really powerful blender.
Not very many people would have shared that.
They showed people.
Just like that idea of concrete that we talked about in the Making Ideas Stick lecture.
The more concrete something is, the more you show rather than tell, the more likely people
are to remember something and to share it with others.
So that's useful to help us to think about social currency.
And next I want to talk about a slightly different principle.
The one of triggers, moving forward in the framework.
Now we've talked about triggers a little bit when we think about ideas of memory and choice.
But here I want to talk about it in a slightly different context.
I want to talk about how it applies to word of mouth.
And to do that, I want to tell you the story of a girl named Rebecca Black.
Now some of you may be already familiar with Rebecca Black's song Friday.
But in case you're not, I'll give you a little story, a backstory behind the song.
Rebecca Black was a 16-year-old girl and her parents paid $4,000 to a company called Ark
Music Factory to come up with a hit for her.
They came out with this overproduced number about those big teenage dilemmas like waking
up in the morning, going to school, and figuring out whether to sit in the front seat or the
back seat of your friend's car.
Really really hefty stuff.
Now the song comes out and people hate it.
Most people give it a thumbs down.
It's amazing if you look on YouTube over 75% of the thumbs are thumbs down.
Some people have called it in fact the worst song ever, which itself would be an accomplishment
to truly make the worst song ever.
Yet even though people hate it, it has over 300 million views.
One of the most viral songs ever.
And so one interesting question is why?
If so many people hate this song and it's so terrible this song Friday, why do they
pass it on?
Well, it's an interesting question.
And I'm a data guy, so I wanted to dig a little bit deeper.
Why was it so successful if people hated it so much?
So I worked with a little bit of data online, I worked with Google to look at the number
of searches for that song over time.
In fact, the number of searches for just the phrase Rebecca Black over time.
And I noticed a really interesting thing when I looked at that data.
There was a spike in attention, man, then it went down.
And then another spike, man, then it went down.
And then another spike, and then it went down.
But when I looked closer, those spikes weren't random.
They were actually every, well, seven days.
And when I looked even closer, I noticed that they were every Friday, which is the same
name as Rebecca Black's song.
Now this song Friday is equally good or bad depending on your preferences every day of
the week.
It's good or bad on Monday, good or bad on Tuesday, good or bad on Wednesday, good or
bad on Thursday, and so on.
But Friday provides a ready reminder what psychologists would call a trigger to make
people think about and talk about and share the song.
Because as we talked about in the lecture on triggers, if something is top of mind,
it's much more likely to be tip of tongue.
Even if something is not the most interesting thing in the world, if we're thinking about
it, we're much more likely to talk about it and share it.
So let's spend the next few minutes talking about this idea of triggers and how it might
impact word of mouth.
Triggers help explain, for example, why Cheerios gets more word of mouth than Disney.
And that might have seemed like a trick.
What do you mean who would talk about Cheerios?
Why would anyone talk about Cheerios?
Shouldn't many more people talk about Disney?
And indeed, Disney is a hugely engaging experience.
When someone comes back from Disney World with their kids, nobody wants to be in the
office because the only thing those people do for the first two or three days is try
to show you the hundreds upon thousands of photos of their kids on Space Mountain and
doing the various things at Disney World.
So people do like to talk about Disney.
But here's the problem with Disney.
People don't go very often.
Think, for example, about how many friends you know went to Disney World, not ever, but
last year.
Usually, it's one, maybe two, either their great parents, they got married there, or
they're maybe just weird.
Those are sort of the three reasons that people go to Disney World.
Disney's a really engaging experience.
People like it when they go, and they talk about it right when they come back, but they
don't keep talking about it.
Because nothing in the environment reminds them to think about it.
Cheerios, on the other hand, is super boring.
It's not the most exciting thing ever.
But if you look at the data for when people talk about Cheerios, you notice an interesting
pattern.
If you look at the data, for example, throughout the day, time of day, by when people talk
about Cheerios, you see an interesting spike.
Not many people talk about it at midnight or 4 a.m. at 6 a.m. it starts to go up a little
bit, 7 a.m. by 8 a.m. lots of people talking about it, peaks around 8.30 or 9 and goes
down again until about noon throughout the rest of the afternoon.
In fact, if you look at the weekend, the data shifted to the side a little bit.
People seem to talk about Cheerios later.
Well, why is this spike in the morning?
Because that's when people are using the product.
Using a product or an idea makes people think about it and makes them more likely to talk
about it and share it.
Even if it's not the most interesting thing, they're more likely to think about it and
they're more likely to pass it on.
And so while Cheerios might not be the most exciting thing ever, we breakfast, well, once
a day, 365 days a year.
And even if we don't eat Cheerios, we wheel our grocery cart through the aisle and we
see the brand making it more top of mind and more tip of tongue.
So is that the only trigger?
Is usage the only trigger?
Well, as we talked about in that earlier lecture, it's not.
So for example, if I said peanut butter and, well, again, you might say jelly or if I said
rum and, you might say Coke.
It's almost like peanut butter is a little advertisement for jelly.
Like jelly should pay peanut butter a kickback for every time peanut butter shows up.
Because if peanut butter's around, jelly doesn't have to remind you that it exists.
Corona's done the same thing with the beach, for example.
I challenge you to go on a beach vacation and never think about Corona.
It's pretty much impossible.
You're lying there on the sand, you're having a great vacation, you got your sunscreen on
and suddenly Corona comes to mind without you even thinking about it.
You might not even like beer.
You might hate Corona, but you thought about the beer because Corona owns the beach.
The beach is Corona's peanut butter.
And because of that, people are more likely to think about it, talk about it, and share
it with their friends.
KitKat is another great example of using the power of triggers.
A few years ago, sales for KitKat were down by about 30 percent, so they came out with
a very simple campaign.
KitKat and coffee, a break's best friend.
They linked themselves to coffee through a number of ads and placement.
KitKat and coffee, coffee and KitKat, having a coffee break, having a KitKat, having a
KitKat, having a coffee and vice versa.
Now if you think about it, why is coffee a really good trigger for KitKat?
Why is it the right thing to link KitKat to?
Well, you can link, you can dip KitKat in coffee, that's true, definitely tasty, and
sure you have a coffee break just like you have a KitKat break.
But the best thing about coffee for KitKat is it comes up so frequently.
It's not just something that happens once in a while, it's a frequent trigger.
Make it more likely that people will think about it and talk about it and that they'll
purchase it.
And indeed sales went up from over 300 million to 500 million.
It's like that slogan for Mikolo, weekends are made for Mikolo, well it used to be, holidays
are made for Mikolo, but they moved it to the weekend because the weekend is more frequent.
The next principle we'll talk about is emotion.
And here the idea is when we care, we share.
The more we care about something, the more likely we are to pass it along.
And here I'm going to tell you a little bit about some research we did with the New York
Times.
Now in particular, we were interested in the most emailed list.
Many newspapers and content providers and websites have a most shared list.
Essentially, if you look, it's the most shared content in the past 24 hours.
The article that the most people passed on, they decided it was worth passing along to
their friends and colleagues and so on.
But one question is why?
Not all articles make the list, in fact only about 20% do.
So why does some make that list and others don't?
What about some content makes it more viral or more likely to be shared?
And so to address this question, to begin to understand why, we actually collected a
huge amount of data.
We looked at every article that came out in the New York Times that was featured on their
website over a six month period.
Over 7,000 pieces of content, everything from political news to sports, from style and fashion
to things about the weather, everything and in between.
And a huge number of people share this content, thousands if not millions of people pass content
on through the New York Times website.
But one question was why, again, why certain articles rather than others?
So we got all these 7,000 articles and then the tough work started because we needed to
understand what about that article made people likely to share it.
So with the help of a large group of research assistants, we coded each article on a variety
of dimensions.
We also used automated coding analysis or textual analysis to code some of the simpler dimensions.
For example, how positive articles were or negative they were based on the number of
positive or negative words.
And we also controlled for things outside the content that might interest or influence
whether or not things made the list.
As we've talked about before, advertising or awareness is really important.
If you don't realize something exists, if you're not exposed to it, it's going to
be tough to share it.
So we controlled for a host of factors that might influence exposure, things like we might
think of as traditional advertising.
For example, articles that might have appeared earlier in the physical paper have been featured
in a more prominent place on the website.
Articles that were released at a time when readership was greater during certain times
a day or days a week, we've been controlled for how famous the author was.
If Bono writes an editorial, for example, lots of people might share it because he's
Bono, not necessarily because of what the content was like.
And the key there, again, was to control for exposure.
How many people are seeing this content?
And then controlling for that were people actually likely to share it.
How many people or what percentage of people passed that piece of content on?
Then we examined the results.
Well, what did we find?
Not surprisingly, consistently what we talked about in the idea of social currency, articles
were more likely to be shared if they made people look good.
More surprising and more interesting pieces of content were more likely to be shared in
part because they make the share seem surprising or interesting.
That's not very surprising, but it is pretty intuitive.
A story about chickens in Harlem, for example, who would imagine they had chickens in Harlem
where things about love, sex, and the changing landscape of infidelity are interesting to
many people and make the share look smart or in the know.
And so people pass it on to get that social currency.
And as we'll talk about in the next lecture, useful information was also more likely to
be shared.
Articles about how to beat high airfares, good restaurants to try, or tips about getting
kids into college are all useful information that many people would find helpful.
People might share this content to look good or to help other people around them.
But even beyond that, we saw one topic that stood out like a Thor sore thumb.
Science articles.
For the most part, these articles were not as surprising or useful as articles from
more mainstream sections, but they were highly shared.
And as a scientist, I was definitely happy to see this.
That's great news.
People are sharing science articles.
But I also recognize that science articles aren't necessarily as useful as articles
about getting in kids into college.
For example, knowing that monkeys have emotion is definitely important scientifically, but
it's not clear how you'd use that in your everyday life.
Yet science articles, like these, monkeys having emotion or a new discovery of a planet
or a star, were making the most emailed lists more than sections like politics, fashion,
or business news.
Why?
Why were so many people sharing pieces on science?
Well, it turns out that science articles frequently chronicle innovations and discoveries
that evoke a particular emotion.
And that emotion is awe.
Imagine standing on the edge of the Grand Canyon.
The gourd scratches out in every direction as far as the eye can see.
The floor drops out below you.
You see a hawk gliding through the air.
You're amazed.
You're elevated.
You're awed.
It's a sense of wonder and amazement that comes from seeing something that is great,
beautiful, or mighty beyond what you usually might expect.
Aux spans our frame of reference and drives transcendence.
It can be evoked by anything from great works of art and music to religious transformations,
from breathtaking natural landscapes to human feats of daring and discovery like some of
the videos you might see on YouTube.
And more than any other emotion, awe described what people felt when they read many of these
science pieces.
When they read science pieces in the times, they were amazed by the possibility that science
had uncovered.
But these initial findings brought up additional questions.
Would any emotion be likely to share?
Or were there certain things about awe that might drive people to pass it on?
Talking to others often makes emotional experiences better.
If we get promoted, for example, telling others helps us celebrate.
If we get fired, telling others help us vent.
So might any emotion boost sharing?
Well, to check, we picked another emotion, sadness, and we went back to the data.
We dove back in, we coded it on that dimension of sadness, and we looked at the results.
Some articles evoked lots of sadness, things like paying tribute to their deceased grandmother.
That evokes a good deal of sadness.
Well, articles about things like a winning golfer doesn't really have much sadness, and
it was scored low on that dimension.
If any emotion boosted sharing, then sadness, like awe, should increase sharing.
But it didn't.
In fact, sadness actually had the opposite effect.
Sadder articles were actually 16% less likely to make the most emote lists than articles
that weren't so sad.
Something about sadness was making people less likely to share.
What was it?
Well, usually, when we think about emotions, we think about two key dimensions.
We think about positivity or valence, right?
Some emotions are positive, like awe, and some are negative, like sadness, and that dimension
of positivity or valence is usually how we think about emotions.
Anger and anxiety were more likely to be shared, right?
In part because maybe they're negative emotions, right?
They might drive people to action.
But there's also a difference beyond positive and negative.
It's not just positive and negative, there's another dimension as well.
And that is high or low or rousal.
If you think, for example, certain emotions are activating, they drive us to take action,
and other emotions are deactivating, they don't drive us to take action.
If we think about the difference between anger and sadness, for example, what we do when we're
angry versus sad, when we're angry, we want to take action.
We want to do something to change how we're feeling, to change our experience.
When we're sad, we don't want to do very much.
We want to sit still and sort of curl up in a ball and eat our favorite bowl of ice cream.
And so it turns out that this dimension of action or arousal, physiological arousal,
that heart beating quickly, that blood pumping, actually drives us to share.
All high arousal emotions, like anger and anxiety, but also like excitement and humor,
drive us to pass things on.
The lower arousal emotions, like sadness, but also contentment, decrease our likelihood
of sharing.
And so it's not just about functional information that gets shared, yes, useful things get shared,
but it's also about how it makes us feel, the emotions that the content evokes.
And I think our findings about emotions also explain some interesting things in the world,
why angry political rants get shared, and also funny things get shared on YouTube.
We might think of anger and humor as two completely different things, but they're not actually
as different as they might seem.
One's positive and one's negative, but they're both high arousal or activating emotions.
So to summarize, in this lecture we talked about the six key drivers of social transmission.
So far we talked about three of them, we talked about social currency, the idea that people
share things that make them look good, smart, or in the know.
We talked about triggers, things are top of mind, they're much more likely to be tip of
tongue, just like peanut butter reminds us of jelly.
And we talked about emotion, the more we care, the more we share.
High arousal emotions drive us to pass things on.
In the next lecture we'll continue with these six key steps to talk about the last three,
public, practical value, and stories.
