Music
On July 4, 1997, NASA landed the Pathfinder spacecraft on the surface of the planet Mars.
This landing was years in the making and it was a huge success.
The mission took years of preparation and millions of dollars in funding,
but it received huge attention around the world.
People watched the rover ride around the surface of the red planet
and parents everywhere bought their children Mars rover toys to celebrate the mission.
But over that same period of time, the Mars candy company noticed something unusual.
A surprising increase in the sales of its Mars candy bar.
The company was particularly surprised because it hadn't changed its marketing in any way.
No extra advertising, no change in pricing, and it hadn't run any special promotions.
Yet sales, surprisingly, had gone up.
What had happened?
Now, Mars bars are named after the company's founder, Franklin Mars, not the red planet.
But all the attention to the planet Mars seemed to bolster sales of the Mars candy bar.
Customers apparently responded to news about the planet Mars by purchasing more Mars bars.
Now, this is a lucky turn of events for a candy company,
but what does it mean for our understanding of human behavior?
In this lecture, we're going to talk about the science of triggers and cues.
We'll talk about what triggers are and how they shape everything from what people think about,
or what's top of mind, to what we like, what we buy, and even how we vote.
Why voting in a church, for example, versus a school might change how you cast your ballot.
And while hearing French music at the grocery store makes people more likely to buy French wine.
Let's start by defining what triggers are.
A trigger is any stimulus in the environment that makes us think about a related concept or idea,
any sight, sound, or smell that makes us think of something.
If you see a vitamin container on your kitchen counter, for example,
that might remind you that it's time to take your vitamins that you've forgotten for a couple of days.
If you hear a particular song on the radio, that might remind you of a friend of yours that likes or loves that song.
And if you smell some freshly baked, delicious cookies,
it might remind you of the ginger snap cookies your mom used to bake every year.
In each of these cases, a sight, like the vitamin container, a sound, like a song,
or a smell, like cookies, reminds you of a related thing,
even though that thing may not be physically present at the moment.
The way this works is based on the cognitive psychology that we talked about in the last lecture
about exposure, perception, and memory.
Because as we talked about, if two things are connected in our mind,
seeing one of those things can activate the other.
Just like things have associations,
seeing something's association can remind you of the thing in the first place.
Triggers can rely on two types of associations.
Existing associations, or existing links, or be based on new ones.
In the case of Mars bars, for example,
Mars the planet is already associated with Mars the bar,
because they share a common name, both Mars.
Mars didn't have to do any marketing or anything else to link the two together,
they're already connected in your mind.
You think about Mars, it reminds you of other things that might be associated with Mars.
In other instances, new associations may form.
Seeing a white duck, for example, might remind you of the insurance company, Affleck.
Now, a duck isn't naturally associated with Affleck,
but it gained that association based on repeated pairing with Affleck in ads.
Seeing the white duck together with the brand, again and again and again,
reminded people or connected the two in people's minds.
Now, seeing similar ducks, even if they have nothing to do with Affleck,
might remind people of the company.
In fact, even a duck's quack might remind you of the brand,
sort of because it sounds like Affleck.
You hear that sound, you just can't forget it in your mind.
And as we talked about, companies spend lots of money creating these links
because they want to remind you of their products or brands.
Now, triggers influence a number of things.
First, they influence what's top of mind.
One way to think about our minds is sort of like an ordered list.
Some things are top of mind or on the top of the list, and other things are less so.
Think about what's top of mind for you at the moment.
Probably the last couple sentences that I shared about Affleck, for example.
Maybe what you did right before this lecture, or maybe what you're doing after you listen to this.
But an appointment you have six weeks from now, or your spouse's birthday that might be five or six months away,
that's probably not so top of mind, not so top of the list.
Certain things are top of the list, others are less top of mind.
But interestingly, cues or stimuli in the environment, what I'll call triggers, can change that.
If I said peanut butter and blank, for example, what comes to mind?
Well, if I said peanut butter and blank, you might think of jelly.
Or if I said rum and blank, what might you think about?
Well, you might think of coke.
Now, you probably weren't thinking about the brand Coca-Cola a moment ago,
but once I said the phrase, rum and blank, coke is now accessible or top of mind.
It went from lower down the list to higher up on our mind.
The idea here is that triggers can make things top of mind that might not be otherwise.
A study we did around Halloween illustrates this concept nicely.
We approached people who were about to enter a local supermarket
and we asked them to do a quick thinking study.
Just think whatever you can think of top of mind and ask them to list six brands of soda
and eight types of candy or chocolate.
There were no right or wrong answers, anything was fine, just whatever came to mind.
For soda, for example, people listed things like Coke or maybe Pepsi, maybe Sprite or Root Beer.
For candy, people listed things like Snickers or Baby Ruth.
Importantly, though, there were two conditions.
Half the people were approached on the day before Halloween.
Imagine walking up to your local grocery store on the day before Halloween
and filling out this survey about what types of soda you're thinking about
or what types of chocolate come to mind.
The other half the people were given that exact same survey,
but they were approached a week later, a week after Halloween.
And we picked that in particular because we were wondering
whether that difference in time might affect what was top of mind for people.
Around Halloween, for example, there are lots of orange things in the environment.
Orange pumpkins, orange displays in the store, orange cards you get in the mail.
And we wondered whether all that orange right before Halloween
might make orange products top of mind.
And that's exactly what we found.
When we crunched the data, we noticed that orange products, like orange soda or Reese's Pieces Candy,
were more likely to be listed, more likely to appear on people's lists
the day before Halloween compared to a week after.
For example, Reese's Pieces was listed only by about 30% of people
the week after Halloween, but that jumped to around 54% the day before Halloween.
Many more people were thinking about that product.
And the reason is triggers.
The color orange is much more prevalent in that surrounding environment right before Halloween.
Again, lots of pumpkins, lots of orange displays.
But as soon as the holiday ends, a week later, much of those orange stimuli disappear.
So right before the holiday, there are many more triggers or cues
to remind people to think of orange things.
You might even be more likely to think about tide around Halloween.
It's not because you need more detergent,
but it's just because all that orange stuff reminds you of the brand, making it more top of mind.
Now, we've already talked about how triggers change what we think about.
Next, let's talk about how triggers influence choice and sales.
Know, for example, the Musac you're used to hearing while you shop for groceries?
Well, researchers subtly replaced it with music from different countries.
In some days, people came into the store and the store was playing French music,
music you might think of when you go to France.
Well, in other days, they played German music,
what you more might think of as a polka, maybe,
or other music you might expect to hear around Oktoberfest.
Now, they manipulated the music that people heard and they measured what people bought.
They were wondering how the type of music that people were listening to
might change what they purchased.
Now, again, should it?
Well, you might say no.
The one you like is the same, the products you like are the same,
the only difference is the music that happens to be playing in the store.
Why should that matter?
But when scientists looked at the data,
they found that the music being played impacted the wine that people bought.
When French music was playing, well, more customers bought French wine.
And when German music was playing, more customers bought German wine.
Same thing, right?
The music is different, though it changes what we end up preferring.
It might not change whether we like French wine or German wine,
but it changes what we choose because it makes those products or ideas more top of mind,
makes us more likely to reach for a variety of French wine,
maybe a nice Chardonnay rather than a bottle of German wine,
maybe a nice Riesling.
The same thing happens with names.
Take, for example, the name April.
Well, more than a third of children born with the name April
are born in guess which month?
Well, April.
Now, why is this happening?
It's all about the stimulus in the environment spilling over to impact choice.
Children could be named April in any time of year.
But in April, people are more likely to think of that word,
and as a result, are more likely to give their kids the name.
Similar with the wine, by triggering consumers to think of different countries,
the music spilled over an affected purchase.
The music made ideas related to those countries more accessible,
and those accessible ideas, again, top of mind, spilled over to affect behavior.
Now, at this point, you might be thinking, OK, cute.
Triggers maybe impact what names people get,
or whether they pick a certain wine in the store,
but could it really impact more consequential choices,
things that really matter, like a really important domain?
Well, how about how people vote?
Think about it for a moment.
Where did you cast your ballot in the last election?
Well, most people will answer this question with the name of their city or state.
Durham, North Carolina.
New York City, New York.
Scranton, that's where I voted.
If asked to clarify, they might add,
well, yeah, I voted near my office or across from the supermarket,
a few miles away from my home.
Few people will be more specific, and after all, why should they be?
Although geography clearly matters in voting,
the East Coast, for example, tends to vote a little more Democratic.
Well, the South tends to see you a little Republican.
Few people would think that the exact venue where they voted matters.
Again, why would it matter?
You just have your ballot and you drop it off at a particular place, right?
But think for a moment.
Be more specific.
What type of place did you vote in for the last election?
Was it a church?
Was it a school?
Was it a firehouse?
Most people in the U.S. are assigned to vote at a particular polling location.
These are typically public buildings, like a firehouse, a courthouse, or a school,
but can also be things like churches, private office buildings, or other venues.
Now, if you talk to political scientists,
they'll assume that voting is based on rational and stable preferences.
Why do people vote?
Well, they possess core beliefs and they weigh the costs and the benefits
when deciding how to vote.
If we're concerned about health care, for example,
we support initiatives to make it more affordable and available to a greater number of people.
In this calculating, more cognitive model of voting behavior,
the particular kind of building people happen to cast their ballot in shouldn't impact behavior.
Again, it makes sense.
If you're assigned to vote at a school versus a church, why would you vote differently?
You're still the same person.
You still have the costs and benefits that you might have otherwise.
Don't you just drop off your opinion wherever you happen to vote?
But when we think about triggers,
when we think of that idea about cues in the environment
and how they make different things accessible,
triggers suggest that it just might.
Could where we vote actually affect how we vote?
Because different locations contain different triggers.
Churches are filled with religious imagery,
which might remind people of the church doctrine.
Schools are filled with things like lockers and desks and chalkboards,
and those things might remind people of children or their own early educational experience.
And once these thoughts are triggered, they might change behavior,
just like we talked about already.
Voting in a church, for example, might lead people to think more negatively
about abortion or issues like gay marriage.
Voting in a school might lead people to support education funding
based on the stimuli in their environment.
Well, to test this idea, my colleagues and I acquired data
from each polling location in Arizona's 2000 general election.
We used the name and address of each polling location
to determine whether it was a church, or a school, or some other type of building.
We looked at the numbers, and about 40% of people are assigned to vote in churches,
26% in schools, 10% in community centers,
and the rest in a mix of apartment buildings, golf courses, and even RV parks.
Then we examined whether people voted differently at these different types of polling locations.
We focused in particular on a ballot initiative
which proposed raising the sales tax from 5% to 5.6% to support public schools.
This initiative had been hotly debated, with good arguments on both sides.
Most people support education funding, so they want to go that way,
but few people enjoy paying more taxes, so it's kind of a tough decision.
Now, if where people voted didn't matter,
then the percent supporting the initiative should be the same at schools
and other types of polling locations.
But it wasn't.
Over 10,000 more people voted in favor of the school funding initiative
when the polling place was a school.
Polling locations dramatically impacted voting behavior,
and at the end of the day, the initiative passed.
Now, this difference persisted even after we controlled for a host of factors
that you might think impact voting.
Regional differences in political preferences and demographics.
We even compared two similar groups of people to double check our findings.
People who live near schools and were assigned to vote at one,
versus people who live near schools but were assigned to vote at a different type of polling location,
maybe like a firehouse.
Some of you may live near a school and you actually voted at a school,
others may live near a school but vote somewhere different.
We found that a significantly higher percentage of the people voted in schools
were in favor of increasing funding for schools,
even if they were the same types of people or lived in the same neighborhoods.
The fact that they were merely in a school when they cast their ballot
triggered them to act more school friendly.
Now, when we think about this, a 10,000 vote difference in a statewide election
might not seem like a big deal.
But it was more than enough to shift a close election in the past.
In the 2000 presidential election, for example,
the difference between George Bush and Al Gore came down to less than 1,000 votes.
If 1,000 votes is enough to shift an election, 10,000 certainly could.
Triggers matter.
These have an important impact and we think about how we shape the electorate.
Why are certain polling locations churches, for example,
should people be allowed to vote in churches?
You might say no, given these effects I've shown you, but it's difficult.
Polling locations need to be large, they need to have room for a lot of parking,
and they need to be handicap accessible.
It's difficult to find locations that are all those things and are open during the day.
And further, you wouldn't necessarily expect that triggers affect all voting decisions.
Who we vote for president, for example, is a complicated choice.
It depends on many different dimensions.
Something that's simpler, like an initiative about school funding
or about religious ideas like gay marriage or abortion,
may be easier or more likely to be swayed by where people voted.
But it's an interesting important finding that suggests that triggers
have a big important impact on behavior.
In fact, in another study, we found that triggers even impact
whether people eat their fruits and vegetables.
Now, fruits and vegetables may not seem as important as how people vote,
but if you notice, getting people to eat healthy is tough.
Most people realize that they should eat more fruits and vegetables.
Most people even say that they mean to eat more fruits and vegetables.
But somehow, when the time comes to put those fruits and vegetables
into our shopping carts, onto our dinner plates, or into our mouths, we forget.
Well, we wondered, as scientists, whether we could use triggers to help people remember.
We paid students $20 to report what they ate every day for breakfast, lunch, and dinner
at their nearby dining hall.
On Monday, for example, a student might have eaten something like a bowl of special-case cereal,
two helpings of salmon, and a side of pasta.
Maybe they ate a cheeseburger later that day with salad and fries.
And on Tuesday, maybe they ate a yogurt with fruit and walnuts, pizza with sprite,
and chicken tacos.
You get the idea, writing down everything you ate over a two-week period.
Halfway through that study, though, we interrupted them,
and students were asked to participate in what seemed like an unrelated experiment
from a different researcher, a team totally unrelated.
In this experiment, they were asked to provide feedback on what seemed like it was a public health slogan
directed at college students.
Just to be sure they remembered the slogan, they were shown it more than 20 times
using different colors and fonts.
There were two slogans that we used.
One group of students saw the slogan, live the healthy way,
eat five fruits and veggies a day.
Another group saw a different slogan.
Each and every dining hall tray needs five fruits and veggies a day.
Now, both of those slogans are similar in some ways.
They both use fruits and veggies a day, they both rhyme,
and they both encourage people to eat more fruits and vegetables.
Live the healthy way, eat five fruits and veggies a day,
versus each and every dining hall tray needs five fruits and veggies a day.
But notice that that tray slogan encourages people to eat fruits and vegetables using triggers.
These students, many of them lived on campus,
and so many of them ate in dining halls that used trays.
So we wanted to see if we could trigger healthy eating behavior
by using a dining room tray to remind students of the slogan.
To trigger them to think about eating fruits and vegetables when they were in the line.
Now, our students didn't really like the tray slogan.
They called it corny and not very fun and interesting,
and when we asked them would it change their behavior,
the generic live healthy slogan seemed much more effective.
Further, when we asked whether it would actually change their fruit and vegetable consumption,
the students who had been shown the tray slogan were much more likely to say no.
Most of them said no way.
In fact, we gave them a one to seven scale,
where seven would be changed my behavior, one would change not at all.
They rated it something like a one and a half or two.
Still, when it came to actual behavior, the effects were striking.
Students who had been shown the more generic live healthy slogan didn't change their eating habits.
But students who had seen the tray slogan and used trays in their cafeteria
showed a market change in behavior.
The trays reminded them of the slogan and they ate 25% more fruits and vegetables.
The triggers worked.
Again, it wasn't which slogan people liked.
It was which one the environment reminded them of.
It's not always the most clever slogan or the most interesting slogan that's effective.
We have to remember to think about it.
And it's particularly interesting to think of these results in light of the way
the government used to represent healthy eating.
If we think from when growing up, we used to see a food pyramid.
Grains like bread, cereal, and rice were the biggest group,
sort of at the bottom of the pyramid.
Fruits and vegetables were the next level of the pyramid up,
the largest next group, and meat and dairy were the next level up,
and so on with fats, oils, and sweets at the top of the pyramid.
But while the pyramid might have been visually appealing, unfortunately it's not very memorable.
People might remember that they are supposed to eat more fruits and vegetables than dairy,
but how much more?
And how much is the right amount to eat overall every day?
Unless you're looking at a pyramid, it's hard to remember.
Well, in 2011, the U.S. Department of Agriculture replaced the pyramid
with a new nutrition guide called MyPlate.
Now, if you think about MyPlate, it's still colorful.
It still has many of the attributes that the pyramid did,
but it does something a little bit better.
It divides the plate up into chunks to illustrate how much of different groups people should consume.
More than a fourth of the plate is taken up by the vegetable chunk, for example,
while protein makes up a much smaller chunk.
Now, by no means is the MyPlate system perfect,
but it does a great job of using triggers to remind people of what they should be doing.
Pyramids are fine, but unless you live in Egypt, you don't see them very often.
But you see a plate almost every time you eat.
Just like that tray slogan, you're more likely to see it and more likely to change your behavior.
And so by linking the message about what people should be doing,
should be eating to the plate, MyPlate helped trigger healthy eating.
The fruits and vegetables study also points out the importance of the context.
Going for interesting messages is our default tendency.
Whether we run for class president or we're selling a product,
we think that catchy or clever slogans will get us where we need to go.
But as the fruit and vegetable study shows,
a strong trigger can be much more effective than a catchy slogan.
Even though they hated the slogan, students are more likely to eat fruits and vegetables
when the cafeteria trays triggered reminders of health benefits.
Just being fed a clever slogan didn't change behavior at all.
It's not enough to be clever.
People have to remember that the message exists and remember to act on it.
How frequently things come to mind then depend in part on how frequently they are triggered.
So things that are triggered more often should come to mind more frequently
and more likely to be chosen.
In a sense, we can think about ideas, products and ideas as having a habitat.
Just like plants and animals do.
Biologists often talk about things as having habitats.
An environment, for example, that contains all the necessary elements that are useful for their survival.
When you think about deer, for example, they need an environment that contains open spaces for grazing.
Ducks need some ponds or water to swim in and some tasty food available to them to eat.
While the biological analogy of habitat is useful, it also applies to products and ideas.
Products and ideas also have habitats or a set of triggers in the environment
that cause people to think about those ideas.
Think about hot dogs, for example.
What makes us think about hot dogs?
Well, for me at least, it's things like baseball, summertime, barbecues,
even seeing a wiener dog walking down the street are a few things that trigger me to think about hot dogs.
And in a way, those ideas make up the hot dog's habitat,
the set of cues in the environment that remind people to think about it.
Compared with the habitat for Moroccan food, for example, hot dogs have a much larger habitat.
What makes people think about Moroccan food?
Not very much.
Moroccan food is certainly delicious, but its habitat is just not as prevalent.
Things that have larger habitats, then, should be more successful.
They should become to mind and be triggered more often and thus be more likely to catch on.
Weekends are made from myclobe, for example, was originally moved from holidays to weekend
because weekends are more frequent.
They wanted people to think about the beer every time the weekend rolls around.
While holidays are good, weekends are more frequent and so it made the slogan's habitat much larger.
Frequency, however, may also be balanced with the strength of the link.
The more things a given cue or trigger is associated with, the weaker any given association.
If you think about it, it's almost like poking holes in the bottom of a cup filled with liquid.
There's only one hole you poke in that cup.
A strong stream of liquid will come out.
But if you add many more holes, eventually there'll be so many that the amount of liquid that comes out of each is lessened.
Too many holes and barely a trickle would come out of any individual hole.
The same thing is true with triggers and cues.
People frequently see the color red, for example, but it's already associated with so many things.
We associate red with the holiday of Valentine's Day, with roses, with Coca-Cola, with Chinese New Year,
with fast cars, a whole host of different things.
And so it's not particularly strong trigger for any of these.
Nor is it a good thing to try to link a product to two because it's already so overburdened.
Red has so many cues and so many triggers, so many associations, any one association is weaker.
Thus the desire to pick a frequent cue has to be balanced with selecting a cue that does not already trigger a lot of other things.
So far we've talked about the frequency of cues and the number, but the exact timing of triggers also matters.
Consider this clever but ultimately ineffective public service ad from New Zealand.
A handsome muscular man is taking a shower.
And in the background you hear some catchy jingle about this new product called heat flow.
Some temperature controlled system that ensures you'll always have hot water in your shower.
While the man turns off the water, opens the shower door and attractive woman tosses him a towel and smiles at him.
He smiles back, she smiles, everybody looks happy.
Then suddenly he puts his foot down on the floor and slips.
He steps out of the shower stall slips and cracks his head on the floor.
As he lies there motionless, his arm twitches slightly.
And a voiceover, somberly in tones, preventing slips around your home can be as easy as using a bath mat.
Wow, definitely memorable, definitely surprising.
Who would have thought that this guy would have slipped?
You thought it was just going to be the usual guy-gall interaction that you see in an ad?
In fact, I think about this ad every time I take a step out of a shower in a bathroom that doesn't have a bath mat on the floor.
I can't help but think about this every time I get out of the shower.
But there's only one problem.
I can't buy very much when I've just gotten out of the shower.
I can't buy a bath mat when I'm in the bathroom.
Because I'm sitting there in a towel and I don't have a credit card or any place to buy something.
The message is too far physically removed from the desired behavior.
Sure, they'd like people to buy bath mats, but you can't buy a bath mat from the bathroom.
Unless I leave the bathroom, turn on my laptop, and buy a mat online,
I have to remember that message all the way until I get to the store.
And as we think about it, we think about that top of mind idea.
Slowly as time goes by, things decrease in being top of mind.
It might be right on top of mind when I step out of the shower,
but it's not going to be as light going to be top of mind two or three hours later.
If you think about it, reusable grocery bags have a similar problem.
Think about reusable grocery bags.
How many of you have those bags somewhere in your house?
Well, how many of you use them all the time?
Now, everyone has them at home. We all do. We all have them somewhere.
But we often forget to use them because we're not triggered to think about it.
We're only triggered when we get to the store.
And by the time we get to the store, it's too late.
We're not going to go back home to get them.
We need to be triggered also at the right time.
Now, we can contrast that with an ad from Australia about the dangers of sun exposure.
Again, the goal here is to remind people to use sunscreen,
to slather on lots of sunscreen when they're at the beach.
But rather than use text, the ad uses a very simple image of a chalk outline,
as will be drawn around a dead body on the ground.
But in this case, it's on a beach towel lying in the sand.
See a big beach towel with a chalk outline of a person as they might look as if they had died.
Now, the idea is that while you're lying on your towel, the sun could simultaneously be killing you.
This ad is certainly clever.
But what makes it even better is the smart use of triggers.
Beach towels are not just a decent trigger for the dangers of sun exposure.
They are the perfect one.
Think about when you want people to remember the dangers of sun exposure.
The best time is when they're at the beach or when they're outside.
That's exactly when you want people to think about using sunscreen,
when you're on the beach, lying on your towel.
So as we talked about in this lecture, ready reminders raise retrieval.
Triggers and cues in the environment can make products and ideas more top of mind,
which makes people more likely to choose them.
It can affect everything from the products we buy to even how we vote.
