Welcome to another Mathologer video. Are you here for your monthly fix of mathematical
wonders? Well, I've got just the thing for you. Really off the beaten track. Petters
perfection hiding in garbage miracle discovered over 100 years ago. Plus a truly miraculous
visual explanation of this miracle that not even most experts will be aware of. Plus a
nice coding challenge at the end for all the coding wizards among you. Intrigued? Sure
hope so. Well then, let's start by drawing a random Pentagon. There. One, two, three,
four, five. A random boring, screwed up Pentagon. Okay, Pentagon. Five sides, 360 degrees divided
by five. That's 72 degrees. Let's add 72 degree isosceles ears to the five sides of the Pentagon.
There. Well, remember, isosceles means that the two gray sides of our triangular ear are the same
lengths. Okay, more ears there, there, there, there. Now the tips of our ears form another
screwed up Pentagon. Slightly less screwy than the one we started with but still pretty boring.
What's next? Well, more ears, of course, but this time let's use two times 72. That's 144 degree
ears. There. Four more. This, this, this. And a third boring Pentagon. How long can I go on like
this before you switch channels? But wait, things are about to get very interesting. What's next?
Well, so far we've had one time 72 degrees, then two times 72. And so three times 72 equals 216
degrees is next. Because this angle is larger than 180 degrees, it will register on the inside of
the Pentagon like this. And, okay. And there you have it. One more boring. No, wait, that new
Pentagon is the opposite of boring. That new Pentagon is a perfect regular one. All sides and
angles are the same. How wonderful is that? And no, this is not a coincidence. In fact, this is
just the first of a string of closely related miracles. First miracle. This works no matter
what screwed up Pentagon you start with. Have a look. I made up this little GeoDribra app that
allows you to interactively move around the vertices of the initial Pentagon. And it shows you
how the other Pentagon's evolve. How easy it is to make up something like this these days is a
little miracle in itself. I link to my app in the description and show you how I built it at the
end of the video. Oh, and there, as you can see, if you start with a regular Pentagon, all the other
Pentagon's will be regular as well. Okay, what other miracles are there? Well, something interesting
happens when you attach to different types of ears in a different order. For example, let's use
this order. First 72. Well, that's the same style as before. And so we get the same green Pentagon
in the first step. The second Pentagon is different. Now here is miracle number two. At the end of the
next step, we get this. Exactly the same regular Pentagon as before. In fact, the same is true
for any ear order. There, there, there, there, there. Next miracle. Everything I said so far works
for any polygon with any number of sides. For example, here's a screwy 10 gone infinity sign.
What sort of ears are we supposed to use here? Well, 10 gone 10, 360 divided by 10, that's 36.
With Pentagon's, we use the first three multiples of 72. Three is two less than five. Similarly,
here we'll use the first 10 minus two equals eight multiples of 36. Here, one times 36, two times,
three times, and so on. Let's attach ears. 36 degree ears. All right, 72 degree ears. And so on.
Ready for the finale. There, a regular 10 gone. And again, we can permute the order in which we
unleash the different ears, and we'll always end up with exactly the same regular 10 gone. There,
there, there, okay. What are some natural questions to ask at this point? Well, there are a couple
mainly. Why the hell does this work? We'll get to that shortly. But what about, what does all this
look like for the simplest case, the triangles? Well, in the simplest case, 360 divided by three
is 120. And since three minus two is one, just attaching 120 degree ears should result in an
equilateral triangle, right? Let's check. Wonderful. This special case of our miracle is known as
Napoleon's theorem. Did Napoleon discover this? Actually, nobody knows how this result ended up
being called Napoleon's theorem. Definitely, the people in the know very much doubt that Napoleon
had anything to do with its discovery. In fact, the first documented mention of this special case
of our miracle was by the mathematician William Rutherford in 1826, who sadly did not share with
the rest of the world where he learned about this theorem. The discovery of the full blown miracle
is due to the Czech mathematician, Karol Petter, who reported on it in a paper published in 1905.
I probably butchered that one. Anyway, it translates to On a Theorem for Plain Polygons.
How's that for an anti-clickbait title? For almost 100 years, this remarkable paper
appears to have gone largely unnoticed. Having said that around 1940, our miracle was rediscovered
independently by the American mathematician Jesse Douglas, one of the first Fields medalists,
and German-born British-Australian mathematician Bernhard Neumann, and was subsequently named after
these two mathematicians. Not fair, right? The original discoverer was only widely recognized
fairly recently, and our miracle is now usually referred to as the Petter-Douglas-Neumann theorem.
So why didn't anybody take notice of this spectacular result when it was first published?
Well, not many mathematicians read Czech math journals. But then Petter actually did
republish his result in German in 1908. Ein Satz über viel Ecke. I definitely nailed the pronunciation
of that one, and you know why, right? Well, German was one of the main languages for communicating
mathematical discoveries at the time, so why do you think nobody took notice? I've got my own
theory, but what do you think the reason might be? Leave your thoughts in the comments.
On was the big question. Why the hell does this work? Well, let me take you on a little journey
of discovery to chase down the answer to this question. Lots of miracles and beautiful mathematics
to look forward to. Promise. Okay, so let's dig a little bit deeper. Just now I glossed over a
problem with the ears. Did you notice anything fishy? Well, time to fess up and get this problem
sorted out. Turns out there's a problem with me saying attach 72 degree ears. Why is there a problem?
Just put the ears on the outside when they are less than 180 degrees and have them register on
the inside if they are greater than 180 degrees. To highlight the problem, let's have another look
at our infinity shaped tengon. This time, let's attach the 36 degree ears one by one. There, one,
two, three, four. Can you see the problem now? With ear five, it's no longer clear what's inside
or outside. It's no longer clear on which side of the segment we should attach the next ear. What
we did before was this. Five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. That's fine. But if it started at the
bottom, going for the outside, we would have attached the first ear here. Two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Very different from what we got before there. Compare.
Now, for Petter's miracle to pan out, either way of attaching ears will work. We just have to be
consistent. But how are we supposed to be consistent throughout the whole construction? After all,
there are a number of polygons that need to be decorated with ears, not just one. Well, to start,
what we do is to go for a run around the polygon. For this, we first pick a direction in which we'll
travel and then we start running. As we run, we attach the ears one after the other and we always
attach the ears to our left with the provisor that angles greater than 180 degrees registered to our
right. Okay, let's go again. Ear one. I just attached this to my left. Ear two. Now, at this
point, we already know two points of the second green polygon. And I think you can guess in which
direction we'll be traversing the green polygon, right? This one, of course. Okay, keep moving
along the blue curve and keep attaching ears. There, there, there, there, there, there. Got it? Pretty
easy. But now, not quite finished yet. Let's quickly spool back to the beginning. So the direction
of running around the second green polygon is forced on us by our initial choice of direction
on the blue polygon. But once the green direction is pinned down, we also know how to add ears to
that third polygon and so on. Have a look. There, there, there. Aha. And so once we've chosen a
direction of travel on the original polygon, the directions of travel on the other polygons is also
clear. All good? All right. Wonderful. To keep things uncluttered, I'll mark the directions
of the first polygon and the last polygon. Okay. And what would this diagram look like if to start
with we travel in the opposite direction? Well, let's have a look. It's different as day and night.
In particular, both the directions on the starting and finishing polygons have flipped.
Also, have a close look at the final 10 guns in both scenarios. They're compared.
Okay. The final regular polygons are different in size and orientation. However, they do have
something in common. Can you guess? Yes, they have the same center. Curious. Not the same,
but share in the same center. Why is that? Well, we'll get to that too.
There's another ear oddity that we have to address. Remember to find the angle for the smallest
ear for the 10 gun, we divide 360 by 10. And that's 36. And to get to the regular 10 gun,
we use the first eight multiples of 36. There one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
Right. But why stop here? Why not also use the ninth angle? Doesn't it seem like a really natural
thing to do? Well, let's see what happens if we also do use this last angle.
Hmm. Alright. Isn't that interesting? All the tips of the ears end up in the middle
of the regular 10 gun. What about our Pentagon example? Well, here the next angle is four times
72 equals 288 degrees. And if we add 288 degree ears, we also end up in the center of the regular
Pentagon. Same thing. In fact, similar to what we noticed before, if we unleash those four types
of ears in any order whatsoever, we'll always end up in the same point. Have a look. They're
different order. Let's quickly go through the individual steps. Initial orientation,
288 degree ears. There they come. Okay. 72 degree ears. Okay. There we go.
Plot thickens. 216 degree ears.
That's nice. 144 degree ears.
Hmm. Same point. Also similar to what we already observed previously, removing the last angle
and just shuffling the order of the remaining three angles will always, always. Can you guess
what comes next? Yes. No matter in what order we apply the remaining angles, we'll always end up
with the same red pentagram. And so by adjusting my choice of ears in the intro, I could have made
things more mysterious by having all my pentagons morph into devilish pentagrams.
So there are these special polygons that collapse to a point when certain ears are slapped on.
These special polygons turn out to be very important for figuring out the
why the hell does this work? Let's have a closer look. In the case of pentagons,
we're dealing with four different ear angles and it's easy to see that for every one of these
angles, there's exactly one special type of oriented pentagon that collapses to a point
in the middle when we attach the corresponding ears. Right? For 72 degrees, the oriented regular
pentagon on the right will collapse to the middle when we attach 72 degree ears. For 288 degrees,
the angle that complements 72 degrees. The same regular pentagon with the direction of
travel reversed will collapse to the middle when we attach 288 degree ears. Similarly,
for 144 degrees and its complementary angle 216 degrees. In fact, for 72 degrees, it's pretty
obvious that the only pentagons that will collapse to a point when we attach 72 degree ears is this
particular oriented pentagon rotated and scaled in all possible ways. And similarly for the other
angles. So four different types of special pentagons? Cool. Oh, before I forget, one more easy but
important insight. If you put other ears on one of the special pentagons, you always end up with
a special pentagon of the same type. For example, let's put some different ears on in this case.
There, there, there, there, there. Another one of the special pentagons of the same type that
we started with. And this works for any type ear for all these special pentagons. Right? Attach
any kind of ear and either all the tips will end up in the middle or the tips will form a special
pentagon of the same type as the one we started with. Right? Now that's all very interesting,
isn't it? And doesn't it feel like the real explanation is just hiding around the corner?
How did we start again? Well, we added these ears in any order and we're left with this
special type pentagon. On the other hand, when we use these three ears, we ended up with this
special type. Also, as we were applying the ears, the intermediate pentagons appear to get closer
and closer to the final type. They somehow smoothed out. Have you got a theory for what might be
happening here? I'm sure quite a few of you will be on the right track by now. Anyway, let me show
you what's really going on. Hmm, all clear? No? Well, in a nutshell, what this set of diagrams
illustrates is an example of a very surprising fact. Under the hood, every pentagon, no matter how
screwed up, is the sum of four special pentagons, one of each of the four types. And then, slapping
on three of our special ears wipes out three of these special summons and leaves us with the
remaining four special summons. That was a bit fast and also a bit wrong. But that's the
amazing gist of it. The ears wipe out three of the four invisible super nice components of a pentagon
and what remains is then, of course, super nice itself. Amazing, right? Before we go into the
details, let me thank John Harnett for lobbying for a mythology video about Petter's miracle.
And I'd also like to mention where I learned this nice one glance way of making sense of the miracle.
There. Eigen polygon decomposition of polygons. A Microsoft technical memo
authored by none other than L.V. Ray Smith, one of the legendary founders of Pixar.
Remember Toy Story? That Pixar. Matt sure can take you to strange places. Also, remember me in Toy Story?
No? Me neither. I don't remember appearing in Toy Story, but turns out my new best friend,
GPT, does. Anyway, let's get back to our magical set of diagrams. Okay, so these four special pentagons
are all centered at the origin. They're also supposed to be of the four different types,
but then where are the arrows that indicate the directions of travel? Well, let's zoom in a bit
for the moment and put in those arrows. There are two regular pentagons running in opposite
directions and the regular pentagrams also running in opposite directions. Actually,
the arrows are not really needed as the direction of travel is built into the coloring of the
vertices. It's always red, black, orange, blue, green and back to red. Okay, let's zoom out again.
Now, I said that our screwy pentagon is the sum of the four special pentagons. In what sense?
Well, just take the x and y coordinates of the four red vertices at the bottom,
add them up and you get the x and y coordinates of the red vertex of our screwy pentagon at the top.
Neat. Well, not quiet. There's also the diagram at the bottom left that we have not talked about
yet. This diagram also shows a pentagon, but a really weird one. A degenerate, infinitely small
pentagon, all of whose vertices coincide with this one point. What? A pentagon? All of whose
vertices are the same? Well, mathematicians are weird. Get used to it. Anyway, important in this
strange degenerate pentagon, the different vertices all have the same coordinates. Now,
also add these coordinates to the other red coordinates at the bottom and this really gives
the coordinates of the red vertex at the top. The same is true for the black vertices,
the orange ones, the blue ones and the green ones. Fantastic. Also, it should be clear that the
direction of travel around the top pentagon is the usual one. There, that's the direction of travel.
In fact, just in case you ever want to reconstruct the direction of travel in anything that follows,
it's always red to black and so on. It's up there. Okay, let's slap some years on all the pentagons.
72 degrees is first. What happened? Well, on the left, how do you put ears on that
degenerate infinitely small pentagon? Well, it's also infinitely small ears and so all
the tips of these ears will end up at the same point as all the five vertices. Weird, but makes
sense, right? Okay, then on the right, all tips of those ears end up at the origin. Okay, so clearly
some zapping in action here. And then what are the new pentagons? Well, as we are traveling
around the original pentagons starting at red, we are creating and coloring the ears one by one
like this. Red, black, orange, blue, green. All right, so there then are the new pentagons all
colored in. Aha, see that new degenerate monster that just spawned on the right? And well, it's not
obvious, but it turns out that as before, the red x and y coordinates at the bottom add to the red
coordinates at the top, the black ones at the bottom add to the black ones at the top and so on.
And notice the new pentagon at the top really looks more regular than the one we started with,
right? This is a consequence of the fact that the special type pentagon on the far right is now
degenerate and no longer contributes to the sum. Makes sense, doesn't it? Its x and y coordinates
are both equal to zero, so no contribution. And now it's all plain sailing from here. Slap on the
144 degree ears and the picture in front of us changes like this. Attach the ears, connect the
tips, color. Three times 72, 216 degrees is next. Add the ears, connect the tips, color.
And that's it. All but one of the special pentagons have been degenerated. And the only thing remaining
is a regular pentagon. Super duper neat, isn't it? But wait, for some more icing on the cake,
let's also slap on the last type of ears. Attach the ears, nothing to connect, so just color.
And so that the general point at the bottom left that we've been staring at all along
coincides with that special point that we end up with at the top. Neat how all this comes together,
isn't it? Here are two little challenges for you. First, how does all this show that the
degenerate point is the centroid, the center of mass of all the pentagons that we came across at
the top? And when I say pentagon, here I just mean the vertices, the center of mass of the vertices.
So the center of mass of these five points, and of these five points, and of these five,
and of these five points. So nice. Second challenge, what would we end up with if instead of slapping
on rounds of 72, 144, 216 degree ears once each, I used one round of 72, two rounds of 144,
and three rounds of 216. Should be easy to figure out at this point, leave your thoughts in the comments.
Very cool how the different pentagons at the top split into their components and how.
When you get close to one of the special pentagons, its corresponding component dominates the other
ones. Absolute magic. Seeing is believing. Seeing is believing, yes, but of course what I have not
explained yet is why, one, every pentagon is an amazing sum like this, and two, while slapping
on our ears and transitioning from one pentagon to the next, preserves the sum property. I should
really say something about all that, shouldn't I? After all, this is mythology. Okay, so why is
every pentagon a sum of these special ones? This may seem very surprising at first glance,
but it actually isn't once you think about it for a bit, right? What are we playing with at
the bottom? Well, for every one of these special pentagons, we can turn and scale in all possible
ways. That gives two times four degrees of freedom. In addition, the x and y coordinates
of the special point at the bottom left gives another two degrees of freedom. So in total,
we've got 8 plus 2 equals 10 degrees of freedom to adjust things at the bottom. On the other hand,
the x and y coordinates of the five vertices of the pentagons at the top also correspond to
2 times 5 equals 10 degrees of freedom. And so if we adjust those 10 variables at the bottom and
add up, we'll definitely create a lot of different pentagons at the top. And since we're dealing
with 10 degrees of freedom both at the top and at the bottom, it's definitely conceivable that we
get all pentagons this way. In fact, there's a super slick way of mathifying all this using
complex numbers. Even Petter already used this trick in his original paper. For this,
you interpret the coordinate pairs of all points inside as one complex number each, like this.
So the x and y coordinates become the real and imaginary parts of the complex numbers.
And every pentagon turns into a list of five complex numbers. But then the pentagons at the
bottom can be written as these extra special pentagons multiplied by some complex numbers.
Remember, multiplying by complex numbers rotates and scales, rotates and scales. And then the task
of writing a pentagon as one of our special sums simply amounts to solving a system of linear
equations. That this system always has a unique solution is easily checked, for example, by calculating
the determinant of the five times five matrix on the left. As I said, I'll skip the details,
but that's actually how I calculated things to produce most of the diagrams and animations in
this video. It's all complex numbers. Weirder! If you're interested in the details, check out
the linked files in the description of this video. Now, the other question is why slapping on ears
preserves the sum property, right? We start with things at the bottom, adding two things at the top,
okay? And then after slapping on ears, the same is true in the new picture we end up with.
How can we prove that this always works? Well, on close inspection, this boils down to proving
that if you add two similar triangles, so add coordinates, vertex by vertex,
red plus red, black plus black, and brown plus brown, the triangle you end up with
is similar to the two you started with. That's a very cute fact in itself. And I'd like to challenge
you to find a proof yourself and share your proof with the rest of us in the comments. Anyway,
once you know that this is true, you can then jump back into this picture and convince yourself
that all the corresponding similar ears at the bottom add to the one at the top.
And on the nitty-gritty side of things, calculating the new pentagon from the old one is then a
matter of simple matrix multiplication. Anyway, all real quick, and I don't expect you to get
all of this straight away, I just hope you get the gist, the flavor of it all. And those of you
who know a little bit more and are really keen should have no trouble flashing things out into
a full proof. First for pentagons and then for all polygons. Also, if you do know a little bit
more maths, by now it should be clear that everything I've been talking about can be
nicely expressed in the language of linear algebra. In particular, slapping on any choice of ears is a
linear operator that has all of our special type pentagons as complex eigenvectors. And the fact
that any pentagon is a linear combination of such eigenvectors then also follows straight away from
the fact that the eigenvalues of those eigenvectors are different. Another catch phrase for what we're
doing here is discrete Fourier transformation of planar polygons. Anyway, that's exactly the
language used in that nice report by Pixar founder L. V. Ray Smith that I mentioned before. I also
link to this report in the comments. Now, if you're a coding ace looking for a challenge,
Petter's Miracle is a rich source of spectacular visualizations that are waiting to be realized
by someone. If you come up with something good in this respect, please share it with the rest
of us in the comments. I'll also list some specific challenges in the description of this video.
And there will also be a prize for my favorite visualization submitted by one of you.
Finally, can anybody here think of some good applications for Petter's Miracle? There must
be some. For example, how about we try to approximate a smooth closed curve by polygons
and use Petter to turn the curve into a circle using some limiting process.
Is there a good way of doing this? Anyway, good enough for today. Until next time.
Bye-bye.
