The Earth, too, has a history like the universe and like human beings,
and this and the previous lecture are describing that history.
The Earth is not strictly speaking alive, though it is covered by a thin film of life that we call the biosphere.
But neither is it a completely inner lump of matter.
It moves and changes, and in its own way, it's quite creative.
It has changed profoundly since its early days, though only in the last 100 years,
through the work of figures such as Wagner and Hess, did geologists come to understand exactly how and in what ways the Earth moved.
Now to understand the modern understanding of the Earth,
it'll help, as with earlier stories, to contrast modern accounts of the history of the Earth with traditional accounts.
Traditionally, it was widely assumed that though mountains might rise through processes of volcanism or earthquakes,
and they might fall through erosion, the slow wearing away of mountains by rain, wind and snow,
the fundamental geography of the Earth's surface was fixed.
Now we've seen this story many times now.
The traditional assumption that human history is something that moves and changes,
but within a context that changes very little.
And once again, we're going to see that idea that the background to human history doesn't change is wrong.
In 1912, Alfred Wagner published a book called The Origin of Continence and Oceans.
Three years later, despite World War I, it was published in English, and of course I've given the title of the English translation.
Wagner had done quite a lot of research in Greenland.
He was an accomplished balloonist.
All in all, he fits in very well with a late 19th and early 20th century generation of great explorers.
And as I said, he would die eventually leading an expedition to the interior of Greenland.
The central idea of Wagner's book is often known as the theory of continental drift.
What Wagner argued, essentially, was that the Earth's continents were moving.
So from the very beginning, Wagner says very clearly, geography is not fixed.
Geography too has a history.
And he argued specifically that the continents had moved across the surface of the Earth
in such a way that once they'd been joined together in a single supercontinent called Pangaea or Pangaea.
There's a reference there that some of you may pick up immediately to the Greek goddess of the Earth, Gaia.
So this in a sense means all Gaia.
When he published his idea just before the First World War, the idea seemed completely beyond the pale to most professional geologists.
So Wagner, like Darwin, as we'll see when he published, had quite a struggle on his hands to persuade people that it was a serious idea.
So what evidence did he offer for this revolutionary claim that whole continents had sort of careered around the surface of the Earth?
Let me describe some of the crucial evidence.
And it has to be said that Wagner managed to produce some very, very powerful evidence indeed.
I'll just list some of the crucial examples of that.
The first comes from simply looking at world maps.
The first modern world maps were created early in the 16th century and they showed immediately, it was apparent to many people who looked at them,
that the continents seemed to fit together rather like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
This was particularly clear if you looked across the Atlantic Ocean and this was picked up by people including Francis Bacon.
If you look at a map of the world, you'll see that West Africa, the bulge of West Africa would seem to fit very neatly into the southern coast of North America.
Well, the bulge of Brazil would nuzzle quite nicely into the bend of West Africa as it bends south past the Congo.
So as early as the 16th and 17th centuries, some scholars had noticed these intriguing fits
and it crossed their mind that perhaps this was real, perhaps in some sense the continents had once fitted together.
In fact, if you look at a map of the world that draws the boundaries of continents, not where the sea is but at the continental shelves,
that's the point where the continental plate sort of drops away sharply, you'll see that the fit is even better.
Now that's the first crucial piece of evidence. You look at a map of the world and what you see is what looks like a jigsaw puzzle whose pieces have been slowly moved apart.
That's the first piece. The second piece is this.
Wagner listed a considerable number of geological formations that seemed to cut right across some of the world's seas.
For example, he identified geological formations that were of a similar date in composition
that you could find in West Norway, in East Greenland, in much of Britain, in Northwest Africa and along the eastern seaboard of the USA.
What could this possibly mean? Why would you get such similar strata in all of these regions?
It made sense only if you made the assumption that perhaps all these regions had once been joined together.
Then it fit very neatly.
The idea was not entirely original. An Austrian geologist, Edward Seuss, who lived from 1831 to 1914,
had already proposed that the southern continents of South America, Africa, Antarctica, Australia and India
had once been part of a single continent that he named Gondwana Land,
and his reasons for arguing this were very similar to those that Wagner used.
Wagner, in effect, expanded Seuss' idea to suggest that it was not just Gondwana Land that had once been joined in a supercontinent,
but all the Earth's major continents had once been joined together.
So that's the second piece of evidence.
You can find these very striking geological strata that seem to cut across the oceans
and suggest very powerfully that what is now separated by oceans had once been joined.
A similar argument concerns fossil species.
Wagner was able to accumulate a lot of data showing that fossil species, such as the ancient plant Glosopteris,
could be found on most of the continents of Gondwana Land.
And again, this hinted at the possibility that that was true,
because Glosopteris had once flourished on a large continent that brought all these masses together.
A similar question arises when you ask about the distribution of marsupials or marsupial fossils.
Why do you find them in South America and Australia?
Why are they so common there? And you can find fossils of them, for example, in Antarctica.
The idea of Gondwana Land explains that very, very neatly indeed.
So that's a third piece of evidence, fossils.
There's a fourth piece of evidence, and that concerns glaciation.
Or rather to be more precise, it concerns evidence that regions of the world
had once existed in very different climatic zones from the ones they existed in today.
For example, in tropical regions of Africa, you can find lots of geological evidence of glaciation.
Geologists can detect glaciation very easily.
It shows up as a sort of scouring of large areas of land by ice.
So there's plenty of evidence of glaciation in tropical regions of Africa.
This is obviously bizarre. It's been unexpected.
Equally surprising, you can find evidence of tropical forests in Antarctica.
And of course, what this suggests is that Antarctica had once been situated in a tropical region,
and Africa had at one time been situated in a region of glaciation.
So here we have four fairly powerful pieces of evidence.
The jigsaw fit of the continents, continuous geological strata, the fossil evidence,
and finally evidence that land masses had once existed in very different climatic zones from those they existed in today.
But here's the question, and this unfortunately is a question for which Wagner had no decent answers.
What in heaven's name can push entire continents back and forth across the surface of the earth?
That was a real problem about his theory. He couldn't explain it.
And his ideas cut across the fundamental commitments of geology.
Professional geologists deeply disliked the idea.
Their whole training prejudiced them against the idea that geography in this sense had a history.
And as a result, by the late 20s, most geologists had formally rejected Wagner's ideas.
And his ideas would remain at best marginal within geology for 40 years until the 1960s.
Now, it has to be said that there's some professional jealousy here.
The fact that he was a meteorologist didn't help at all in a community of geologists,
nor for American geologists who tended to dominate the profession did the fact that he was German.
Remember, this was in the 1920s, not that long after World War I.
That raises another problem. How did geologists then deal with the evidence that Wagner had come up with?
Well, the answer has to be that they came up with some remarkably ad hoc ideas,
which only made sense to geologists deeply committed to preserving the status quo.
One of them, for example, was that there must clearly have existed, though there was no apparent evidence for it,
land bridges linking the continents, very thin strips of land stretching right across massive bodies of water.
In retrospect, it sounds completely crazy. The remarkable thing is that the idea flourished for quite a time.
It was the only way of dealing with the sort of evidence that Seuss and Wagner had come up with.
Eventually, research after World War II would suggest a solution to Wagner's dilemma
and would revive interest in a modified version of his theories.
And in the 1960s, there emerged a new theory which is commonly known as plate tectonics
and will use that label to distinguish it from Wagner's slightly different theory, continental drift.
And plate tectonics would emerge very quickly during what for geologists is the revolutionary decade of the 1960s.
It would emerge as the new fundamental idea in the Earth's sciences.
Incidentally, it's worth reminding you that the 1960s were also a revolutionary era in cosmology.
And we'll see that to some extent that was true also of biology, a lot changed in the 1960s.
OK. What changed for geology?
The crucial figure now is Harry Hess.
His dates in 1906 to 1969. He was a geology professor at Princeton and a naval commander during World War II.
And as a naval commander, he used the recently developed technology of sonar, which had been developed to detect submarines.
But as a geologist, he realized he was a wonderful tool for surveying a branch of geology that very little was known about, and that was the sea floor.
So he started using sonar to survey the sea floor.
Now, to understand why he was so shocked by what he found, we have to be very clear about what most geologists assumed the sea floor was like.
Remarkably little was known about the deep sea floor.
Most geologists assumed that it was a sort of mud flat.
After all, erosion had been carrying Earth from the mountains of the Earth's continents for millions, perhaps billions of years into the sea.
So it was assumed that this would form a sort of flat goo at the bottoms of the ocean.
What in fact did Harry Hess find?
Well, he found something completely different, as opposite as you could imagine from this sort of flat goo.
What he found was a long, long chain of volcanoes, of mountains, quite high volcanoes.
And that chain, it eventually turned out, ran through the center of most of the Earth's oceans.
This was astonishing. This chain of volcanoes was really not what the doctor had ordered at all.
So the chain he found turned out to be one section of a chain that linked all the major oceans.
What sense could he make of this chain? What did this mean? What did this show?
Well, one of the clues came quite soon after his discovery.
In 1962, studies of these deep sea floor volcanic chains showed something again unexpected, but quite significant.
It turned out that if you study the magnetism of the land near these deep sea volcanoes,
you find that very close to the volcanoes, you get normal magnetism.
In other words, the rocks are magnetized in the normal way, with the north pointing north.
Now, I have to explain that as molten rock solidifies, it tends to take on the magnetism of the Earth at the time that it solidifies.
So this was to be expected. What was strange was that if you moved a bit further out on either side,
you'd find bands, strips, that had the opposite magnetism.
In other words, the north pole was off to the south.
If you went slightly further, you'd find a reversal again, and so on.
So you have this series of bands of opposite magnetism. What did this mean?
Well, by 1966, it was shown that the Earth's magnetic field periodically reverses.
Again, this had not been known before. Every few hundred thousand years, the Earth's magnetic field reverses.
So what this meant was that each band represented sea floor laid down in a different period.
And this began to suggest some clues as to what was going on at these huge mid-oceanic volcanic chains.
And eventually improved dating techniques confirmed the emerging picture of what was going on.
And it was this. It was that the bands closest to the volcanoes were oceanic crust that was very recent.
It had been laid down very recently. And as you move away from these mid-oceanic ridges,
you get sea floor crust that has been laid down further away. It's older and older.
And as you reach the edge of the continents, you reach the oldest oceanic crust.
This evidence confirmed an idea that Hess had proposed as early as 1962. And it was this.
It was that what was happening at the mid-oceanic ridges was that molten magma is rising from the Earth's interior
and it's creating new sea floor. And as it does so, it pushes existing sea floor aside.
Here, in other words, is the motor that Wagner had looked for.
Lava rising up from the mantle, pushing the crust apart, creating new sea floor.
Now that, of course, immediately raised a new problem.
If the sea floor is expanding, what's happening? Does this mean, as some geologists suggested,
they toyed with the idea that perhaps the whole Earth is slowly bloating.
It's getting bigger and bigger and bigger and more and more bloated.
Hess had a much better suggestion, which is accepted today.
And it was this. It was that the old sea floor doesn't hang around.
Eventually, it plunges back into the interior. It becomes magma again.
And eventually, of course, it could be recycled as new ocean crust.
This idea helped explain quite a few things. One was why oceanic crust seemed to consist mainly of volcanic basalts.
And why it was so much younger than most continental crust?
Most continental crust tends to be older than oceanic crust, sometimes much older.
You can find rocks that are several billion years old on the continents.
You don't find any rocks older than a few hundred million years old on the sea floor.
OK, let's sum up where these discoveries are leading.
They laid the foundations for the modern theory of plate tectonics.
And as I say, I'm using the term plate tectonics now to distinguish the modern version of the theory from Wagner's version,
which had no mechanism to explain how continents might move.
So this is what plate tectonics says.
According to plate tectonics, the Earth's crust consists of a dozen or so large plates and many, many much smaller plates,
like sections of a cracked eggshell.
And there are gaps between these plates.
And what it argues is that convection currents in the semi-molten regions beneath them move the plates.
Now, we've already seen that the mantle is semi-molten.
So that means, as in a boiling saucepan of water, you get convection currents.
This stuff is moving around very powerfully, it's driven by very powerful forces,
and that stuff carries the plates around.
Not surprisingly, most of the geologically interesting events occur at the plate's edges.
That's where you find volcanoes, that's where you find earthquakes.
Now, to understand this in more detail, we have to look at what happens at the edge of these plates.
So let me just describe several types of edges.
I'm going to describe divergent margins where crust is pushed apart,
convergent margins where it's pushed together,
and then transform margins where plates slide past each other.
So let's begin with divergent margins.
Divergent margins were what Hess himself had been studying,
and these you find at sub-oceanic ridges.
We've seen that magma rising from the interior comes up,
forms new seafloor, and pushes adjacent plates apart.
This is the motor of plate tectonics,
and this is why the Atlantic Ocean, for example, is widening by about two centimetres each year.
If you want to get a sense of what that means,
it's probably about the rate at which your fingernails are growing.
Now the second type of margin, convergent margins.
These are margins where plates are being pushed together by the fact that somewhere else
there are divergent margins that are sort of jostling them all together.
What happens when two plates are pushed together?
Well, there are two main types of convergent margins.
Now let's imagine that our two plates are continental,
because we can distinguish between continental plates
consisting mainly of continental crust and oceanic plates.
If they're both continental, what's most likely to happen
is that they'll be pushed together and they'll simply buckle up
at what are often called collision margins.
And what do they form? They form huge mountain chains.
The Himalayas is the best known example of this,
and it's formed by the fact that India, the Indian plate,
has been travelling north over the last 100 million years very rapidly
since it broke away from Gondwana land,
and eventually it collided with the Asian plate,
and that collision drove up the Himalayas.
Geologically speaking, this is a fairly recent event,
which is why the Himalayas are so high.
There's not been time enough for them to be worn down.
So that's a collision margin, but there's a second type of margin
which is in its way equally interesting and important.
Now let's imagine an oceanic plate.
Oceanic plates consist of...
they're dominated by basalts of various kinds.
Basalts tend to be heavier than granites,
the granites that you find in continental crusts,
and this is precisely why continental crust is so old.
It tends to float higher.
Continental crust has been around for a long, long time.
Oceanic crust is heavier,
and that's why it tends to burrow back into the earth.
So let's imagine we have a continental plate
meeting an oceanic plate.
What happens?
Well, very often you get what are known as subduction margins.
Because the basalt's heavier,
it dives beneath the continental plate.
Now this is a violent, violent process.
You can imagine the two plates are going to grind together
as the oceanic plate dives beneath the continental plate,
and that grinding can generate a lot of heat and a lot of energy,
and it can drive up whole mountain chains.
And in fact, the Andes are a perfect example
of what can happen at a subduction margin,
because the Andes were formed
as the Pacific plate dove under the west coast of South America.
So that's a subduction margin.
So we've seen there are two types of convergent margin,
one where you get two continental plates
and they buckle into mountains,
and the second is a subduction margin
where oceanic plate dives beneath continental plate.
And there, too, you may get mountain chains forming.
The third type of plate is easier to imagine.
It's a transform margin,
and the classic example of this is the San Andreas Fault in California.
Here you have two plates that are sort of pushing in opposite directions.
One is pushing north, the other is pushing south.
They're stuck together,
so friction stops them from moving a lot of the time,
but the force slowly builds up,
and eventually the force will become so violent
that there'll be a sudden release
that the two plates will quite suddenly move
and you get an earthquake,
and LA suffers.
This energy is suddenly released in a huge earthquake.
So that's a transform margin.
So just to summarize,
we've seen these three types of margins,
convergent margins where plates come together,
divergent margins where they dive apart,
and transform margins.
How do we know this?
Well, we have all the evidence that Wagner offered,
but now we have a lot more.
We have the evidence that Hess offered,
and we can go even further.
For example, satellite images can now enable us
