for another level of complexity which we'll get to later on.
Life we'll see is too delicate to exist on stars,
which are extremely violent places.
Planets, though, provide a perfect environment.
They enjoy the benefits of the energy flows from stars,
but not the extreme violence of stars.
So that's where planets, in particular, our Earth,
that's why planets provide the ideal environment for life.
So, how were planets created,
and specifically how was our planet the Earth created?
To understand this, we need to shift scales.
From the cosmological scale that's dominated the lecture so far
to the scale of a single star.
This is a radical shift in scale,
and we need to remind ourselves that we're doing it.
Our temporal scale shrinks slightly.
We begin four and a half billion years ago now,
when the universe was about nine billion years old.
So we've moved forward nine billion years.
It was about two-thirds of its present age
and about two-thirds of its present size.
Our spatial scale is going to shrink much more drastically,
because what we're doing now
is we're focusing on one tiny part of the universe.
Now, just think for a moment
what a radical shift in scale this really is.
We saw in an earlier lecture
that there are as many stars in the universe
as there are grains of sand on all the beaches on Earth.
This is not, of course, a precise calculation,
it's suggesting the sort of orders of magnitude involved.
And what we're really doing now
is we're picking up one of those grains of sand,
our own Sun,
and we're going to study it for the rest of this course.
And in fact, what we're going to study is not the grain itself,
but the stuff around it.
Unfortunately, at present,
this is the only corner of the universe
that we know enough about
to be able to discuss planet formation.
Although we'll see we're beginning to learn a lot more
about neighboring regions.
And that's why for the rest of this course
we'll focus on the history of our solar system.
We can't yet give a general date
for the appearance of the first planets,
though it's probably a good guess
that planets of some kind appeared
within one or two billion years of the origins of the universe.
All we really know is when they appeared in our corner,
our tiny corner of the universe.
So our approach from now on has to be a bit parochial.
Perhaps in the future we'll be able to answer these questions
much better, questions such as
how come on the planets?
When did the first appear?
At present, though, we can guess at the answers,
but do little more.
Nevertheless, if we're looking at this one grain of sand
and the stuff around it,
let's remember also that from a human perspective
this is still a huge scale.
Remember, in an earlier lecture
when I tried to give you some sense of the scale,
the spatial scales of the universe,
I suggested a thought experiment
in which we take an airliner through space.
An airliner that takes five hours to cross the USA
would take about 18 days we saw to reach the moon,
20 years to reach the sun,
about 80 years, that's a whole human lifetime to reach Jupiter,
750 years to reach Pluto,
and about 5 million years to reach the next star.
So that's just a reminder that even this local scale
is very large indeed.
I should add, of course, that that's slightly deceptive
because already we know how to travel much faster
than a jetliner,
and some human-made objects,
such as one or two of the satellites
that have been created in recent decades
have actually reached as far as Pluto itself.
They're reaching beyond the solar system.
Okay.
This is actually a very exciting time
to be talking about planets.
In the 1990s, improved observational techniques,
depending on the use of computers
and improved telescopes,
let astronomers observe other planetary systems
for the first time.
Before the 90s,
we had no certainty
that there were any other planetary systems in the universe,
and so it was always possible that our solar system
was the only system like this that existed.
Now, we're beginning to learn
that we can observe directly other solar systems.
So one of the first things we've learned is that they exist.
Solar systems turn out to be fairly common in the universe.
How's this done?
Extremely precise observations of tiny changes
in the brightness of nearby stars
allows us to detect the presence of bodies orbiting them.
So if you have a star,
and the light suddenly drops for a moment,
and then brightens up again,
and this change is periodic,
there's a pretty good guess that something is orbiting around it
and cutting out some of the light periodically.
So this is one of the techniques
that allows us to detect the presence of planets.
And these techniques could even allow us
to say something about the size, the orbits,
and sometimes even the chemistry of those objects.
Now, so far, these techniques have allowed us
to identify only large planets,
planets about the size of Jupiter,
but the techniques are getting more and more refined,
and very soon we can expect them to identify Earth-sized planets
in orbit around nearby stars.
That will be very exciting indeed.
This is a space worth watching
because if we find lots of Earth-sized planets,
then the odds that there are living organisms
out there increase fairly dramatically.
So this is worth watching.
So far, about 10% of all stars surveyed
in the parts of the Milky Way close to us
turn out to have planetary systems,
and that suggests that planetary systems
are almost as common as stars.
At this time, several hundred planets have been identified.
Okay, now let's go back to our cocktail party question,
which is how do you make a planet?
The very general answer is that planetary systems
are created as byproducts of star formation.
But this can happen only in regions of space
that are chemically rich because of supernova explosions.
In other words, regions of space
in which large stars have lived out their lives and died,
and in their death they have ejected,
they've sprayed new chemicals into surrounding space.
One of the things we can be sure about,
given our knowledge of how elements were created,
is that interstellar space,
particularly in regions where there are lots of stars,
like galaxies, like the Milky Way,
interstellar space has been seeded
with more and more complex elements.
So the interstellar medium has itself
become chemically richer and richer.
And it's when stars are formed in such regions
that you can get galaxies.
So, if you form a star in a region
where there are lots of chemicals,
there seems now to be a good chance
that you're going to end up with planets.
So how's it done?
Our sun was created like all other stars.
We saw it's a normal star.
It was created by the collapse of a cloud of matter,
a solar nebula.
And planets formed from the solar nebula
because this particular cloud was chemically rich.
It's a good guess that hydrogen made up
about 70% of the matter in the solar nebula
and helium about another 27%.
These we've seen are close to the proportions
of hydrogen and helium in the early universe.
However, by now there are other elements,
carbon, oxygen and nitrogen,
all of which we'll see are vital ingredients
of living organisms,
probably accounted for about 1.5%
of the material in the solar nebula.
And the remaining 1.5%
included all the other elements of the periodic table.
There's a helpful acronym here
for chemicals that play an important role in life,
and it's CHON, C-H-O-N.
And it stands for carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
So you can think of that acronym
if you want to think of the chemicals that are crucial for life.
And you'll know by now why they're fairly common.
They could all be made in the dying stages of large stars.
They didn't have to wait for supernovae.
You'll also know, I think, why helium isn't there.
Helium just doesn't do much chemically.
Right. What followed should be familiar now.
We have a cloud of stuff,
and that cloud of stuff is full of matter,
but not just hydrogen and helium.
Now what happens?
Well, we'll go back to the story of star formation.
Gravity draws this cloud together.
As the cloud becomes denser, it heats up.
Pressure simply squashes it together.
You get more and more collisions between particles at the center.
They collide more violently.
They collide more frequently.
And the temperature heats up, particularly at the center.
When the temperature at the center reaches about 10 million degrees,
fusion begins.
Hydrogen atoms start to fuse together.
And according to Einstein's equation,
as they do so, a tiny bit of matter is converted into energy,
and there's a huge release of energy.
The sun lights up.
As a furnace appears, a fusion furnace at its center.
And it acquires the typical structure of all stars.
You have this furnace in the center where there are fusion reactions.
You have a middle layer which contains reserves of hydrogen.
And you have a surface from which energy radiates out into the space around it.
So now we get this nice flow of lots of energy from this hotspot in space
into the cold of surrounding space.
And as we've seen, we can see areas of star formation in our galaxy even today.
This is a process that in some sense we can observe fairly directly.
And I suggested earlier that you might try looking for the horse head nebula on the Internet.
You can find some wonderful pictures of it.
And you'll see there a large area where there are these very bright lights,
which are new stars that have just lit up.
Now this process of star formation, which we've seen before,
is one that can occur at several scales.
And in fact, it occurs even within the solar system.
For example, Jupiter is mainly gaseous, like a star.
And it's large enough so that the pressure created as Jupiter formed
made its center extremely hot, but not quite hot enough for fusion.
At least there's no certainty that anything like fusion is taking place at the center of Jupiter.
So we can say of Jupiter that it's almost a star, but not quite.
Now we shift our attention away from the sun and towards the outer parts of this collapsing cloud of matter
from which the planets and other bodies of the solar system would form.
When I first started teaching big history, the sections on cosmology and astronomy
were given by the late David Allen, who was an astronomer at the Anglo-Australian Observatory.
David Allen was a superb lecturer, and he came up with the thought experiment I've used already
of flying a plane through the solar system.
And another one in describing star formation or planet formation.
He said it's a bit like making a cake, and he remembers as a kid, and I'm sure most of us do.
A cake's being made and you hover around as the cake's being made.
The cake is poured into the bowl in which it's going to be baked, the baking bowl,
and then you get to lick the bowl.
And David Allen's point was that the planets are made from the stuff that's left in the bowl,
the edge of the baking bowl, the bit you lick.
And they're made through a process known as accretion.
The planets and other bodies of our solar system are created from just 0.1% of the solar nebula.
That's the bit of the solar nebula not incorporated in the Sun.
Something like 99.9% went into the Sun.
That's the bit that goes into the baking tin.
Now, let's go back to the solar nebula.
It's contracting at the center of the Sun's formed.
As it contracts, it starts spinning.
Now, why does it spin?
Well, here's just a naive way of describing that.
In fact, it would be very odd if it didn't spin.
You can imagine it's contracting if every particle in the solar nebula
were heading exactly for the gravitational center of that cloud.
Then it might stand still, but that's extremely unlikely.
What's going to happen? It's a bit like water going down a plug hole.
Some are going to be aiming slightly off the center,
but gradually you'll find the whole thing starts to spin.
Then as it gets smaller, it spins faster.
And this is exactly like an ice skater doing a pirouette
and then bringing her arms in on herself.
She'll start spinning faster and faster and faster.
Now, this is important because the spinning shapes the solar nebula.
It flattens the spinning nebula into a disk.
And what this means is the material not gobbled up by the sun
begins to orbit the sun in a single plane.
This is the same principle as taking a pizza dough,
a ball of pizza dough, and turning it into a pizza.
You spin it, centrifugal force spreads it out, and flattens it.
So you end up with a spinning disk.
We can see this principle at work very clearly if you look at Saturn's rings.
They give us a very good idea of what went on because Saturn's rings,
like the solar nebula, consist of orbiting debris that didn't go into the main star.
So they may give us a good idea of the shape and structure of the solar nebula.
Now, we have the spinning disk around the sun.
Because it's spinning, particles are orbiting in a series of different orbits.
So now let's move out to one of these orbits.
