to measure tectonic movements with great precision.
This is not guesswork.
We can actually measure precisely the speed
and direction of the movement of each plate.
And now in summary,
we know what the machine was that Wagner was looking for.
How can we describe it?
What's driving this whole process?
Well, what's driving it is something we saw in an earlier lecture.
It's heat from the center of the Earth,
and we saw that that heat was generated when our Earth was formed.
And it's still there, slowly, slowly dissipating.
But there's a lot of heat in the center of the Earth,
and it's that heat that drives this massive process.
So it's now clear that the continents are indeed moving,
and they're moving on these plates.
Now, in the final part of the lecture,
I want to very briefly give you some feeling
of how this process created the geography of the modern world.
It now seems clear that as plates move around,
periodically all the plates, all the continental plates,
have formed supercontinents such as Pangea.
Wagner was dead right about that.
And here I want to just summarize some of the crucial changes
over the last two of these cycles.
Now, we begin about 540 million years ago,
we're in the fourth of the great geological eons,
the Phanerozoic Eon.
That is divided into a number of geological periods,
whose names will be fairly familiar.
This is not a course in geology,
so though I'm going to use some of those names,
I'm not going to use them in great detail.
So what I'd like to do is just very quickly,
in about a minute, describe the movements of the plates
over 540 million years.
540 million years ago was when the first multi-celled organisms
formed in the Cambrian period.
It's the oldest period of the Phanerozoic Eon,
and the first in which multi-cellular fossils are abundant.
The ancient supercontinent of Radinia was breaking up.
Now we zoom forward, 120 million years.
420 million years ago, we're in the Silurian period.
Most continental plates are gathered together in the south.
They're beginning to sort of re-gather.
The first bony fishes appearing are appearing in this era,
and the earliest land-based trees.
We move forward another 120 million years.
300 million years ago in the Carboniferous period,
continental plates are reassembling.
This is the period of the first reptiles,
the first winged insects and amphibians,
and the first vertebrates on land.
And it's when fossilized trees begin laying down huge beds of coal.
180 million years ago, in the Jurassic period,
most continental plates joined together
to form vagueness supercontinent of Pangaea.
This is when dinosaurs flourish,
ferns and conifers, and the earliest forms of mammals.
Then 60 million years ago,
Pangaea begins splitting into two supercontinents,
Laurasia and Gondwana land.
This is just after the dinosaurs have been wiped out
by an asteroid impact.
And today, we're in an era where continents are breaking up.
The Earth is as fragmented as it's ever been,
and that's a geographical reality
that would have a profound impact on modern history.
We've described the theory of plate tectonics
and the creation of today's world geography.
Now, we must turn to discuss life itself,
one of the most amazing of all these thresholds.
Thank you.
I very much hope you're enjoying this rapid journey
through the history of everything.
And I hope also that you're beginning to see
some of the many intriguing connections there are
between knowledge that's accumulated within different disciplines,
from cosmology to chemistry and geology.
And I hope you're beginning to see that when you put them together,
it's only when you put them together in a single story
that you can begin to see these connections.
So I hope you're beginning to get a feeling
for what I described in an earlier lecture
as the underlying unity of modern, scientific,
evidence-based accounts of the past.
But it's been a very fast journey.
We've covered the best part of 13 billion years
in the lecture so far.
So at this point, I'd like to pause briefly,
take a breath, and check where we are.
Most of the universe, and when I say most,
I mean overwhelmingly most of the universe,
is still extremely simple.
It consists of cold, empty vacuum.
But in tiny pockets, it's getting really interesting,
and those pockets appeared quite early in the history of the universe
with the appearance of stars.
We've seen that complexity builds on complexity.
Stars themselves created the preconditions
for new forms of complexity in their hinterland,
in the area around them,
the area that was warmed by their energy.
And so we saw that new forms of complexity
began to appear in their hinterland,
with the creation of planets in particular.
We've seen how we can explain each of these steps
towards increasing complexity,
from the universe to stars to chemical elements,
and now to planets.
But I'm sure you'll agree that something pretty fundamental
is still missing.
And that thing, of course, is life.
Most of the universe, as I've described it so far,
is still technically dead.
It's not alive.
It can do lots of interesting things, we've seen.
But it's not, strictly speaking, alive.
It's not alive in the sense that you and I are alive.
So what we start doing now in the course
is exploring the next, the fifth threshold of complexity.
And that threshold is creation of life.
Here, perhaps more than with any of the other thresholds,
we can feel the apparently magical nature
of new emergent properties.
Remember Nagasena's explanation of the self
as an emergent property of various components,
assembled in certain ways.
You assemble them in a certain way and suddenly, poof,
something brand new, something quite magical.
In this case, the sense of self appears.
And something like that seems to happen with life.
So, let's cross that threshold into life.
Now, I'm going to do it slightly backwards.
I'm going to discuss what life is
and how it changes before we actually come
to the question of its origins.
And I hope you'll see there are very good reasons
for doing it this way.
Okay, let's begin with, again,
one of these great cocktail party questions,
which is, what is life?
What is life?
Life is one of those things that seems extremely obvious
until you try to sit down and define it rigorously.
As soon as you try to define it rigorously or scientifically,
it starts wriggling and threatens to get away from you.
It proves surprisingly tricky.
Traditional answers to this question
have often seen life as a sort of divine gift.
Now, this is something we've seen over and over again by now.
Trying to explain fundamental aspects of our reality,
you resort to the idea of a deity of some kind.
So, life too has often been explained as a divine gift.
But as we've seen, this leads us back to the familiar,
infinite regress of who made the creator
and to the other problem of evidence for the creator.
It's proved impossible to demonstrate the existence of a creator.
It's even proved impossible to demonstrate
the existence of a sort of generalized life force.
So, what modern science does
is to assume that living organisms
are made from the same materials and forces as non-living entities.
This incidentally is rather like what Newton did
when he showed that the heavenly realm and the earthly realm
can be explained using the same laws.
In other words, there wasn't an impassable gulf between them.
Something like this happened in chemistry in the early 19th century.
And the proof that different realms of chemistry were linked
came from the work of a German chemist Friedrich Verla,
whose dates are 1800 to 1882.
Before Verla's time, chemists widely believed
that there were two fundamental types of chemicals.
There were organic chemicals,
which were the sort of stuff that created life.
And there were inorganic chemicals, which created non-living things.
And it was widely assumed that organic chemicals
might contain some sort of special ingredient that explained life.
That was the situation before Verla.
What Verla did was to synthesize in a lab
one of the chemical ingredients of life, an organic chemical.
It happened to be urea. It doesn't matter.
It's been done, the experiment has been repeated many, many times.
It's now known that many of the basic chemicals of life can be synthesized.
And what this proved was that the chemistry of living things
is essentially the same as that of non-living things.
There is, in other words, a continuum between life and non-life.
And that may be why we find it so hard to distinguish scientifically
between life and non-life.
So there's a continuum between the two.
These are not utterly different realms with some sort of huge chasm between them.
Nevertheless, having said that, living organisms are different.
And I'm going to use the idea of emergence to explain that difference once again.
Here are some of the crucial differences, I think.
First, living organisms count as a higher level of complexity.
Now, there are several reasons for saying this,
but first, let me remind you of the four features I've focused on as keys to understanding complexity.
First, a special arrangement of elements in a new form.
Secondly, some stability.
So we have structure, a degree of stability.
Third, the appearance with these structures of new emergent properties of some kind.
And fourth, significant energy flows that sustain these complex structures.
So living things are complex.
Their existence depends on very specific ways of organizing matter, that structure.
Get the plan wrong, and the organism simply dies.
The structure's crucial.
They have a degree of stability, but eventually they die.
They're not eternal.
They display new emergent properties,
and they depend on flows of energy to maintain their complexity.
You and I need to breathe, and we need to eat in order to survive.
Indeed, Eric Chason has suggested, as we've seen, that these flows are denser than in other complex things that we've looked at.
And this justifies in his mind the argument that living things represent a higher level of complexity.
Let me remind you of the figures Eric Chason comes up with in his back of the envelope calculations.
He suggests that while about two ergs per second per gram of energy flow through a star,
some 75 flow through planetary surfaces, and about 900 through simple plants, simple living organisms.
And that's a sort of first suggestion that we really are dealing with a higher level of complexity.
We shouldn't rely on these rough calculations too much, but they're very suggestive,
and they fit in well with our intuitive sense that living things are more complex than dead things.
The complex structures of living things are designed exquisitely to maintain and handle these dense energy flows,
and the energy flows in turn help living organisms maintain a high level of complexity.
So complexity builds on energy flows which builds complexity.
Now I said one of the properties of complex things is emergent properties.
What are the emergent properties that make living organisms so different?
This may be one way into defining what we mean by life.
I'm going to suggest here, I have to say immediately there's no perfect consensus on this.
So any conclusions we reach are going to be slightly arbitrary.
Nevertheless, I think what I argue here represents a broad consensus.
Three distinctive emergent properties distinguish living organisms from non-life
and contribute to the complexity of living organisms.
Some of these properties you can find to some degree in non-living things.
It's really the combination of the three I'll argue that is most powerful.
These properties are, first, metabolism.
That is the ability to generate and use energy flows.
Secondly, reproduction, the ability to make multiple copies of an organism.
And third, adaptation.
The ability over time to slowly change in ways that enable you to fit your environment better and better.
So here are the three qualities, metabolism, reproduction and adaptation.
Let me talk about each of them in slightly more detail.
First, metabolism.
Metabolism means the ability to use and process energy from the environment.
All living things, like all complex things, require a flow of energy to maintain themselves.
And their metabolism consists of multiple chemical reactions through which they extract energy from their surroundings.
Humans extract energy by eating and breathing.
Plants extract energy directly from sunlight through the very complex chemical reaction known as photosynthesis.
In a sense, of course, both stars and planets also depend on energy flows.
The difference is the astonishing variety of ways in which living organisms extract energy from their environments.
Each species seems to have its own subtly different way of extracting energy from its own particular niche in the environment.
Its own particular place in the environment.
So that's metabolism, the ability to extract energy from the environment.
And we've seen it takes a huge variety of forms in living organisms.
The second emergent property is reproduction.
Reproduction is the ability of living organisms to make multiple copies of themselves.
Now, you might say that in a sense crystals reproduce.
Yes, to some degree.
But they reproduce so mechanically that their copying goes nowhere.
Reproduction is vital in organisms because it helps preserve new ways of extracting energy and resources.
And to do that, as we'll see, the reproduction has to be not mechanical.
It has to be subtler than that. It has to be slightly more flexible than that.
So that's the second quality, reproduction.
The third is adaptation.
By adaptation, I mean the ability that living species show to change over time.
So as to find new ways of extracting energy from their environment.
It's as if living organisms are constantly exploring their environment and looking for new ways of relating to it.
Adaptation can occur both at the level of the species and the level of the individual.
Individuals adapt in the sense that they learn. You and I adapt to our environments.
But for understanding the longer history of biological species, it's adaptation at the level of the species that's crucial.
And here what goes on is that the average features of an entire population of an organism slowly change.
Not the individuals.
For species change, it's average change in the qualities of the species that's crucial.
Now what's remarkable is that adaptation allows organisms to keep extracting energy from their environments even if their environments change.
So adaptation is wonderful if you happen to be in a somewhat unstable environment.
And that, of course, is true of all living organisms.
So adaptation is the ability, and it's really unique to living organisms, to slowly change over time in ways that enable you to fit better into your surroundings.
Adaptation, in other words, is the key to the ability of living organisms to explore their environments and find new ways of extracting the energy they need.
And that means adaptation explains why living organisms exist in such a huge diversity of forms.
Okay, metabolism, reproduction, adaptation.
Do these three emergent properties provide a rigorous definition of life?
Probably not quite.
Viruses are a sort of counter example.
