And we've seen before, in looking at star formation, how pressure itself, driven by gravity, can heat things up.
So gravity is ultimately the force that explains this source of heat.
So as each planet grew in size, through accretion, pressure and temperature built up at its center.
Very, very hot place.
Now, we've got our young Earth, and it's melting.
This is extremely important, it turns out, for the way the Earth is today.
Because what now took place was something that could only have taken place in a molten or semi-molten Earth.
And that's differentiation.
A sort of sorting out of the different elements of the Earth into layers.
And the Earth, in this way, acquired a layered structure that it still has today.
Heavy materials sank to the center, lighter materials rise to the surface in this process of differentiation.
And this gave the Earth its internal structure.
And we can think of this sorting process as creating four main layers.
A geologist would want to introduce many nuances to this picture.
But for our purposes, all we need to look at is these four crucial layers.
The heaviest stuff sinks through the Earth to the center.
Now, I've said the Earth is molten.
I probably need to qualify that.
Let's not think of water.
Let's just think of a sort of slow-moving liquid, a bit like lava perhaps.
Some liquids can move very, very slowly indeed.
So some of the Earth may be more sort of plastic than liquid.
Anyway, it's penetrable.
It's not rock solid.
So this is one of the first things that happens.
A lot of the metals in this early Earth, mainly iron and nickel,
sink to the center to form the core.
Now, we've seen already why iron is very common in the universe.
It's formed in the dying stages of very large stars.
And very large stars often end up with solid iron cores.
That is scattered into space when they break up.
So iron and nickel sink to the center to form the Earth's core.
Given the Earth a solid center and then probably a liquid,
metallic liquid around that solid center,
this core is going to be very important because it generates the Earth's magnetic field.
And for fragile chemicals like you and me,
this is important because the magnetic field can fend off
nasties such as extreme ultraviolet radiation.
So there's the core at the center.
The heavy stuff's gone to the center.
Secondly, the mantle.
Lighter materials.
And again, there's a whole range of materials that a geologist
would immediately have in mind.
But let's think of sort of rocks of various kinds, perhaps granites.
Form the semi-molten middle layers of the mantle.
The mantle includes most of the Earth from the core out to the edges.
And the crucial thing about this is that it's hot and it's hot enough
so that a lot of it is semi-molten.
That's the mantle.
And again, a geologist would break that up into many different layers.
The third level.
So we've got two levels, the core, the mantle, and now the third level.
The third level is the crust.
It's the shell around the edge of the young Earth.
The lightest materials tend simply through buoyancy,
through having less density to drift towards the upper levels,
the outer levels of this ball of semi-molten stuff.
And because this is the coldest layer,
this is the area exposed to the cold of outer space,
this chills early, this becomes solid.
And what it forms is a crust.
If you want to get a sense of the relationship of the crust to the rest of the body,
think of a sort of egg shell.
The relationship of an egg shell to the rest of the egg is probably about right.
It's incredibly thin and, as we'll see later,
somewhat fragile layer of stuff on the surface.
But for us, of course, it's crucial.
It's the crust that we live on and walk on as land-dwelling organisms.
The crust cools much more rapidly than the interior of the Earth.
And the interior of the Earth, we'll see, maintains its heat throughout the Earth's history.
And that will be an important part of a later story.
The fourth layer.
The fourth layer is the atmosphere.
In the young Earth, a lot of the elements are gaseous.
So gaseous and water vapor bubble up through volcanoes to form the Earth's earliest atmosphere.
Volcanoes are points in the early crust where stuff is just puncturing the surface and coming through.
And a lot of the stuff coming through is gaseous.
And the gases that bubble up, think of a sort of massive burping that goes on for several million years
if you want to get an idea of what's going on.
This stuff that bubbles up forms the Earth's earliest atmosphere.
It's possible that we're not sure that there had been an earlier atmosphere
dominated probably by hydrogen and helium.
But the young Earth, when it was smaller, didn't have enough gravitational pull to hold these light gases.
So this is probably the first atmosphere on Earth created by outgassing.
Now, it may also have been added to by incoming comets that brought a lot of water vapor and other stuff as well.
We're not absolutely sure.
The early atmosphere was probably dominated by water vapor, nitrogen and carbon dioxide
and also a range of other gases.
Finally, in its infancy, as we've seen, our Earth also acquired a satellite of its own, the Moon.
This is not strictly a layer, of course, but it's an important part of this system.
How?
Well, I described the process briefly in the last lecture.
The best current theory suggests that the Moon was the product of a sort of part of the process of accretion,
of a collision between the very young Earth and a large proto-planet, perhaps about the size of Mars.
And that collision would have gouged a huge chunk out of the young Earth,
would have vaporized the stuff because everything would have heated up violently.
It would have created a sort of nebula of vaporized stuff around the Earth
and eventually that nebula, through a process of accretion, would have formed into the Moon.
So all this molten stuff would have been ejected into space and eventually congealed into the Moon.
Now, when was the Moon formed? When did it take place?
We actually can more or less figure this out by indirect methods.
If you take the date of Moon rocks, they are very close to the same age as the solar system as a whole.
Now, what that tells us is that this process happened very early in the creation of the Earth.
We can probably regard it almost as part of the process of accretion.
But there's one other interesting thing about the Moon.
When Moon rocks were brought back from the first Moon expeditions and analyzed,
one of the surprises was that they contained very few metallic elements.
And this immediately suggested that this collision with another planet
must have taken place either during or just after the process of differentiation.
Because it looks as if what was gouged out was stuff gouged out from the mantle and the crust, not from the core.
There's so little metallic stuff in Moon rocks or such a low proportion of metallic stuff
that that suggests that a lot of the metals in the early Earth had already sunk to the core before the Moon was gouged out.
So that suggests that the Moon was created very early in the planet's history,
but just after the time of differentiation.
Okay, let's continue with our story.
We now have an Earth which has four main layers.
It's got structure and it's got a Moon.
What happened during the rest of the Hadian era?
Several quite important things.
First, the Earth kept cooling.
And one result of this was that eventually the water vapor that's probably orbiting in huge clouds around the young Earth
rained down to form the first seas.
We're not sure exactly what this involved, but you should probably imagine a storm that went on for millions of years
and was much more violent than any storm we're ever going to see.
Now the formation of seas is not just an academic matter.
It's not just that we expect our planet to have lots of seas.
Water, as we'll see clearly, water in liquid form is vital to the creation of life.
And we'll see that water is crucial because water provides a wonderful environment
for complex chemical reactions to take place.
It's a much better environment than either a gassy environment or a solid environment.
So water's crucial for the emergence of later forms of complexity, including life.
So with water, the Earth's beginning to look a bit more user-friendly.
And at the end of the Hadian era, the Earth is looking slightly more user-friendly,
but it's still a pretty unpleasant place.
Let me read a delightful description from Bill Bryson's short history of nearly everything.
This is Bill Bryson's description of the early Earth, the Hadian Earth.
If you were to step from a time machine, he says, into that ancient world,
he's actually talking about the very beginning of the Archaean era,
the next era, just after the end of the Hadian.
You would very swiftly scamper back inside,
but there was no more oxygen to breathe on the Earth back then than there is on Mars today.
It was also full of noxious vapours from hydrochloric and sulfuric acids,
powerful enough to cut through clothing and blister skin.
The chemical stew that was the atmosphere then would have allowed little sunlight to reach the Earth's surface.
What little you could see would be illuminated only briefly by bright and frequent lightning flashes.
So not a nice place.
Now let's look at the Archaean Eon.
It lasted from about 3.8 billion to 2.5 billion years ago.
And it's the era as we saw of the earliest life forms.
There were two important changes during this era.
Of course, there were many more, but for us two are crucial.
The first is that there were fewer asteroid impacts.
Why?
Well, the answer is really that the process of accretion itself was, as we've seen,
a process of sweeping up stray material.
So as accretion progressed, more and more of the debris of the early universe
was simply swept up into planets and various bodies,
so there was less stuff to collide with other stuff.
Asteroid impacts diminished, and the solar system as a whole, including the Earth,
became a slightly less violent place.
However, as we'll see in Lecture 17, occasional impacts could still play a critical
and even catastrophic role in the Earth's history.
And of course, it's still possible that they could play such a role in the future.
There are plenty of bad guys out there, all the asteroids,
lots of other things roaming around the solar system in eccentric orbits.
And as a number of recent Hollywood films have suggested, they're dangerous.
Some of you may have seen a 1998 film starring Bruce Willis called Armageddon.
And Bruce Willis, you may remember, is an engineer hired to take a team up to
an asteroid that seems to be heading for Earth and blow it up.
Frankly, his method of dealing with it is not terribly promising.
Blowing up an asteroid is probably not a good thing to do,
because all it's going to do is multiply the number of fragments
and increase the chances that at least one of them is going to strike the Earth.
Currently, it seems that the best way of dealing with a dangerous asteroid
might be to try and tow it away by sending a sort of heavy object to fly alongside it.
And that might be able to just drag it into a slightly different orbit
so that it passes the Earth.
However, the good news is that today, for the first time in the planet's history,
we can see asteroids coming, and that's brand new.
Indeed, a number of astronomers in different countries are mapping where they are
and keeping an eye out for the most dangerous one.
So is there coming to get us? We'll probably know it.
So that's the first thing. The number of impacts diminishes making the Earth
a slightly friendlier place for the evolution of chemical complexity, including life.
And the second thing that happens in the Archaean era
is that the Earth's atmosphere slowly changes.
And the crucial thing that happens is that increasing amounts of free oxygen begin to appear.
Now, we've seen already, oxygen is an extremely reactive element.
It eagerly combines with other elements.
And that's a fact we see whenever we light a fire.
Fire is simply oxygen doing its thing, combining quite violently with other elements
and releasing energy as it does so.
It's so reactive that it's actually quite strange to find traces of free oxygen in the atmosphere.
And what this must mean, James Lovelock pointed this out in his early work on Gaia,
it must mean that there was some process on the surface of the Earth
that was constantly pumping free oxygen into the atmosphere.
And that something, as we all see later, was life, early forms of life.
In particular, plant life.
And in particular, the process of photosynthesis, which releases free oxygen.
So plant-like organisms on the surface of the Earth are beginning to release more and more oxygen
and they're beginning to transform the atmosphere.
And this is the first hint of how living organisms can transform our planet.
Okay, that's a very brief general description of the early Earth for about the first half of its history.
Now, I want to talk briefly about the evidence.
How do we know about the early history of the Earth?
Once again, it's the same question.
How can we possibly know the history of events that happened so long ago?
The Earth itself has changed so much that we have little direct evidence from the Haiti and Eon.
The oldest Earth rocks date to about four billion years ago.
So our understanding of this Eon depends on a combination of theoretical inference
and the indirect evidence described in the previous lecture.
At present, understanding the structure of the Earth is also dependent on indirect evidence.
Again, there was a recent film that suggested we might be able to just dive through the Earth.
We can't do that. That's impossible.
At present, we cannot drill deeper than about seven miles into the Earth,
which is about 0.2% of the distance to the center, which is 4,000 miles away.
So to understand what's inside the Earth, we have to use indirect methods.
And one of the most important is seismology, or the study of earthquakes.
Seismic waves caused by earthquakes come in several different types, three main types,
and they travel in different ways and at different speeds through different types of rock.
So careful study of seismic waves using seismographs placed at many different parts of the Earth
can tell us much about what's inside the Earth.
There are three main types of waves, and I'm not going to go into details,
you can call them primary, secondary, and surface waves.
They vibrate in different ways, and their speeds differ.
Secondary waves, for example, travel about 40% slower than primary waves,
and what this means is that by comparing the times of arrival of the two types of waves,
you can calculate the distance of an earthquake from a particular seismograph.
They also travel in different ways through different media, different materials,
and slowly, slowly using all this information, geologists have built up their current picture
of the internal structure and composition of our Earth.
So seismographs have played a similar role in study of the Earth
to spectroscopes in studies of the stars.
How can we know what was in the ancient atmosphere billions of years ago?
Two simple techniques, one is capturing the gases released by volcanoes today.
That can tell us about the sort of gases that bubble up from the interior of the Earth,
and that gives us some clues about the early atmosphere.
But evidence for the buildup of free oxygen depends largely on the discovery of huge strata of red rocks.
If you see a red rock, the odds are what you're seeing is rust of some kind.
And the appearance of rust suggests that iron on the surface of the Earth is suddenly encountering free oxygen.
So this is the crucial clue to the buildup of oxygen in the atmosphere in summary.
So let me summarize what we've seen.
This lecture has described the early Earth and some of the more important changes it underwent
through accretion, differentiation, and some early changes in its atmosphere.
We saw that the Earth, the early Earth was very different from today's Earth.
How did it change to become the Earth we know today, with the sort of atmosphere we know today,
and the sort of geography we know today?
We'll tackle that question in the next lecture as we discuss the fundamental geological paradigm of plate tectonics.
Thank you.
Music
Lecture 11, Plate Tectonics and the Earth's Geography
Applause
How did the Earth get to be the way it is today?
How did it acquire the geography that would eventually shape the structure of human history?
Two crucial figures are going to dominate this lecture.
One is German and one's American.
One served in World War I, the other in World War II.
Alfred Wegener, W-E-G-E-N-E-R, was the German.
His dates are 1880 to 1930.
He was a meteorologist.
He was a Greenland explorer.
He served in the German Army in World War I, and he eventually died on an expedition in Greenland in 1930.
The American was Harry Hess.
His dates are 1906 to 1969.
He was a geologist and a professor at Princeton, who during World War II served as a naval officer.
Each of them would play a crucial role in our modern understanding of how the geography of today's Earth was constructed.
And as we'll see in geology as in other fields, what's happened as a modern scientific consensus has emerged,
is that we've realized that much more change took place than we once thought.
In fact, here again, we've realized there's a history to the Earth's geography.
It's not been fixed forever.
In the previous lecture, we saw that the early Earth was very different from today's Earth and distinctly less friendly.
So our main question is how did the Earth become as it is today?
And what we're going to focus on is one aspect of this.
How did the Earth's surface acquire its present form?
How did it acquire today's geography?
And as we'll see in later parts of the course, that geography would have a profound impact on the course of human history.
The timelines that are relevant to this are timelines two, which covers the history of the Earth,
and three, which covers the history of the last 600 million years.
Now the short answer to the question, how did the Earth come to be the way it is, is that the Earth moved.
