from one level to another, from the top to the bottom of a waterfall,
from the boiler to the condenser of a steam engine.
So for energy to do work, there have to be inequalities,
gradients, differences of some kind.
Now there's one more thing about these flows of energy.
As energy flows along these gradients, along these inequalities,
its distribution tends to even out.
And what this does is reduce the capacity of energy to perform work.
Let me just give a very familiar example, the battery.
A battery, a charged battery, is charged in the sense that one of its terminals
has a surplus of electrons, the other has a deficit of electrons.
There's an imbalance of electrons at the two ends of the battery.
As the battery does work, electrons flow from one terminal to the other,
until eventually the distribution of electrons has evened out.
And at this point we say the battery has run down.
Now note that energy has not disappeared.
Nothing contradicts the first law of thermodynamics.
Energy is simply distributed more evenly, so it cannot flow or do work.
What the physicists say is that the level of simplicity or disorder
and the word they use is entropy has increased.
Entropy has increased.
Things are evened out.
There's less possibility of energy doing work.
The second law of thermodynamics was formulated by a German physicist, Rudolf Clausius,
who lived from 1822 to 1888.
And what it does is it generalizes these principles
and states them in the form of a scientific law.
And what it states essentially is that differences in energy levels
tend to diminish as work is done,
and entropy, this measure of disorder or simplicity, increases.
What this means in layman's terms, I think, is the amount of energy that can do work
is steadily diminishing.
I think what that means when applied to the universe as a whole.
Applied to the universe as a whole, what this seems to mean
is that energy flows ought to be decreasing over time.
Incidentally, if you doubt that the second law of thermodynamics affects your daily life,
think of the bedroom of a teenager.
And the question is, does disorder naturally increase?
Well, yes.
How do you re-establish order?
You have to put a fair bit of work into it.
So this is a sort of very elementary personal example of what we mean by entropy.
Now, one of the consequences of this argument is, as Stuart Kaufman puts it in a book on complexity,
as follows, the consequence of the second law is that order,
and I've used the word structural complexity,
order, the most unlikely of all possible arrangements, tends to disappear.
It follows that the maintenance of order requires that some form of work be done on the system.
This incidentally explains why you need energy flows to maintain complexity.
And he goes on.
In the absence of work, order disappears.
Hence we come to our current sense that an incoherent collapse of order is the natural state of things,
or to put it in very simple terms,
the universe ought to be getting simpler and simpler and simpler rather than more and more complex.
Complexity ought to be decreasing, not increasing.
So that's the problem.
And it's a problem that scientists are likely to see very quickly in facing this idea of increasing complexity.
So how can we deal with it?
How can the upper levels of complexity increase if energy flows in the universe are constantly being run down?
There have been several attempts to solve this apparent paradox.
And once again, I'm describing these in extremely simple terms,
but I think nevertheless we can get the gist of it.
The Nobel Prize winning chemist, Ilya Prigorzhin,
whose dates are 1917 to 2003,
suggested that there may exist within matter itself a spontaneous tendency towards self-organization.
In other words, what he's hinting at is the possibility that there are laws of nature
that we don't yet fully understand that tend to counteract the breakdown of order
described in the second law of thermodynamics.
As yet though, it has to be said, his ideas are immensely stimulating and immensely rich,
but it's been impossible to identify such laws clearly.
So this remains a hypothesis to be tested,
but there is fortunately a much simpler answer to the problem of entropy, and it goes like this.
It may well be true that energy differentials are diminishing over the entire universe,
so that in some sense the amount of energy that can do work and create complex things is diminishing.
Nevertheless, it may still be true that locally in little pockets these differentials, these gradients are increasing.
Let me give you one example which is going to take us into our next few lectures.
The force of gravity packs energy and matter into smaller spaces.
It's a force that attracts matter and energy together, so it tends to pack stuff into smaller spaces.
That itself creates differentials because it means that there are areas of greater density and areas of lesser density,
areas of higher temperature, areas of lower temperature.
And eventually we'll see these differences are crucial to the construction of stars.
So gravity tends to increase these differentials, and by doing so, it allows local flows of energy.
That, incidentally, is why planets are good places for complex beings such as us.
Once you've created a star, you have a massive flow of energy because stars pump energy into the cold of surrounding space.
Like little hot spots dotted throughout the universe.
For us, this is very, very important indeed.
Gravity fortunately has created these powerful energy differentials and we depend on them.
And what it reminds us is that complexity has its own geography.
Once complex things appear, like stars, they create the preconditions for more complex things.
And that's why when complexity appears, it seems to appear in the universe in little pockets
hanging around the first complex things, which are stars.
So complexity, we can say, appears in the hinterland of stars.
But it doesn't appear in the stars themselves or rather higher levels of complexity don't appear in stars.
What happens?
In stars, the energy flows are too violent.
In empty space, well away from stars, the energy flows are too weak.
Planets, which hang around stars in their hinterlands, are just right.
And we can think of this as the Goldilocks principle.
So it's no accident that increases in complexity are likely to occur around stars.
So whether a sustained energy flows, for example, near stars,
but not too violent flows of energy, complexity can build and accumulate over long periods of time.
Eric Chesson has suggested a third possible source of free energy, of energy that can do work.
And that's the expansion of the universe itself.
He suggested that the universe, as it expands, constantly creates new energy imbalances.
And this ensures that work can always be done somewhere in the universe.
But the crucial thing for us is the knowledge that even if the second law affects the universe as a whole,
it doesn't necessarily affect every particular corner of the universe.
And we live in a corner where there are huge energy flows, where complexity can be created.
So my conclusions about complexity do not contradict the second law.
Because in the long run, local energy flows do diminish energy differentials in the universe,
but while they exist, they can create complex things.
So wherever there are local flows of energy, it's possible to create complex things.
Now, that's a long and elaborate tour around the second law of thermodynamics.
And it's necessary to clear the ground for our understanding about the nature of complexity.
The rest of this course will trace the astonishing creative process of increasing complexity,
as new complex things appear leading eventually to you and me and modern human societies.
The idea of increasing complexity will provide a thematic unity for this course.
In the next lecture, we'll ask another unifying question about big history, and that is this.
Why should we trust the astonishing claims made by modern scientific accounts of the past?
What is the status of the story that we can tell within big history?
Thank you.
This series of introductory lectures is looking at what big history is,
and at some of the challenges we face in trying to construct an account of the past at all possible scales.
I've argued that the problem of dealing with multiple scales can be handled.
In fact, we can turn it into a virtue, because we'll find that each scale illuminates the others.
And in the last lecture, I argued that something like this is also true with the problem of coherence.
Instead of a rag bag of disparate stories, we find that there are some central themes,
and I suggested one of the most powerful of them might be that of complexity.
And this theme can help each scale to illuminate the others.
What we'll be doing is seeing complexity taking many, many different forms.
Now, here's one more problem, one more challenge we have to face
if we're to construct a viable account of big history.
And we can describe it, if you like, as the question of trust.
How can we possibly know all these things?
Or rather, how reliable is the account of big history that I will offer in this course?
After all, I've already made some outrageous statements about things such as the size and age of the universe.
Why should you trust those claims?
So this lecture asks why we should take the claims of modern science,
because this course, after all, is based on modern science.
And I'm using science in a very general term, so that it includes historical science, also known as history.
Why should we trust the claims of modern scientific research into the nature of things?
But I'll also argue in this lecture that we should never treat any of the claims of modern science dogmatically.
In short, this lecture is about the nature of truth and the types of claims on truth that we can make in a course on big history.
Now let's explore this issue of truth and trust in more general terms.
Whatever society you live in, everyone needs to ask the same fundamental question over and over again,
which is why should I believe the stories the experts tell me?
How can I distinguish between competing claims about the nature of reality, the nature of the universe?
How should I decide which of these claims to trust?
Now put more deeply and more fundamentally, the question we're asking is, what is truth?
And the question, what is truth and how can we know truth when we find it is discussed in the branch of philosophy known as epistemology.
If epistemology discusses, how do we know what we think we know?
How can we know anything about our world?
I'm not a philosopher and I'm not going to attempt a highly nuanced account of this.
But the ideas I offer will, I think, capture enough of these arguments for us to go a long way.
So I'm really skimming the surface of some very complex philosophical discussions here.
What I'm going to focus on is certain types of claims about reality and those are the claims made within modern science.
These are essentially claims about the nature of the real world, of its past and present.
What is the world like? What has it been like in the past?
They are not ethical or moral claims.
That's a completely different branch of philosophy and I'm not going to be talking about that sort of claim.
I'm going to be talking about statements about the way the world is and has been, statements about reality.
Now, in principle, there are two extreme positions we could take to any statement about reality
or any broad claims about the nature of reality.
I'll call the first of them absolutism and it goes something like this.
The absolutist claim is there is a real world out there.
With a bit of effort, we can get real knowledge of that world.
So this is what I'll call absolutism and it has the implication that any particular claim that's made about the real world
can in principle be adjudicated to be correct or incorrect.
That's the first position. The second position we'll describe as relativism and it goes something like this.
We can never really know if what anyone says is true or not.
We can't even know whether to trust our own senses because they may be conveying inaccurate impressions about the real world.
All we really have is a lot of stories.
You might as well pick one of those stories randomly in order to choose which one to believe in.
And that's an extreme statement of the relativist position, epistemological relativism.
One of the great explorations of this sort of argument comes in the work of René Descartes in the early 17th century.
Descartes famously imagined that there was an evil demon who inserted sensations and thoughts into his head
and what that did was create a fake impression of a real world.
So all the experiences Descartes had were simply inserted there by the evil demon.
And his question is this, sounds absurd, probably it is absurd, but how could we tell if this was true or not?
How could we prove it's wrong?
It turns out that it's surprisingly hard to prove that it's not true.
There's a modern version of this sort of experiment, it's known as the brain in the vat.
There's a brain, it's in a vat of chemicals, it's plugged in to lots of electrodes
and the mad scientist is pumping information into the brain and keeping it alive in this soup of chemicals.
And you are the brain.
Everything you think about the world around you is completely unreal.
It's simply an impression that the mad scientist is pumping into your brain.
That's an illustration of how seriously one must take extreme relativist positions.
Now in practice, neither absolutism nor relativism is tolerable in its extreme forms.
Now if you're a philosopher, maybe you can tolerate them.
And if you're just living in the ordinary world, you actually have to take up a position.
We can't live with either of these positions.
Why not?
Well let's take extreme relativism.
Why is extreme relativism intolerable?
It's intolerable because as I live my life, I have to act.
And to act, I have to commit to statements about the world I live in.
I cannot act unless I make a commitment to the truth of some statements.
Let me give a banal example.
Whenever I cross a road with traffic on it, I get a lot of information about cars moving towards me, moving away from me.
Eventually I commit to the idea that there's a space wide enough for me to cross without getting run over.
We have to do this all the time, day in, day out.
We cannot dither forever.
So I must trust in some information.
Is that a tiger I see in the shadows?
Or is it a deer?
It's really important to get it right.
But we can't wait forever.
We have to commit to one solution or another, or a more modern problem.
I have a sudden excruciating headache.
What do I do?
It really scares me.
Do I trust my new age friend who offers a mantra over a crystal?
Or do I go to a hospital?
So over and over again, we actually have to take up positions.
We cannot dither forever.
We have to decide who to trust, what information to trust.
That's why relativism, extreme relativism, is intolerable.
Something similar is true also of extreme absolutism.
Why can't we tolerate extreme absolutism?
Well, the reason is equally simple.
We all know that some information, including some of the information we receive from our senses,
and some people are unreliable.
We can be deceived about the way the world is.
Again, let me give a banal example.
It seems so obvious that the earth that we walk and live on doesn't move.
You throw a ball up in the air, it comes down the same point where you throw it.
Clearly the earth isn't moving.
And yet, in fact, we have very good reasons for thinking that the earth is moving around the sun
at a speed of about 66,000 miles per hour.
We can be very easily deceived.
So the real question is not should we choose extreme absolutism or extreme relativism.
It's how can we negotiate a sort of reasonable, workable position between those two extremes?
How do I decide what claims about reality to trust?
From all the information I receive, how do I pick the information that's most likely to be right?
Now, I've said we can think of epistemology, these questions about the nature of truth in terms of trust.
What information do you trust?
To this question too, I think there are two very broad types of answer that are worth distinguishing.
The first is that you trust information because it's authoritative.
You trust authority.
We trust the source of the information.
We trust a priest.
Or we trust a sacred text such as the Quran or the Bible.
Or we trust a scientist because they're wearing a white lab coat and have a beard.
In many situations we have little option but to accept the word of the experts.
If I take my car to be fixed, I'm going to trust the work of the mechanic because I haven't a clue how to fix it.
Every time you fly in a plane or undergo surgery, you're putting a lot of trust in the expertise of those around you.
So we cannot entirely avoid simply relying on authority on trust.
But in pre-modern societies, the role of trust was probably even much greater because so few people were educated
and there didn't exist modern forms of science.
There's a second type of answer to this question, what types of information do you trust?
And that is evidence.
You use evidence.
The alternative is to trust no claims unless they're based on strong evidence.
Descartes, who I've mentioned already, lived between 1596 and 1650.
And in his thinking, he offers an extreme example of this commitment to evidence.
He's writing in the early days of the Scientific Revolution.
The Scientific Revolution as a whole is characterized by a tendency to reject authoritative judgments and prefer judgments based on evidence.
He decided, in a famous thought experiment, to distrust everything for which he didn't have firm evidence.
To not leave anything unless he had good evidence for it.
This is an extreme commitment to evidence.
He concluded, after reasoning that his senses could not be trusted because of the evil demon, which could be manipulating them,
he concluded that there was one thing of which he could be certain.
And that was that he was thinking.
And if he was thinking, that must mean he exists.
This is the famous Koikito ergo sum.
Think about it.
Even the evil demon wants us to have a self that can be deceived.
So this, for Descartes, was rock bottom.
And this is a wonderful example of trying to rely as much as possible on evidence.
Unfortunately, in practice for most of us, life is too short to get direct evidence about everything.
So we always have to rely on both evidence and authority.
We often simply have to trust people who assure us that the evidence is there if we want to look for it.
Now, one of the distinctive features of modern science, and Descartes sets the benchmark here,
is that it prefers as much as possible to rely on evidence rather than authority.
It obeys, if you like, the rules of the law court.
And there are several important implications of this fundamental fact about modern science.
To just tease out some of them.
The first is that it applies to all modern forms of scholarship.
All modern scholarship, not just experimental science.
It applies also to history.
