And we've seen it's got immense elegance, immense simplicity,
but we've also seen that it's really rather slippery.
And we've seen it generated a lot of resistance.
That made it peculiarly important for Darwin to study the evidence for it.
So how good was the evidence for Darwin's idea?
Thank you.
Lecture 14
The Evidence for Natural Selection
In the previous lecture, I described Darwin's very elegant solution
to what I described as the fundamental riddle of adaptation
and his solution took the form of his theory of natural selection.
Now what I want to do is look at the evidence for that theory.
I've already mentioned Daniel Dennett's book, Darwin's Dangerous Idea.
Dennett captures very well what it was that made Darwin's ideas seem so outrageous to so many,
including his beloved wife, Emma.
Because what it seemed to imply was that random, blind forces with no intention or purpose
repeated over and over again like a computer algorithm, millions and millions of times,
could over time create all the miraculous beauty and variety of the biological realm.
They could create the colors of a peacock, they could create the cobwebs of the spider,
they could create the majesty of a blue whale.
What was worrying about this was that it seemed to imply that you didn't need a creator god,
no creator god was needed.
All of this happened as a sort of natural process simply because that's how the world works.
Now we've spent quite a lot of time in previous lectures looking at the nature of modern science
and I hope by now you've seen enough to see that Darwin's idea is fully in the spirit of modern science.
For even the most religious of scientists, and I don't know what proportion of professional scientists today
do count themselves as religious believers, but it's a significant proportion.
Even the most religious of scientists attempt as much as possible to explain reality
without resorting to the hypothesis of a creator god.
And we've seen the two main reasons for this.
The first is that by supposing the existence of a creator god, you create a new problem
because you raise the problem of how the creator god was created.
And the second is we don't know of any way of finding scientific evidence to prove the existence of such a creator god.
So scientists prefer to try and explain the world around them including things such as the variety of biological species
without resorting to the deistic hypothesis.
And that's what Darwin was trying to do and that's the sort of theory he offered.
It's a scientific theory that means it had to live or die on the evidence and Darwin was prepared to do that.
So how good is the evidence for Darwin's theory?
That's the main thing I want to look at in this lecture.
This lecture will look at the evidence in two parts.
In the first part I'll look at the evidence that existed in Darwin's time and that Darwin himself was aware of.
In the second part I want to look at the evidence that's become available since his death.
Darwin was well aware as we'll see that there were holes in his theory.
There were pieces of evidence he'd love to have had but he didn't have.
A lot of the gaps have been filled in since his death and that's why the idea of natural selection with modifications lies at the centre of modern biology, of modern life sciences.
Darwin himself understood perfectly well how much resistance his theory would provoke
and that's why he defended it with scrupulous care.
He also did so in language very accessible to a general readership.
It's been said that Darwin's On the Origin of Species is one of the few great scientific classics that's also very readable and that's absolutely true.
If you haven't read it I strongly recommend that you try reading it.
It's very clear, very lucid, the arguments are spelt out very very clearly.
There's very little jargon where the jargon does appear, it's always explained.
When we try to come to terms with the evidence that Darwin offered for his theory,
we'll find it's generally easier to understand that evidence and the arguments he presents.
If we're very clear what Darwin was arguing against,
he was writing in a context where there was a powerful indeed dominant alternative theory about how species were created
and that was what I've described as the deistic theory, the theory that God had made all living things in their existing form
and had made them already adapted to their environments.
Darwin's offering an alternative theory, so what he has to do is over and over again show that if you look at the evidence,
his theory fits the evidence better or his theory makes better sense of the available evidence.
So we'll see this type of argument over and over again when we look at how Darwin tried to defend his own theory.
Now let's look at the evidence he presented.
Let's begin with the evidence he saw that persuaded Darwin himself
and I'll separate that out from the arguments that he mobilized to try and persuade others.
And this will take me back to some of the things I said in the previous lecture.
For Darwin, the first argument for his theory was that it made so much sense of what he'd seen on his five-year trip on the Beagle.
It made sense of a lot of the oddities he'd seen.
Darwin we've seen was puzzled by finding many neighboring species that were clearly very, very similar
and yet they were also clearly separate species, yet they lived very close together.
And over and over again it looked, it really looked as if they had to be related
until eventually he concluded maybe they really were related.
They were on the same family tree.
He'd been particularly struck by the species he encountered on the Galapagos Islands.
So let's go back to the Galapagos Islands and look more closely at them.
The Galapagos Islands are a group of volcanic islands.
They belong today to Ecuador and they lie about 600 miles west of Ecuador in the eastern Pacific.
There are 13 main islands, six smaller islands and numerous tinier islets or rocks.
They are named from the Spanish word for saddle because of the saddle shape of the shells of Galapagos tortoises.
On the Galapagos Islands Darwin observed many types of finches, tortoises and iguanas
but I'm going to focus on the finches. It's the easiest example to understand.
He found that the birds on the Galapagos Islands, they were clearly finches
and yet they varied from island to island. In fact you had quite distinct species
and the main variations or at least the most obvious ones were in their beaks.
On each island you seem to have a different species making for at least 14 distinct species.
Now the puzzle was this. Let's go back to our two hypotheses about life.
If God had made these various species it made sense to assume that a god would have adapted each species of bird
to the particular types of vegetation on the island and Darwin also knew that the vegetation did change slightly.
There were slightly different types of nuts on the trees which required slightly different beaks and so on.
So it made sense to assume that a god had adapted them in this way
but what didn't make so much sense with the deistic theory was why bother to make them related?
Why not just design from scratch a specific animal for each island?
The fact that they looked related suggested to Darwin an alternative possibility.
In 1846 this is almost ten years after he returned from the islands
when he'd been mulling over what he saw for almost ten years. This is what he wrote.
Seeing this gradation and diversity of structure in one small, intimately related group of birds
one might really fancy that from an original paucity of birds in this archipelago
one species had been taken and modified for different ends.
This argument, this idea that you'd begun with one species and that they'd slowly changed
to become more adapted to the different islands seemed to explain both things,
both why they were adaptive and why they were closely related.
This was something that he felt deistic arguments couldn't explain as elegantly.
Only on his return did Darwin actually really see the implications of what he'd seen on the islands clearly.
Only then did he realize how similar the different species of finch were
and this is what suggested that they had all once belonged to a single species
despite the tiny variations from island to island.
And it was then that he slowly thought through what was going on
and came to understand that you have different beaks
because you have slightly different trees, slightly different fruit
so the beaks were perfectly designed to get at the nuts in particular types of trees on particular islands.
And this suggested to him that over many generations those individuals
that happened through natural variation to have beaks that were slightly better
at getting at the nuts or fruit on this particular island would feed and breed more successfully.
They would have more offspring.
Their offspring and their features would eventually come to dominate the species on that island
and in this way entire species would slowly change.
Voila, you've got your 14 species.
So the Galapagos finch is offered for Darwin a wonderful paradigm of the working of natural selection.
It could explain both why they were adapted and why they were related.
Now this was all very well.
But were there more direct forms of evidence for his theory?
This is the sort of stuff that persuaded Darwin but what direct evidence could he offer for his theory?
Well now I want to list some of the other forms of evidence he described on the origin of species.
And let's begin with fossils.
Darwin is supposing that living species have changed over long periods of time.
So the fossil record was a natural place to look.
It was already clear enough fossils had been collected by the time Darwin was doing his work.
It was already clear from the fossil record that species seemed to have changed over time.
The mix of species was different at different periods in the Earth's history.
Remember that at this time the capacity to date fossils was not very precise.
So the fossil record was understood in a rather confused way.
It gave a rather murky picture of the past but what was clear is that species had once existed that no longer existed.
Now it has to be said immediately that the fossil record could never on its own prove Darwin's idea definitively.
And there's a very good reason for this.
The fossil record consists of those individual organisms that happen to die in a place where they could be preserved.
Now if we imagine, and I don't know the exact figures, but one in a million, one in a billion individuals is fossilized
and of those only a small number are found.
So the fossil record can only ever give us a very fragmentary record of the past of living species.
So it can never prove the argument but it can be very powerfully suggestive.
So in the fossil record you find things like trilobites for example.
Now trilobites are strange. They don't exist today but it's easy to think that they might be related to modern organisms.
So intuitively it fits quite well with Darwin's argument but as we've seen the record is extremely spotty.
Now the ideal thing for Darwin was to look not for a continuous sequence.
He's never going to get it.
He's never going to find all the individuals that show you change from one species to another.
That's never going to happen.
Next best to this was to find transitional species.
These are species that seem to fit very well between two types of existing species.
So this is what Darwin was keen to find.
At the time he wrote the first edition he didn't have any really spectacular examples but a spectacular one turned up just two years after the book was published.
Now again let's compare his argument with the deistic argument.
A creator god of course would not need transitional species.
A creator god would just make species as they were needed and make them adapted to their particular environment.
Why would you have species that seem a sort of mixture of features of species today?
Darwin's theory required transitional species because it argued that species had changed very slowly over time.
So he ought to see all stages of those changes.
Now the species that turned up in 1861 was called Archaeopteryx.
It belonged to a bird-like species that had lived about 150 million years ago.
Archaeopteryx was about the size of a magpie and it had feathered wings and it had a wishbone.
So it had clearly bird-like features.
It looked like the ancestor of modern birds.
But if you look closely you'd see some anomalies.
For example it had teeth. Birds don't have teeth.
And it had a bony tail.
That made it very similar to several species of small dinosaurs that existed at the same time.
These were clearly reptilian features.
So in Archaeopteryx you had a wonderful example of a transitional species.
A species that seemed to exemplify the slow transition from one type of species to another.
Now that's the fossil record.
And it's highly suggestive particularly when transitional species,
missing links as they're often called, begin to turn up.
Now here's a second type of argument.
And it concerns homologies.
There's a highly technical definition of homologies.
I'm going to simply use the term to mean unexpected similarities between species.
If you look at a lot of species, one of the strange things you find
is you can often find very similar features across a wide range of different species.
Now the question is if you find very similar features, how can you explain them?
If you're adopting the deistic thesis, there might be a very good answer to this.
If you've come up with a design principle that works such as a wing, why not use it?
Wings work well, why not stick them on bats as well as birds for example?
Now that works fine in cases like that.
But there are some situations where we find that the same design seems to be used for very different purposes.
And that Darwin felt doesn't work as well for the deistic hypothesis
and is much more supportive of his hypothesis of natural selection.
If the same design is being used for many different purposes,
that may suggest that the species were once related but slowly, slowly changed
and they put existing organs and structures to different uses.
Fingers and hands are a very good example.
Now let me quote Darwin on this.
This is Darwin describing homology as a form of evidence for natural selection.
What can be more curious, he writes,
than that the hand of man which is formed for grasping,
that of a mole for digging, the leg of a horse, the paddle of a porpoise and the wing of a bat
should all be constructed on the same pattern and should include similar bones
and in the same relative positions.
And he gives a similar example from the world of marsupials.
How curious it is that the hind feet of the kangaroo,
which are so well fitted for bounding over the open plains,
those of the climbing, leaf-eating koala,
equally well fitted for grasping the branches of trees,
those of the ground-dwelling insect or root-eating bandicoots.
I've seen bandicoots, I have to say, that the most beautiful, gorgeous creatures.
And those of some other Australian marsupials should all be constructed on the same extraordinary type,
namely, with the bones of the second and third digits extremely slender
and enveloped within the same skin,
so that they appear like a single toe furnished with two claws.
Why would you do this?
Why not design different limbs for different purposes?
Particularly striking example of this is the fact that even whales have fingers
and no one can figure out what use they are.
Now, this is a phenomenon that doesn't work very well under a deistic hypothesis.
It doesn't make much sense to try and figure out why a god
should use these different types of mechanisms,
but design them on exactly the same principle.
Why have the same number of bones, for example?
Whales don't use their fingers.
Why should a rational creator have given whales fingers?
In fact, to some, it seemed that doing this looked like a sort of cruel joke.
But natural selection is going to explain this very, very easily
because it works by constantly tweaking or tinkering with existing species.
It provided a natural explanation for such survivals.
And we now know, in fact, that whales are descended from mammal species
that lived on land and could make very good use of finger bones.
So natural selection tinkers.
It doesn't get rid of existing stuff unless it's actually harmful.
The results are often surprisingly effective, but not necessarily perfect.
So in natural selection, you expect to find things that work.
They're a bit gerry-built. They work. They're not necessarily perfect.
So that's the second type of evidence that Darwin talked about.
The evidence from homology.
These strange similarities that make a lot of sense
if you assume that the species were all descended from a common ancestor.
Now, I want to talk about a third type of evidence,
and that's from the geographical distribution of species.
We all know that you find different types of species in different parts of the world.
But one of the oddities of this distribution
is that you'll find in different parts of the world very similar niches,
or niches, forgive my British pronunciation on that,
you'll find very similar niches that are occupied not by identical species
that have clearly been designed for that niche,
but by species that are biologically very different,
even though they may seem to be working in similar ways.
So, for example, why do most marsupials live in Australia?
And why do some marsupials look remarkably like species
that are filling similar niches, niches in other parts of the world?
Now, Darwin argued that such oddities made sense on the simple assumption
that all marsupials happened to be descended from marsupial ancestors.
So, as they adapted, they adapted to particular niches,
but they remained marsupials.
Now, this works for natural selection.
It doesn't work so well for the idea of a deistic God.
Why shouldn't a deistic creator have designed particular organisms
and put them down everywhere?
Why not design camels and put camels everywhere where you have deserts?
Well, for example, let's take the example of wolves.
There are wolf-type niches in Australian landscapes.
And we know the animals that fill them, that are adapted to them.
They're known as marsupial wolves, thylacines.
Why not put wolves there?
Once again, Darwin's argument is that this curious feature
of the distribution of biological species
makes lots of sense if we assume that marsupials exist in Australia
because their ancestors were marsupials.
It makes less sense on the deistic hypothesis.
Now, as I've said, Darwin was scrupulous about the evidence.
He was really determined to argue his case as powerfully as possible.
And that means he always plays fair with his opponent.
He presents the opposing arguments as powerfully as possible.
He was aware that there were gaps in his argument, in his arguments,
and many of these gaps have been filled since his time.
So let's look at some of the problems he was aware of
that have since been at least partially remedied.
Here's the first.
The fossil record in his time, as we've seen,
presented at least suggestive evidence for natural selection.
But it was so spotty that that evidence was limited.
The fossil record now is much, much richer.
And furthermore, we can date fossils
with much more precision because of radiometric dating techniques.
Now, even today, the record is spotty, it always will be.
