So it's impossible to produce a perfect sequence of fossils
showing all the links between one species and another.
However, many, many more transitional fossils have been found.
And as we see, we can now date them
so we can put them in a very precise sequence.
One of the most powerful examples is the evolution of the horse.
The evolution of the horse has now been very, very well studied indeed.
And we can fill in many of the stages.
And what you see is exactly what Darwin predicts.
A slow progression from early forms to modern forms.
From a small, fox-sized animal called Hierachotherium,
which lived about 60 million years ago,
through many intermediate species,
to their only modern survivor, the horse.
This is one of the clearest sequences of fossils
to demonstrate the evolutionary history of a modern organism.
So that's the first thing.
The fossil record is now much, much better.
We understand it much more precisely than in Darwin's time.
Here's a second issue.
This was a real problem for Darwin.
Was there enough time for evolution?
He knew evolution was a gradual slow process.
It depended on tiny changes, generation after generation.
So the question for him was, could this mechanism explain
imagining that all living things were descended
from a single primeval ancestor?
Could it explain all the variety he saw around him?
At the time he wrote,
the best estimate for the age of the Earth,
and this is something we've discussed in earlier lectures,
was somewhere between about 20 and 200 million years.
But that was the estimate of Lord Kelvin,
who assumed that the Earth had once been a molten ball,
which was slowly cooling.
And Darwin was always worried by this.
He felt that even 200 million years
was not really enough time for natural selection
to do all the work that he required it to do
to create the species present in the modern world.
Now this problem has been solved today.
As we've seen, modern estimates,
since the time of Claire Patterson in the 1950s,
give an age of more than four billion years for the Earth.
And we now know that living things have been on Earth
for at least 3.8 billion years.
So the timescale is about 40 times longer
than it was in Darwin's time.
So that problem, we can say, has essentially been solved.
There's plenty enough time for natural selection to do its work.
And here's a third problem.
And that's heredity, the nature of reproduction and heredity.
No one in Darwin's time really understood how heredity works.
He and many of his contemporaries assumed
that qualities inherited from parents were blended in their offspring.
Now this makes sense, because a lot of features are indeed blended.
But it had a very unfortunate consequence for his theory,
because it seemed to suggest that, let's say, an advantageous variation appears.
Is it going to be preserved into future generations?
Well, if in fact from generation to generation what happens
is the qualities of the parents are blended,
what's going to happen is it's slowly going to get diluted.
And over time it's just going to vanish.
And this ought to mean that species are fairly stable.
That from generation to generation any outliers,
any strange things slowly get diluted away,
and species remain fairly stable.
There's no room here for natural selection,
no room for the preservation of mutations that work really well.
I mean, it implies, for example,
if one of your parents had blue eyes and the other had brown eyes,
what would you end up with?
You'd end up with eyes that were sort of muddy blue-brown.
Now we all know this is not, in fact, the way things worked.
But the fundamental assumption was that most heredity
takes the form of blending.
Now we understand much better how heredity works.
Modern genetic studies began with the work of the monk Gregor Mendel.
He worked with peas and other garden vegetables,
and he bred them,
kept scrupulous observations about the parentage,
the features of the offspring.
He bred peas, for example, and he counted the number of peas in the pod,
in the parents and the children, from generation to generation.
And what Mendel showed very, very clearly is that many features,
such as the color of human eyes, were not blended.
What the children got was not a blending of their parents' qualities,
but one or the other.
They get either the one parent's features or the parents of the other.
This is good for natural selection
because it means that advantageous features could be preserved.
The discovery of DNA in 1953 and subsequent work,
which has teased out how the whole elaborate mechanism of reproduction works,
has clarified how genes work,
and essentially it's demonstrated that heredity works in just the ways
required by Darwin's theory.
While some parental features are blended, many are not.
Furthermore, though the copying is almost perfect,
there are always occasional errors,
and what these do is create tiny variations
that provide the raw material on which natural selection works.
And one final point.
Darwin always argued that one of the difficulties of his theory
is that you could never observe it in action.
It would always be so slow that the evidence would have to be indirect.
So he feared that you'd always have to give indirect evidence.
You could never actually watch evolution happening.
Well, we can say that in the 20th century
we've learned how to study evolution as it happens.
And the reason for this is that if you're studying rapidly breeding species
such as fruit flies, drosophila,
which has been studied immensely throughout the 20th century,
you can watch many, many generations of them
and you can actually start evolution happening.
We now know evolution can sometimes happen extremely fast.
Here's a recent example.
In 2001, it was found that bacteria were killing off males
of the blue moon butterfly of Samoa.
I love the name.
It was killing the males before they could reproduce.
Males counted for only 1% of the species.
And there were fears that the species would go extinct.
In 2007, it was found that the butterfly had evolved a gene
that could control the activities of these harmful bacteria
that were causing the problem.
And the males now accounted for 40% of the population.
And one of the researchers involved in this work,
Sylvain Charla of University College London,
writes, to my knowledge, this is the fastest evolutionary change
that has ever been observed.
Here we have a significant evolutionary change,
crucial to the future of a species,
occurring and spreading through the population in just six years.
Now, the rapid evolution of the AIDS virus
is another much more worrying example of this,
as is the declining effectiveness of antibiotics
as bacteria evolve to acquire resistance to antibiotics.
Okay, let me summarize.
We've seen that Darwin himself used the evidence
of the fossil record of homologies
and the distribution of species to support his theory.
Since he died, the fossil record has improved.
We've learned that the Earth is old enough
for natural selection to have done its work.
We've learned that heredity works in exactly the way needed
to support his theory.
And we've learned to observe natural selection at work directly.
These are some of the reasons why Darwin's idea of natural selection
is now the central organizing principle of modern life sciences.
It's involved in pharmaceutical research, in biological research.
It's the key idea, if you want to understand life,
in the 21st century.
Thank you.
You may have noticed that we've talked about how life changes,
but we haven't yet talked about the origins of life.
And that's what I'm going to do now.
But the reason why with this threshold
we didn't begin with the origins
is that it's vital to understand how life changes.
In fact, it's vital to understand the mechanism of natural selection
before we get a sense of how life originated.
Because in modern understanding of the origins of life,
natural selection itself plays a crucial role.
Now, I'm going to come at this subject from a slightly different angle.
Let's talk about Fred Hoyle,
who was one of the greatest of modern British astronomers.
His dates are 1915 to 2001.
Fred Hoyle is a very important figure
in several modern scientific disciplines.
He pioneered our modern understanding
of how chemicals are formed in stars and supernovae.
So he could play a starring role
in the lecture on the formation of elements.
But Fred Hoyle was also famous for being,
what should we say, a contrarian.
That is to say, he was someone who seemed to enjoy
taking positions that most scientists opposed.
For example, he never accepted
the Big Bang Theory,
despite being one of the best-known,
most influential physicists of his generation.
And he defended modified versions of his steady-state theory.
That's the theory that the expansion of the universe
was caused by the continual creation of matter in space.
He defended his steady-state theory throughout his life.
He also refused to accept
that life had evolved on Earth,
that life had originated on Earth.
And he claimed it must have evolved elsewhere
and arrived in the form of a reign
of living material from space.
This was the theory known as Panspermia.
Fred Hoyle in connection with this
wrote a wonderful science fiction novel,
which I remember seeing in televised form as a teenager
in the early 1960s.
It was called Apha Andromeda.
In Apha Andromeda,
British astronomers, of course British,
receive a signal from space,
and they realize that it's got a pattern to it,
and eventually they decide it's a sort of code.
And they look at the code,
and after time they crack it,
and they realize it looks like instructions
for building a computer.
So they build a computer,
and then they press the start button,
only to find out that the goal of the computer
is to construct a new race of alien beings.
This is a very elegant way of moving life
from one part of the universe to another.
I should confess at this point
that my very happy memories of this series
probably colored by the fact
that the first alien created by the machine
was played by a young Julie Christie.
Now, Hoyle described his primary objection
to the idea that life had evolved on Earth
as follows in a very famous metaphor.
This is what he said.
A junkyard contains all the bits and pieces
of a Boeing 747, dismembered and in disarray.
A whirlwind happens to blow through the yard.
What is the chance that after its passage,
a fully assembled 747, ready to fly,
will be found standing there?
Now, Hoyle is supposed to have made
the comparison with a 747
because yeast cells and Boeing 747s
both contain about six million parts.
In some sense, we could say
they represent similar levels of complexity.
Fred Hoyle's objection to the idea
that life could have evolved on Earth
through blind processes such as some form of natural selection
expressed a widely held view
that life is simply too complex
to have been the product of blind, random processes
such as those that drive natural selection.
His own answer, we've seen,
was that life must have evolved somewhere else.
Quite frankly, I think I hope you'll agree
that this is really, in its own way,
very unsatisfactory.
And it's a bit like announcing the existence of a creator God.
It simply postpones the question
by forcing us to try and figure out
how it could have formed somewhere else in the universe.
So this is the question.
Can we do better in explaining the origins of life?
Most biologists today think we can do a lot better.
And in this lecture, I'm going to try to describe
their efforts to do so,
to explain the origins of life on Earth
in modern scientific terms.
Now, the last lecture described why most biologists
accept that natural selection explains the variety
and adaptability of life today.
But the question is, can natural selection
also help us explain the initial appearance of life?
Can it overcome the objections of critics like Hoyle?
I'm going to try and show that it can.
So how were the first life forms created?
That's a question that Darwin himself
seems to have had no answers to.
A little speculation, but no serious answers.
I've deliberately held off with these questions,
as we've seen, because we do need a good grasp
of the mechanism of natural selection
before we can understand the modern answer.
It has to be said, though, that the modern answer
is not yet quite as good as many biologists
would like it to be.
We have a very good answer.
We have lots of pieces of the puzzle.
But I suspect many biologists would agree
we don't have quite as complete a scientific theory
of the origins of life as they would like.
But nevertheless, we can offer a very good attempt at this.
