Each bond consists of two bases.
These are small clusters of atoms.
That's all we need to know.
The bases come in four main types and they can only fit together in certain ways.
The four types are A, T, C and G which stand for adenine, thymine, cytosine and guanine.
And this is the rule.
A links only with T and C only with G.
So along each of these rungs you have sticking out from one chain maybe an A
and it's linking with a T which is sticking out from the other chain.
Now imagine we separate the two.
We run along one of the chains.
What we find is a long list of bases A, T, C, G.
That is the code.
That's the genetic code.
The exact sequence of those bases contains the code for creating a living organism.
How does DNA reproduce?
It splits down the middle.
All the rungs split.
Each chain goes off in search of its pairs.
So if you have a rung with A it looks for T and so on all the way down.
And eventually it reassembles its complement.
So you now have two identical chains each forming a helix.
This is the key to accurate reproduction.
The trouble is that DNA cannot exist on its own.
It's like software.
Yet cells can't survive without DNA.
So which evolved first?
The software of DNA or the hardware of the cell?
It's a puzzle and at present all we can say is that the best bet is that RNA,
ribonucleic acid which is closely related to DNA,
may have acted at one time as both hardware and software.
RNA comes in single chains so it can do the work of software
but it can also do the work of proteins within cells.
It can do both.
So there are three stages forming the basic chemicals,
turning them into large complex molecules and creating DNA,
the basic genetic structure.
Now I hope I've conveyed a sense that we know a lot of the story.
I shouldn't say we, the biologists know a lot of the story.
They know a lot of the details but it's still not quite perfect.
Nevertheless, there's enough here for biologists to be very confident
that they can essentially explain how living things were assembled
from non-living ingredients.
About 3.5 billion years ago or slightly more.
And that's something we'll look at in the next lecture.
Thank you.
Lecture 16
Life on Earth, Single Celled Organisms
Think of a tropical jungle.
Think of the trees, think of the insects, the reptiles,
think of the fish in the river,
think of the birds, think of the monkeys.
This is one of the richest natural environments we can imagine.
Then think of the countless numbers of single celled organisms
in the soil, on the skin of animals, on the leaves of trees.
The sheer variety of life is staggering,
the number of different species is staggering.
Biologists really still don't know how many species there really are.
In his book, Diversity of Life, E. O. Wilson writes,
we don't know, not even to the nearest order of magnitude,
the number of species could be close to 10 million
or it could be as high as 100 million.
Of all these species, a little over one million
have been listed and described.
Of those incidentally about 750,000 are insects.
So we haven't seriously begun to list the staggering variety
of microorganisms in amongst all of this.
Yet all of these organisms, despite their variety,
their differences in color, shape, function, scale,
share the DNA molecule.
They share the same basic mechanisms of DNA
and many of the same basic chemical processes.
They, in fact, why not say it frankly,
we are all relatives.
We're all members of a single family.
We're all part of the same family tree.
And this is one of the fundamental payoffs to Darwin's idea.
So how did we get from the biological simplicity
of the early Archaean Eon about 3.8 billion years ago
when life first appeared to the staggering variety of species
that we find in later eons and later periods of history?
That's the story I want to tell in this and the next lecture.
In the last lecture, we described how we think life originated on Earth.
Now what I want to do is try to describe how life evolved
to create the astonishing variety of forms present today.
We've seen that this capacity to evolve, this capacity to adapt
and create an astonishing number of different forms
is itself one of the distinctive properties of life,
one of the things that distinguishes life from non-life.
So the variety of living organisms reflects, in a sense,
a slow exploration by life as a whole,
all the possible ways of getting energy from the environment,
all the possible niches that there are on Earth.
We, of course, represent merely one of these many millions of species
generated by this process over almost four billion years.
But to understand how we were created,
we need to understand the history of this long process of change.
So we need to see how we fit in to the larger story of the evolution
and proliferation of life on Earth.
We're looking at the history of life on Earth.
Okay, we've seen that one of the things that Darwin did
was to show that life is not static.
It, too, has a history, like the universe, the stars and the Earth,
and now we begin surveying that history.
We'll see that the history of life begins with very, very simple life forms.
We began to talk about them in the last lecture,
but then, over almost four billion years,
more and more new life forms appear,
until today, life looks very different from the life of the early Earth.
I want to survey this history.
It's a fantastically complex history.
You could devise an entire course about this history.
So this is just a very, very brief tour of this history.
And I'm going to break it up into eight stages.
Four I'll deal with today in this lecture and four in the next lecture.
Each of these stages I have picked
because they create one of the elements
that would eventually define our own species.
So this is a survey of the history of life on Earth
very much from a human perspective.
If you want to get a sense of the chronology,
you might find timelines two and three
in the printed materials with this course are helpful.
So in this lecture, I described the first four of these stages
in the evolution of life.
This entire lecture is concerned with a period in the history of life on Earth
when the only living organisms on Earth were single-celled.
And that period covers the first three billion years of the Earth's history.
It covers most of the history of life on Earth.
Okay, the first stage.
The first stage consists of the first organisms.
We described in the last lecture roughly speaking how we think they were created.
Almost certainly, if we'd been able to see them,
we would describe them as prokaryotes.
Prokaryotes are the simplest single-celled organisms we know on Earth today.
Now, it's important to remind ourselves how important bacteria,
single-celled organisms are in the history of life on Earth.
Life for the best part of three billion years of the Earth's history
consisted of single-celled organisms.
Not until about 600 million years ago would the first multi-celled organisms appear.
Multi-celled organisms, therefore, have existed for only 15% of the time
that life has flourished on Earth.
They are an extremely recent development,
and their representatives will see a significant new level of complexity.
One of the things this means is that if we're looking for life elsewhere in the universe,
we should expect that most of the life we're going to find
will take the form of something a bit like bacteria.
It's going to be extremely simple.
Prokaryotes. What are prokaryotes?
They're very, very simple cells.
Prokaryotes are, for the most part, invisible to the naked eye.
Indeed, countless billions live in or on our bodies.
They're so small that you could fit 100,000 prokaryotes into a single dot on a printed page.
So they're absolutely minute.
However, let me add, they are probably not quite the simplest of all organisms we know.
We've seen that viruses seem to have evolved in the direction of greater simplicity,
and as they did so, they shed their capacity to generate energy on their own.
They just abandoned their metabolism and they let other organisms do the work of metabolism,
knowing that they could hijack that metabolic machinery whenever they wanted
in order to maintain themselves.
And of course, we experienced this hijacking
and this sort of siphoning off of energy from our bodies,
as well as the battle between the viruses and our own cells every time we go down with flu.
It's possible that viruses evolved from bacteria rather than the other way around,
and if so, they represent an example of how evolution can lead not to greater complexity,
but sometimes to greater simplicity as well.
Back to prokaryotes.
Like all cells, prokaryotes have a fatty membrane, a surface which is semi-permeable.
It can keep most of the important stuff inside,
but it does allow chemicals to flow inwards for nutrition,
and it allows waste products to flow outwards for excretion.
So it's a sort of chemical bag that's not totally insulated from the outside world.
Within the cell, there are free-floating molecules of DNA.
They just drift around in the center of the cell.
Now, inside the cells, what happens is RNA molecules.
Now, I mentioned them in the last lecture.
Remember, they are single-stranded equivalents of DNA, very closely related to DNA.
Single-stranded molecules, these single-stranded molecules of RNA,
approach DNA, they peer inside it, prizing apart the double helix,
to get instructions for their next job inside the cell.
So that's how the reproductive apparatus works.
Prokaryotes, I've said, are extremely simple, and in a sense, that's true.
By comparison, with later organisms, it's going to be certainly very true.
But by comparison with some of the earlier things we've seen in this course,
even prokaryotes are immensely complex entities.
To give you some sense of this, I'd like to quote, once again,
from Bill Bryson's short history of almost everything.
He offers a very entertaining description of what it might be like to be inside a cell.
So here's Bill Bryson.
Blown up to a scale at which atoms are about the size of peas,
a cell itself, he writes, would be a sphere roughly half a mile across
and supported by a complex framework of girders called the cytoskeleton.
So you can imagine a sort of vast football stadium.
Within it, millions upon millions of objects, some the size of basketballs,
others the size of cars, would whizz about like bullets.
There wouldn't be a place you could stand without being pummeled and ripped
thousands of times every second from every direction.
Even for its full-time occupants, the inside of a cell is a hazardous place.
Each strand of DNA, he points out, is on average attacked or damaged
once every 8.4 seconds, 10,000 times in a day, by chemicals and other agents
that whack into or carelessly slice through it.
And each of these wounds must be swiftly stitched up if the cell is not to perish.
So I hope you're getting a sense of a cell as a very, very violent and active and complex place.
The proteins are especially lively, spinning, pulsating and flying into each other
up to a billion times a second.
The enzymes, themselves a type of protein, dash everywhere, performing up to a thousand tasks a second.
Like greatly speeded up worker ants, they busily build and rebuild molecules,
hauling a piece off this one, adding a piece to that one.
Some monitor passing proteins and mark with a chemical, those that are irreparably damaged or flawed,
these chemicals are marked for execution.
Once so selected, the doomed proteins proceed to a structure called a proteasome
where they are stripped down and their components used to build new proteins.
Sometimes a protein exists for less than half an hour, others survive for weeks,
but all lead existences that are inconceivably frenzied.
The earliest prokaryotes we know of probably got most of their food from chemicals near the seafloor.
We've seen that life itself probably originated near ocean floor volcanoes.
And many in fact still survive by eating chemicals such as methane.
We've seen that mid-oceanic vents would have provided an ideal environment
for the very earliest living organisms.
They would have supplied energy, they would have been watery,
they would have provided plenty of chemicals that bubbled up from the earth
for the chemical reactions needed to create these early simple prokaryotes.
And they also would have been protected from ultraviolet rays because they're deep beneath the sea.
So, that's the first stage.
Our earliest ancestors were almost certainly simple prokaryotes, probably living deep in the sea.
Stage two, photosynthesis.
The second transition is the evolution of the complex chemical reaction known as photosynthesis.
It's extremely complicated and it's now found in all plant or plant-like organisms.
What photosynthesis does, you can think of it as a sort of chemical trick
or a piece of technology if you like.
It enables organisms to tap into an entirely new source of energy.
And we saw that the very first living organisms are probably acquiring a lot of their energy
or depending directly or indirectly on energy from the centre of the earth.
So, the energy that fuels them is the heat at the centre of the earth.
What photosynthesis allows them to do is to tap into a much, much larger
and more durable source of energy, the sun.
So, this means that by the time photosynthesis appeared,
at least some prokaryotes had learned to live near the surface of the oceans
where they could feel the sun's energy and ingest its light.
The ingredients needed for photosynthesis are carbon dioxide and water.
Those are the chemical ingredients.
And the energy for the reaction comes from sunlight.
The products of photosynthesis are first sugary molecules such as glucosees
which can act as stores of energy or batteries of energy.
In effect, what they're doing is they're storing the energy of sunlight.
But there's another byproduct and that is oxygen.
The manager of this entire process is the complex molecule we know as chlorophyll.
When did the first photosynthesizing prokaryotes appear?
They appeared almost certainly about 3.5 billion years ago.
Now, photosynthesis marks a fundamental threshold in the history of life on earth
because it enabled living organisms to tap into an entirely new energy source.
It was the sort of energy bonanza.
It's allowing them to tap into the energy flows generated in the core of the sun by hydrogen fusion.
Today, all plants practice photosynthesis.
They capture energy from the sun using green molecules of chlorophyll.
And as plants are consumed by other organisms,
this captured energy diffuses through the biosphere via the food chain.
Look once again how powerfully the different stories of this course are linked.
Through photosynthesis, the energy created in the center of a star, our sun,
eventually flows to you and me.
Now, how do we know about the date of photosynthesis?
Some of the oldest microfossils, these are microscopic fossils,
they were only observed for the first time in the 20th century,
about 3.5 billion years old.
And they seem to be fossils of photosynthesizing algae like modern cyanobacteria.
Indeed, it's their discovery that provides the best evidence for the early appearance of photosynthesis
and indeed of life itself.
These are the first clear fossils of life that we know.
But their appearance suggests that something had existed even earlier.
And that's why we assume that the very first prokaryotes appeared about 3.8 billion years ago.
Now, these cyanobacteria-like bacteria, simple organisms,
created coral-like structures called stromatolites.
Stromatolites are huge crowds of organisms,
and eventually as they die, these structures build and become larger and larger and larger.
Some of them still exist today.
They live and flourish, for example, off the western coast of Australia.
But we have very ancient examples of them so that we know that stromatolites are very, very old indeed.
And if you want to imagine an Archean landscape,
if you want to imagine a sort of shallow seashore,
you should probably imagine it's strewn with stromatolites.
