So these two things, understanding fusion and understanding gravity,
help explain the processes I've just described.
But observational astronomy also comes into it.
Observational astronomy can identify regions of our own galaxy, for example,
where we see huge clouds of matter that appear to be collapsing in on themselves
and forming new stars.
We can describe these, if you like, as sort of star nurseries.
It won't be hard to find a star nursery if you look on the internet, incidentally.
The Hubble space satellite has taken, as many of you will know,
absolutely gorgeous pictures of the universe in recent years.
And many of those show these star nurseries.
And you can see the new bright young stars often appearing in clusters like eggs in a nest inside them.
If you want, you can check out the Horsehead Nebula,
which is a very spectacular and beautiful example of such a region.
So to a certain degree, we can actually observe this process of star formation.
It's going on in the Milky Way all the time, and we know where it's happening.
Now, what about studying the life cycle of stars?
We've talked about their birth. What about their life cycle?
This is a tricky proposition, mainly because stars last so long
that we can never observe an individual star revolving.
This is one of those areas where our limitations,
the limitations of our capacity to deal with scales becomes very important.
So we have to find ways around this.
And what astronomers have done since the 19th century is to study millions of individual stars
and assume that each of them represents different parts of a star's life.
It's rather as if you took a sort of mass photograph of millions of humans at one moment in time
and then tried to figure out the lifetime of humans by comparing different individuals.
Now, how in practice do astronomers do this?
Lecture 5 mentioned the invention of the spectroscope by Joseph von Fraunhofer in 1814.
You remember the absorption lines. You break up the spectrum from starlight
and you see the different frequencies of light in it,
and you find that some of those frequencies are darker than others.
There are lines of darkness. These are the absorption lines.
And we saw that each of these frequencies represented a particular element
which was absorbing light at particular frequencies.
So, for example, you can identify lines that show the presence of hydrogen, helium, carbon, and other elements.
So spectroscopes can tell us a lot about what's inside stars.
They can also tell us about the relative amounts of different chemical elements within a star
because the absorption lines, you can measure the strength of the absorption lines.
In fact, how much of the light of a particular kind is absorbed.
So we can estimate roughly the proportion of different elements in a different star.
And what these studies show is that stars consist, as we've seen already,
overwhelmingly of hydrogen and helium.
And that's what we expect.
The early universe itself consists overwhelmingly of hydrogen and helium.
And, in fact, the universe today still does.
But if you measure them carefully, or if you measure the ratio of hydrogen and helium,
you see something else.
You see that the amount of helium within particular stars varies quite a lot.
In some stars you find there's a lot of helium and, in fact, more than hydrogen.
And this shows us that here we're dealing with a star that's been burning hydrogen for a long time,
fusing it into helium, so that what's happening is, at the center of the star,
a lot of helium is accumulating.
In fact, we know this is true of our own sun.
Originally, it probably contained about 27% of helium.
Now, 62% of our sun consists of helium.
And that's the sort of indication that our sun is perhaps about halfway through its stock of fuel,
and therefore about halfway through its life.
But it's been burning for four and a half billion years,
so we've probably still got another four and a half billion years before we need to start panicking.
We can also measure the apparent brightness of a star.
That is to say, the brightness it seems to have from Earth.
And we've seen already that if we know its distance, we can measure its real brightness.
Now, that's the reverse of the process we saw with seafheeds.
With seafheeds you knew the real brightness, and you could measure their distance.
But if we know their distance and their apparent brightness, we can also measure their brightness.
That's the amount of energy it emits.
Now, larger stars, think back to our collapsing cloud of matter.
Larger stars generate greater pressures at their center, higher temperatures, and more brightness.
So what this means is that by and large, the brightest stars tend to be the largest stars.
So if we can estimate the real brightness of a star, we can estimate its mass.
So here are quite a few things we can tell about stars.
We can tell about their chemical composition.
We can tell about their brightness.
We can tell, as we've seen, something about their distance, something about their movements.
And there's one more thing we can tell.
We can estimate the temperature at the surface of a star.
And we can do that quite simply from its color.
Basically, if a star is very blue, it's very, very hot indeed.
Rigel in the constellation Orion is such a star, very hot blue star.
If it's red, it's probably cooler.
Beetlejuice in Orion is such a star.
Okay, so astronomers from the 19th century and into the 20th century have built up a massive database of observations about stars, like a vast family portrait.
And the question is, how can you use this portrait to figure out how individual stars live and die?
Well, this is the first of several examples we'll see in this course of scientists suddenly finding a new way of arranging familiar data so that it reveals new regularities.
In 1910, a Danish astronomer, Enar Herzprong, and an American astronomer, Henry Russell,
distilled all this information into an extremely simple graph that helped astronomers identify the key factors in a star's life cycle.
This is what they did.
They took two features of a large number of stars and they plotted them on a scatter graph.
The first feature was the star's brightness.
Now, we've seen effectively that's a measure of its mass, the total amount of light and brightness that it's emitting, of energy that it's emitting.
The second thing is its surface temperature, which can be different than its total brightness.
And what they found is a simple correlation.
The most stars, the more massive they were, in other words, the brighter they were, the higher their surface temperature.
If you look at an example of the Herzprong-Russell diagram, you'll see that normally brightness is charted on the vertical axis and surface temperature on the horizontal axis.
So what this means is that you end up with a ribbon of stars, which is known as the main sequence, which moves from the top left down to the bottom right of the graph.
And most stars appear on the so-called main sequence.
At the top left, you have very big, very bright stars, stars that also have high surface temperature.
At the bottom right, you have smaller, less stars with less surface temperature.
That's the main sequence, this diagonal band.
But they also found a number of stars that didn't fit into this correlation.
These were stars, it turns out, at the end of their life cycle.
They're beginning to behave slightly differently from other stars.
Stars on the main sequence are all burning hydrogen and fusing it into helium according to the principles I described earlier in this lecture.
They're doing the normal thing that normal stars do during most of their life cycle.
The other stars that are off the main sequence are slightly different.
And we'll discuss them in the next lecture.
They're probably coming to the end of their life.
What the graph shows is that the key determinant of a star's life is the size of the initial cloud from which it's formed.
In fact, the size of the star itself.
This determines its overall brightness.
Normally it determines its surface temperature.
And it determines the speed at which fusion takes place and therefore the time it will take to run through its fuel and eventually die.
So this one parameter, how big the initial cloud was, is the key to understanding the evolution of stars.
Let me end this lecture by summarizing why stars play such an important role in big history.
First of all, they count as the first complex things created by our universe.
By merely existing, they make the universe more interesting, more complicated, and they generate flows of energy.
They represent the first new form of complexity since the creation of the universe.
Secondly, stars create the preconditions for new forms of complexity.
They provide a platform for building other forms of complexity and they do so in two main ways.
First, from the furnaces at their center, they pump energy out into the cold, empty spaces between them.
And this creates powerful energy flows.
And these will provide the energy needed to create even more complex things in the future, including ourselves.
Secondly, they also create new chemical elements.
And we'll talk about that in the next lecture.
With new chemical elements, we'll see it was possible to create a universe that at least in some corners was much more complex.
So this lecture has described how gravity sculpted stars from the simple raw materials of the early universe.
What happens next? How do you create even more complex entities?
That was the task of stars and we'll describe how they did it in the next lecture. Thank you.
Lecture 8. Threshold 3. Making Chemical Elements
In the previous lecture, we saw how the first stars were created.
Now with the appearance of stars, our universe is already much more interesting than it was.
We saw how, with remarkably limited ingredients, gravity managed to cook up these new complex things, stars.
And as we did so, as stars were created, we actually moved from cosmology, that's the discipline that studies the universe as a whole,
to physics and astronomy, disciplines that study some of the first complex objects that were made in the universe, such as stars and atoms.
In fact, you'll notice that when we cross in this course from one level of complexity to another, we're often going to be crossing also from one scholarly discipline to another.
So now, our universe is dotted with billions of tiny hotspots that pour energy into the cold of surrounding space.
But how far can you go with this? Could you make even more forms of complexity with just the existing elements, with hydrogen, helium, gravity, other forms of energy and stars?
It's hard to see how. We'll see in fact that all later forms of complexity, or at least all those that are significant to human beings,
depend on the existence of a larger palette of chemical elements.
These make it possible to create a greater variety of material elements, of stuff, of substances, if you like.
And using these, it's possible to combine them so as to create entities that have new emergent properties.
And one of these emergent properties will eventually turn out to be life itself.
So the creation of new stuff, new chemical elements, takes us from the physical level of complexity, from the level of atoms and stars, to a new level which we'll call the chemical level of complexity.
So as we cross from the disciplines of astronomy and physics to that of chemistry, we find ourselves ready for the new levels of complexity that eventually will form life and you and me.
So that's our central question for this lecture. How do you create new chemical elements?
Before we can really answer that question, we need a very clear idea of what we mean by chemical elements.
The chemical elements are the 92 most elementary forms of matter, ranging from hydrogen with just one proton in its nucleus to uranium with 92.
There are in fact other elements that have more protons than uranium in their nuclei.
They can be created artificially and some may have been created occasionally by natural processes, but they're so unstable that they soon break down.
They're known as the transuranic elements.
Modern understanding of chemical elements really goes back to the work of the Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev, whose dates are 1834 to 1907.
Mendeleev was born in 1834 in Tobolsk, in Siberia.
In 1869, now a young professor at St. Petersburg University, Mendeleev did something for chemistry and for chemical elements that was rather similar to what Herzsprung
and Russell had done for stars.
What he did was he arranged them in a new way that revealed new and hitherto unsuspected features.
He produced a list of the chemical elements that were known in his time, and he arranged them so as to reveal some striking and unexpected new regularities that no one had seen clearly before.
He arranged them first in rows. He arranged them by atomic weight, so they're getting heavier and heavier and heavier, row by row.
That we now know that it would have been slightly more precise to order them by atomic number, that is to say the number of protons in the nucleus.
For example, hydrogen has one proton in its nucleus, carbon has six, oxygen has eight, silver has 47, gold has 79 and uranium 92.
These are their atomic numbers, the numbers of protons in their nuclei.
In all but a few cases, however, these two rankings, ranking by atomic weight and by atomic number, coincide.
Which is why Mendeleev's version of the table worked as well as it did.
Now that was the first arrangement, horizontally by atomic weight and nowadays by atomic number.
But the really interesting information was found in the vertical columns of his table.
He found that the elements known in his time could be arranged in such a way that the vertical columns contained elements with similar features,
features such as differing degrees of chemical reactivity.
And he also showed something else.
These features recurred at surprisingly regular intervals.
At first they recurred every eight elements, then every 18 and finally every 32 elements.
So striking with these patterns that Mendeleev was eventually able to guess at the position and even some of the chemical qualities of elements that had not yet been discovered.
For example, he discovered that an undiscovered element ought to lie somewhere between calcium and titanium and he listed some of its properties.
That element, which came to be known as scandium, promptly turned up in about 1879 along with the appropriate chemical properties.
Now when a scientist manages to make predictions like this, this is one of the most powerful forms of proof that can exist.
So this prediction was a sign of the power of the arrangement of elements that Mendeleev had put together.
Today, with a much fuller understanding of the nature of chemical elements and how they work, these patterns can be seen even more clearly.
For example, the so-called noble or inert gases consist of helium, whose atomic number is 2, neon, whose atomic number is 10.
You notice the gap of 8 between them, argon 18, another 8, krypton 36.
Now we get a gap of 18, xenon 34, another gap of 18, then radon atomic number 86.
All of these appear in the last column of modern versions of Mendeleev's table.
And as we've seen, the intervals between them are 8, 8, 18, 18 and 32.
And you'll find similar intervals in other vertical columns.
For example, the so-called halogens are extremely reactive elements.
They include fluorine number 9, chlorine 17, bromine 35, iodine 53 and astatine 85.
Though he was struck by these intervals, Mendeleev himself couldn't explain them.
Partly because doing so required understanding of the role of the electron in atoms,
and the electron had not yet been discovered when he devised this table.
We now know that these periods depend on the way electrons were arranged in the outer shells of atoms.
In fact, the number of electrons in the outer shell of an atom determines many aspects of its chemical behavior,
including its liability to react and the way it reacts with different elements.
If, like the noble gases, you have a complete outer shell, then you're not likely to need to react much with other elements.
And that explains why the noble gases are inert.
Mendeleev's table is now known as the periodic table of the elements.
And it's been described as the most elegant organizational chart ever devised.
It gave shape to our modern understanding of chemical elements,
and the existence of chemical elements is crucial to the existence of planets, living organisms and ourselves.
So they're the key to the third threshold of complexity in our course.
So back to the question of how they were made.
How were they made in a universe that consisted entirely of hydrogen and helium?
Mendeleev himself had no clue, nor would anyone else until about the middle of the 20th century,
when astronomers finally managed to get a much better understanding of the life cycle of stars,
because stars turn out to be the key to this process.
So how were the elements created?
Now the first thing to note is that most elements were not formed in the Big Bang.
And there's a reason for this.
The reason is because in the initial split second of the Big Bang,
temperatures were just far too high for protons to lock together,
to form the multi-proton nuclei that you need for more complex elements.
Then, when temperatures had fallen low enough for protons to combine to form helium with two protons,
they were now too low to form other elements.
So it's as if things moved far too fast in the first second or two of the Big Bang
to form any other elements apart from hydrogen with one proton in its nucleus and helium with two,
and tiny amounts of lithium, atomic number three, and beryllium, atomic number four.
So within minutes of the Big Bang,
temperatures were too low to form elements heavier than hydrogen and helium.
And that explains why most of the universe today consists of hydrogen and helium.
And those were the two elements created in the Big Bang.
So if the universe was too cold to jam together atoms to form more complicated elements,
where could they form?
We need to look somewhere where remarkably high temperatures could be generated.
And of course, stars are the place to look.
Temperatures high enough for the creation of further elements would not be recreated in the universe
until the appearance of stars.
But to understand how stars created temperatures high enough to synthesize heavier elements,
we need to understand something about their life cycles.
So let's return to the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, the HR diagram.
We saw that this, a bit like Mendeleev's table,
summarizes a large amount of information about different types of stars.
The diagram is a scatograph.
It ranks stars according to two types of measurement.
The first parameter is their brightness, or the amount of light they emit.
And this is often given as a multiple of the sun's brightness.
In most forms of the HR diagram, this is measured on the vertical axis.
And this means that stars that are emitting more light appear higher up the graph than cooler stars.
In effect, a star's brightness tells us its real mass, the amount of matter it contains,
because a large star generates more density and higher temperatures.
The second parameter on the HR diagram is a star's surface temperature,
which can be different than its overall temperature.
This can often be estimated from the star's color.
By and large, the bluest stars are the hottest and red stars are cooler.
Surface temperature is normally plotted on the horizontal axis,
so that bluest stars with higher surface temperatures appear to the left of the graph
and redder stars to the right.
So just to recapitulate, the hottest stars appear higher up on the graph.
Those with the hotter surface temperatures appear on the left-hand side of the graph.
Now, when you look at an HR diagram, you'll see that there's a broad band of stars
that appear on a narrow diagonal band, which is called the main sequence.
And this runs from the top left, where we find stars that are large, bright, and very hot,
and they tend to be bluish.
To the bottom right, where we find stars that are smaller, less bright, less hot, and reddish.
All stars on the main sequence are normal, mature stars.
The temperatures in their core are hot enough to fuse hydrogen into helium,
at least 10 million degrees, but not high enough to create elements with higher atomic numbers.
So all the stars on the main sequence are doing what stars spend most of their time doing,
most of their lives.
Their job basically is turning hydrogen into helium,
and that's what they spend most of their lives doing.
So that's the main sequence.
What this band, the main sequence seems to be telling us,
is that for most of their lives, overall brightness, total mass,
and surface brightness are closely correlated.
That's why you get this neat line.
Now, why does a star appear on a particular part of the main sequence?
A particular star will appear at a particular place in the main sequence,
and it'll stay there for most of its life.
Its position depends on one factor, its mass.
And that essentially means the amount of stuff that went into making the star.
Why is this?
Small stars generate less pressure at the center,
and they burn at lower temperatures.
So they burn their nuclear fuel slowly, and they may live for billions of years.
These appear at the bottom right of the main sequence.
They're cooler, and they're smaller.
Our sun is in the middle of the main sequence.
It's quite large, and it's quite bright.
It's probably going to last for about nine billion years,
which will see means that it's about halfway through its life.
Stars that are more than about ten times larger than our own sun
create much, much more pressure at their centers, much higher temperatures,
and they burn through their fuel much faster.
