they put up a spore-producing stalk,
a bit like a sort of submarine's periscope,
and they remain there indefinitely, just like that, as long as it's dry.
But if you add water, the spores germinate
and give rise to independent mix amoebas,
which head off in different directions.
So that's the slime mold.
So I hope you can see that there are several stages
between complete independence of organisms and cooperation.
Now, this is a very important point,
because when we look at human society later on,
we're going to see that human societies, too,
exist as crowds of individuals,
but over time, those individuals get more and more interdependent.
And that raises a very important question
to which we have no clear answer yet,
which is, can you imagine humans eventually becoming so interdependent
that we'd have to start thinking of society as a whole
as a sort of single organism?
And I'll just leave that question hanging in the air.
Okay, genuine multicellularity
requires, as we've seen, that all the participating cells
have identical genetic material,
and that's in order to avoid competition between them.
If they're identical, they can cooperate.
What happens in human beings, for example,
is that a fertilized cell
will create billions of clones as the embryo develops.
Each of those clones has exactly the same genes,
but they don't develop in quite the same way.
Though they have identical genetic material,
different cells are activated in different ways,
depending on where they find themselves in the developing body
and the chemicals that surround them.
So different chemicals can persuade the RNA inside those cells
to unzip the DNA and use different parts of it,
get different instructions, and perform in different ways.
So in this way, each cell slowly starts developing a specialist role,
and it'll eventually turn into a distinct type of cell,
a liver cell, perhaps, or a neuron.
So within human bodies, you have specialization,
as in human society, with different cells specializing in special functions.
As a result, the organism as a whole becomes much more complex,
and it's capable of a much wider range of functions
than would be possible for a single cell.
So multicellularity allowed the construction of gigantic organisms,
organisms that existed, in fact, on a completely different scale
from those of most of the history of life on Earth.
Imagine yourself as a prokaryote,
and you're looking at yourself as you really are.
What would we look like?
Presumably, of course we can't really tell,
but presumably you would look like a huge moving equivalent
of the Empire State building, only probably much larger.
So imagine the Empire State walking around New York.
That's probably what we would look like to these organisms.
Some large organisms, like ourselves, contain as many cells
as there are stars in the Milky Way.
Once the first multicellular organisms appeared,
they evolved rapidly in an adaptive radiation.
Now I'm going to use this phrase adaptive radiation again.
It's quite helpful, so let me try and explain it clearly.
Adaptive radiations occur quite frequently in evolutionary history.
We've seen already, this is actually one of the great ideas
of Stephen J. Gould, who I've mentioned before,
the pace of evolution can vary greatly.
Sometimes it's very, very fast, sometimes it's very, very slow.
Sometimes a new organism appears which has a new trick,
let's say, photosynthesis as an example of that,
but it's a trick that could be used in multiple ways.
And very often when that happens,
what you find is that a whole series of individual species appear
very, very quickly, each of them using the same trick,
but in slightly different environments.
That's an adaptive radiation,
and something like that seems to have happened
with the appearance of multicellular organisms,
and that's why in the Cambrian you suddenly get a huge array of new species.
It's as if once the trick of multicellularity has been discovered,
evolution, adaptation starts exploring all the possible uses of that trick
on our Earth.
Okay, now we've got multicellular organisms.
Before I go further, let me spend a bit of time talking about how we classify them.
Now, we've already touched on the idea of taxonomy.
It was pioneered, we've seen, by Carl Linnaeus in the 18th century.
We've already met him, and we saw that he was one of the great opponents
of the idea of evolution, but also the pioneer of modern taxonomy.
Now, we need to look slightly more closely at how taxonomy
groups different types of organisms.
We want to understand different types of multicellular organisms,
so we need to get a bit of a grip on taxonomy.
What taxonomy does is group organisms into many nested categories.
I should warn you that there's not yet total agreement about the best system,
so occasionally you'll find slightly different bits of terminology
dropping up in different systems of taxonomy,
but they all share the same basic features.
Today, the largest generally recognized category
divides all living organisms into two super kingdoms.
This is the largest division of all between living organisms,
and it's one that most biologists accept.
It's the division we've seen already between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
There are two fundamental types of organisms,
and we, of course, are eukaryotes.
We're made of eukaryotic cells.
That's the super kingdom.
Below that comes a level of kingdoms.
Kingdoms include, for example, animals, plants, and fungi
amongst multicellular organisms.
We're animals.
Then come phyla.
That's the plural of the Latin phylum.
Phyla include chordates, the backbone organisms.
Below that come classes such as mammals,
then orders such as primates,
and finally species such as human beings.
Now, don't worry about the details. We'll come back to this later on.
What you need to remember is this picture of nested hierarchies,
which enabled us to determine the precise place of an organism within life as a whole.
And we'll see later how this elegant system allows us to define a species
such as our own with great precision
and assign it a precise position in the family tree of life on Earth.
Okay, multicellularity is perhaps the most important large transition
we talk about in this lecture.
Now I want to go on to the next three,
and the second is the appearance of vertebrates.
The appearance of organisms with backbones, with spines, chordates.
We belong to the phylum of chordates or vertebrates.
Organisms, multicellular organisms with backbones.
The first vertebrates evolved about 500 million years ago
in the Ordovician period on the geological timescale,
and they evolved from worm-like ancestors.
I'm probably going to keep saying this for a bit.
Meet the relatives, get used to it.
We evolved from worm-like ancestors.
They were probably pretty unimpressive, the first vertebrates.
Fish-like beasts with no heart, no brain, a bit like modern Lancelots.
It's hard to love them, but they were our ancestors.
All vertebrates have a structure.
Unlike amoeba, where you can't really say where is the front or the end,
vertebrates are sort of stretched out along their spine,
and that means they have a front and they have a back.
Now we take this for granted,
but it's worth remembering that this is something that evolved,
and it represents a new level of structure.
They have a front and a back,
and they have a complex system of internal communication
through nerve cells that run along the spine.
Vertebrates include fish, amphibia, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
And we, of course, fit within the mammals.
So with vertebrates you can see clearly the appearance of new types of structure,
one of the defining features of increasing complexity.
So each of our sub-thresholds is itself adding a bit of complexity to life on Earth.
That's the second threshold.
Now on to the third.
To land.
I need to remind you that up to this point,
almost all living organisms have existed in the seas.
A lot, of course, would stay there.
And eventually some land animals, such as the ancestors of Wales,
would return to the sea.
But now what we're going to do is we're going to follow the story
of those that migrated to the land.
This is the third great transition,
the movement of some multicellular organisms from the sea to the land.
Plants and insects probably reached the land first about 500 million years ago
during the Ordovician period.
The first vertebrates to leave the sea did so about 400 million years ago.
That's during the Devonian period.
Now we need to think about what a challenge this was.
Life we saw evolved in the sea, and there's very good reasons for this.
Liquid provides the ideal environment for the complex chemical dance
from which living organisms were created.
Moving beyond liquids was a huge challenge.
You needed first a strong skeleton.
Water gives you buoyancy, it supports you.
Outside of the water, your skeleton has to support your weight.
So you're going to need a tougher skeleton.
You're going to need a tough skin to avoid drying out.
Your internal organisms are going to need to act as if you still lived in water.
So you'll need a skin that protects you from drying out.
And that's so our internal organisms can carry on existing
in a sort of at least semi-liquid environment as they had before.
Try going for a few days without water,
and you'll get a sense of the fact that we are still basically aquatic organisms
that have made special provisions for living outside of the water.
You needed special apparatus enabling you to breathe,
to breathe oxygen directly rather than through the water.
And you also needed, and this was perhaps the most difficult thing of all,
some way of reproducing in a watery environment.
You need some way of reproducing so that your very, very fragile offspring
don't perish in this hostile environment.
A good way of getting a sense of how difficult this was
is perhaps to think of what it meant for humans to walk on the moon.
We required an entire special exterior in order to deal with such a hostile environment.
It was extremely cold, there was no oxygen,
there was no pressure, so people walking in space need very special apparatus.
And the earliest organisms on land had to make an equally complex adjustment.
The first vertebrates to live for prolonged periods on land
were probably a bit like modern lungfish.
Once again, get used to it.
These are our ancestors, we have to learn to love them.
Lungfish can survive for some periods on land
if the ponds they live in dry out.
It's a type of organism that has endured for a long, long time.
You can still find them on the earth today.
And ancient lungfish may have not been that different from the ones we find today.
Two important classes of vertebrates were the amphibia,
which lived on land permanently but returned to water to lay their eggs.
They evolved about 400 million years ago during the Devonian.
And the reptiles.
The reptiles evolved about 350 million years ago during the Carboniferous period.
That's the era in which much of the cold that we excavate today was laid down.
Reptiles laid their young in eggs so they could live permanently on the land.
They didn't need to stay near the sea or near water to reproduce.
Eggs with a leathery skin could protect their young
and keep them in a liquid environment until they were ready to face the land.
Now let's move on to the fourth transition, mammals.
Now we're getting seriously parochial.
In terms of the biosphere as a whole, mammals weren't particularly important
until maybe quite recently.
Or numerous, but we happen to be mammals.
So mammals naturally interest us and we can even feel some empathy for them.
Try feeling empathy for an amoeba. It's really tough.
Mammals we can empathize with.
So this is the fourth transition, the appearance of the class of mammals
about 250 million years ago during the Triassic.
As you remember the supercontinent of Pangea, as it was forming,
a huge number of living species vanished during the so-called Permian extinction.
The Permian period lasted from 290 to 250 million years ago.
This mass extinction may have been caused by a massive asteroid impact,
although we really don't know.
Another possibility is that it was caused by plate tectonics.
A world with many different separated continents and islands
is a world with a huge potential for diverse species.
But if you bring them all together, then competition between species
is going to eliminate so many that you're going to find that biodiversity shrinks.
So biodiversity on Pangea was probably a lot smaller than before and after.
Think of the diversity you find on isolated islands today to get some feeling for this.
The Galapagos are a very good example.
So that's another possibility.
That may have accounted for this massive extinction,
but the massive extinction in turn may help us understand
why there seems to have been a sudden proliferation of new species
after the appearance of Pangea.
And the mammals were amongst that new group of species that appeared as Pangea assembled.
The removal of so many earlier species
created space for a rapid adaptive radiation of new species.
Two important new classes of vertebrates were the dinosaurs and the mammals.
Both appeared in the Triassic period between 250 and 210 million years ago,
and they flourished.
The class of mammals contains furry, warm-blooded organisms
that nurture their young within their mother's body and feed them with milk.
Even humans have fur, though not very much.
The earliest mammals were probably shrew-like animals
that foraged for insects at night and scurried around beneath the feet of huge dinosaurs.
They were not terribly impressive, but they once again are our ancestors.
Then, about 67 million years ago, right at the end of the Cretaceous period,
a massive asteroid impact, the so-called Cretaceous event,
destroyed most large species, including dinosaurs.
Now, this is something that was not known even 30 years ago
until the work of Walter Alvarez and his father, the physicist Louis Alvarez,
proved that it was true, and it revolutionized geology
because most geologists resisted the idea of catastrophic changes like this.
Mammal species now diversified, with the dinosaurs removed,
suddenly there are a lot of niches that you can fill,
so suddenly we find all sorts of new species of mammals
appearing from about 65 million years ago,
and they start filling the niches vacated by the dinosaurs.
We're still not certain why mammals fared better than dinosaurs.
Many were probably killed, but perhaps the fact that they were small and nocturnal
helped in some sense.
Perhaps fur and warm-bloodedness also helped them.
As part of this mammalian radiation, there appeared a new order of mammals,
the primates.
The primates were tree-dwelling mammals with stereoscopic vision,
hands designed to grasp, and large brains.
And you and I are primates.
Thank you.
