It runs the gamut from cosmology to geology to medicine to biology to astronomy to history.
Your opinions in all of these fields in modern scientific scholarship don't count unless you can offer evidence for them.
So they all share the same basic rules of evidence, even if the specific types of evidence they use are different.
A chemist may rely on a carefully conducted lab experiment,
while a historian may rely on the use of archival evidence.
So in this sense, all, let me say, historical disciplines.
Thus to say, all disciplines concerned with the past, from cosmology to human history, can be described as scientific.
Now, a second implication of this commitment to evidence.
Even if we rely on authority, and we've seen that a lot of the time it's unavoidable, we have to rely on authority.
We want some assurance that the authority in turn relied on evidence.
Even if you can't check the evidence yourself, and sometimes it's just too difficult to do that,
you need some reassurance that the evidence is available somewhere,
so that if you are willing to spend the time and effort, you could check it.
This means that science tries to avoid all claims that rely purely on authority.
Always you'll find a scientist or a historian saying,
this is where the information comes from, if you want, you can check it.
Now, a third consequence of relying on evidence, all scientific scholarship,
makes some concessions to relativism.
Science very rarely makes absolute claims on its statements about reality.
It sometimes makes very, very strong claims, very confident claims,
but rarely are they made absolutely.
There's always the sense that as in a law court, the evidence is never perfect.
New evidence could kick in, and that might change the story we're telling.
So there's a certain quality of provisionality about science,
that some more dogmatic views of the world lack.
Yet despite this, science is not relativistic.
The fact that it's a bit tentative sometimes doesn't mean it's relativistic.
All stories are not equal.
Modern science did not believe that all stories are equal.
Some evidence is always better than none.
And the story based on lots of good evidence should always be preferred to the story based on none.
Think of it in a law court.
If I say, your honor, I feel in my bones that my client is innocent,
despite the fact that she was caught standing over the murder victim
with a bloody knife in her hand and blood spattered all over her body.
How far am I going to get?
I've simply offered an opinion. That's all. I'll get nowhere.
And there's one final point about science and evidence,
which is that science has an advantage that the law courts often don't have.
The law courts have to make a verdict, and often it's final.
Science can keep revisiting the verdicts it makes.
It can change its mind. It can evolve and improve.
And over time, the story should slowly get more trustworthy as more evidence accumulates.
And sometimes this accumulation of evidence leads to changing the verdict
to a new idea about reality, such as the introduction of Big Bang Cosmology,
which is the subject of the next lecture.
Modern science is powerful because it's been improving its stories in this way for several centuries.
So in summary, scientists are by and large pretty confident that they're on the right track
because their claims rest on a vast amount of carefully tested evidence
accumulated over many centuries and subjected to multiple tests.
This is the basis of the claims made in this course,
which is why in this course we will spend a fair bit of time discussing the evidence
on which particular claims are based.
Now, I want to move on and give a sort of illustration of some of the ways
in which evidence builds a more convincing picture of reality.
And I'm going to do it by focusing on a theme of immense importance in big history.
And that is what I'll call chronometry.
I've referred already to chronometry.
By chronometry, I mean the techniques we use to date past events.
How we assign absolute dates to events in the past.
Dating techniques, if you like.
It is, after all, a remarkable achievement that we can assign dates to past events.
So, dating techniques.
And I'm not, of course, talking here about going out on a Saturday night,
something I have to explain in my first year course when I say this.
So the question is, how do we date past events?
What evidence has been used to construct the chronologies
that provide a fundamental framework for this course in big history?
Now, I want to very briefly survey changes in the techniques we use.
And I'll be focusing mainly on the Western tradition,
which has played a dominant role in modern historiography.
Similar techniques have evolved within many different cultural traditions.
Okay.
Chronology is fundamental to history.
It's so fundamental that we often take it for granted.
The ability to simply assign dates to things that happen in the past
without that ability our account of the past would have no real structure.
It would be fluid.
It would lack shape entirely.
So, to tell a decent historical story, we must be able to assign dates to past events.
Now, how do we do this?
It's possible to identify two major revolutions in chronometry,
in our ability to assign dates to past events.
In societies without writing, such as those that existed throughout most of human history,
in the Paleolithic and in many parts of the world until very recently,
the sense of the past depended on memory, on oral tradition.
Now, oral tradition can actually hold, as anthropologists know, a lot of rich information.
But it also tends to lose chronological precision within a few generations of today.
So it's very hard within oral tradition to construct an account of deep time
that has much chronological structure to it.
And this is why most communities without writing seem to have projected time back
just a few generations into the past,
before which time seems to sort of turn a corner of some kind.
And it flattens out and loses structure.
This is the time of the Aboriginal-Australian dream time, for example.
But it's also something we all experience in our personal memory, going back too far.
And your sense of the past begins to lose structure and to flatten out.
So that's our first sense of time, depends on memory and oral tradition.
Then came the first Tronometric Revolution.
And it's associated with the appearance of writing from about 5,000 years ago.
What writing could do was to fix information outside human minds.
And it could fix information also about dates.
So as written documents accumulated over many centuries and eventually millennia,
it allowed those interested in the past to construct a more rigorous
and better structured account of the past.
The Jewish historian Josephus, writing in the 1st century CE,
captures this difference very well, and this is what he writes.
The Egyptians, the Chaldeans and the Phoenicians
have preserved the memory of the most ancient and lasting traditions.
For all these nations, he wrote, inhabit such countries
as our least subject to destruction from the climate and atmosphere.
And, he goes on, they also take in a special care
to have nothing forgotten of what was done among them,
but their history was esteemed sacred and ever written in the public records
by men of the greatest wisdom.
So here we have a sense of the power of writing to preserve dates in the past
and therefore to enable us to create a structured account of the past.
But written documents, even if they allowed us to extend our sense of history further back in time,
were also a trap because they could warp our account of the past.
They highlighted the activities, above all, of those who wrote and those who read.
And this meant that what stood out in this account of history
and this system of dating, if you like, based on writing,
was the activities of elite groups.
A sense of history based on writing obscured the activities of most humans
and, above all, it excluded the history of the natural world
or of anything that existed before the invention of writing.
So we get a sense that history, our understanding of the past,
because it's based on written records,
essentially means the deeds of great, above all, literate human beings
and excludes the natural world.
The French naturalist Bouffan captured something of this warped view of the past in the 18th century.
The past, he wrote, is like distance.
Our view of it would shrink and even be lost entirely
if history and chronology had not marked out the darkest points by beacons and torches.
That's the power of chronometry, yet he writes,
Despite these lights of written tradition,
let us go back a few centuries and how uncertain are our facts.
Besides, history tells us only about the deeds of a few nations,
i.e. the doings of a very small part of mankind.
The rest of the human race is as nothing, either for us or for posterity.
So, this first chronometric revolution allows us to date events based on written records,
but it gives us a rather warped view of history,
and that view of history eventually became naturalized
and became what we normally think of as history.
Now, written evidence could also deceive.
Christian theologians, such as Eusebius of Caesarea, who died about 340 CE,
used written evidence to attempt the sort of project we're attempting here,
to date the origins of the universe.
What they did was they took written evidence from sacred texts, the Old Testament.
They're focusing, of course, on the bagats.
So and so, bagats, so and so, who bagats, so and so.
And they took all these bagats and they calculated that God had created the universe in about 4000 BCE.
This was good evidence-based work based on literary evidence for dating.
And their calculations would dominate Christian cosmology for 1500 years.
Now, from the 17th century, new evidence began to undermine the traditional Christian chronology.
The 17th century geologists already began to doubt the traditional timescale of four or five or six thousand years.
The Danish geologist Nicola Steno, for example, who lived between 1638 and 86,
and the English physicist Robert Hook, who lived between 1635 and 1703,
were both struck by finding fossils that seemed to be of marine creatures but were high up in mountains.
Now, both immediately understood what this seemed to mean.
It seemed to mean that the mountains had once been under the sea.
And what this hinted at was long, slow geological processes which must have taken many, many thousands of years,
much longer than the traditional Christian chronology.
In fact, it turns out their suspicions had been anticipated as so many things
by the artist Leonardo da Vinci, who found fossils of marine animals in the Tuscan hills.
In 1795, the geologist James Hutton, often described as the real discoverer of deep time,
argued that the Earth's surface had been formed by very slow processes such as erosion and uplift,
acting over unimaginably long periods of time.
And he wrote famously,
We find no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end.
So geologists were beginning to cotton on to the fact that the Christian dating scheme didn't quite work.
They could also come up with relative dating.
They could say which layer preceded which layer in geographical strata,
but what they couldn't do is assign absolute dates to those layers.
Despite the skepticism about the possibility of assigning absolute dates to events in the geological past,
attempts were made to date the age of the Earth scientifically from as early as the 18th century,
and they were based on the idea that the Earth was like a slowly cooling body of metal.
In the 19th century, William Thompson, Lord Kelvin, who lived from 1824 to 1907,
calculated using this method that the Earth was probably about 20 to 40 million years old,
though he allowed the possibility that it might be perhaps 100 or even 200 million years old.
But would it ever be possible to construct an absolute chronology for events before written records?
As late as the early 20th century, written records remained the basis for most of our dates.
The archaeologist Colin Renfou writes,
Before World War II, for much of archaeology, virtually the only reliable absolute dates were historical ones.
Tutankhamun reigned in the 14th century BC.
Caesar invaded Britain in 55 BC.
Even archaeology is relying mainly on written evidence.
And in his outline of history, written just after World War I,
H.G. Wells attempted a sort of big history,
but he knew perfectly well that he had no real dates before the first millennium.
Chronology, he wrote, only begins to be precise enough to specify the exact year of an event
after the establishment of the eras of the First Olympiad and the building of Rome.
The situation was transformed by a second chronometric revolution,
whose impact was felt after World War II.
The real breakthrough came with the discovery of radioactivity at the end of the 19th century,
and the realization that radioactive materials break down so regularly
that if you could take a lump of material and estimate how much the radioactive material had broken down,
you could estimate when it was formed.
Marie and Pierre Curie discovered radioactivity and both eventually died of cancer,
caused by handling radioactive substances.
A New Zealand-born physicist, Ernest Rutherford,
showed that radioactive materials break down with such regularity
that you could use them to date events in the remote past.
But it was not until the Second World War that Willard Libby at the University of Chicago
made these methods practical with his pioneering of carbon-14 dating.
And from the Second World War, there appeared a whole range of different techniques,
many of them, but not all of them, based on radiometric dating,
that allowed us to do something quite remarkable.
And that was to assign absolute dates to events before writing
and as far back as the origins of the universe.
In 1953, Claire Patterson of the California Institute of Technology
showed that the Earth was about 4.5 billion years old.
Now, these dating techniques provide the chronological framework for a course in big history.
We couldn't have constructed such a framework
before the emergence of radiometric dating and other chronometric techniques after the Second World War.
So we've seen that science makes strong but not absolute claims on the truth
and I've tried to show how evidence was used to build up our modern account
of the chronology of the universe. Thank you.
applause
music
Lecture 5, Threshold 1, Origins of Big Bang Cosmology
applause
In the previous lecture, we talked about evidence.
I was asking why and how should you trust the stories that modern science tells
about the origins of everything, about the universe, the stars, the planet and so on.
And I focused on the idea of evidence, arguing that science focuses above all on evidence.
So in the light of that discussion, here's a question you might want to ask at a flagging cocktail party.
It is, how did the universe begin?
Now, I think there's a sporting chance that you'll actually get an answer to that question.
So you might have to go to the next step, and the next step is the next question, which is,
so how do you know? Were you there? What's your evidence?
How can we know about something as remote as the origins of everything?
What I want to do in this lecture is to approach that question.
I'll be describing the modern answer in the next lecture.
But what I want to do is show how over several centuries, evidence and argument slowly built up
that provided the foundations for the modern scientific answer
to the most fundamental historical question of all, which is, how did everything begin?
And we'll see that the crucial breakthroughs came in the 1920s.
Now, one reason for going back into the past and looking at how the modern story was constructed
is so that we avoid taking the modern answer for granted.
It's all too easy. You'll hear about Big Bang cosmology and you'll think, oh, that's the way it is.
If we see how painstakingly over many centuries that modern answer was constructed,
it may be a reminder of the power of evidence and the difficulty and effort
with which the modern scientific claims about the past were constructed.
So that's what I want to do.
I want to look at how over several centuries, evidence accumulated
from which the modern answer was constructed to this deepest of all possible questions.
I'm focusing on evidence.
Now, this is something I'll do in many of these lectures.
Instead of just describing the modern answer, I want to contrast it with traditional answers,
both to see some of the similarities and to see some of the differences
between modern scientific accounts of reality
and the traditional accounts that have shaped people's thinking for so long in human history.
As far as we know, all societies have asked this question, how did everything begin?
And as far as we know also, many societies have offered deep, rich and powerful answers to that question.
We'll look at some of them in the next lecture before describing the modern answer to this question.
But here, I want to focus just on one tradition and that's the Western Christian tradition.
The reason for that is not that rich and powerful ideas about the origins of everything
didn't emerge anywhere else.
It's simply that the modern answer emerged out of the Western cultural tradition,
out of that particular cultural environment.
So, let's look at traditional ideas within Christian culture about cosmology
and the origins of the universe.
Christian ideas about the universe were dominated for almost 1800 years
and still to some extent today, for many people, by a combination of Christian theology,
which of course saw God, the Christian God, as the ultimate creator of everything,
the prime mover of this process, the ultimate explanation for everything.
That's the first part. And secondly, a model of the universe that was created by
an astronomer and mathematician Ptolemy of Alexandria, whose dates were 90 to 168 CE.
So, he lived the second century after Christ.
And Ptolemy's model, I'll argue, counts as scientific by the best standards of his time.
What Ptolemy's model did was to put the earth at the center of the universe.
So, this is an earth-centered model of the universe.
Now, I want to look briefly at Ptolemy's model.
In the Western tradition, it was hugely powerful.
It was influential, as I said, for 1500 years before it started losing some of its power.
By the standards of the time, Ptolemy's model was good, empirical, evidence-based science.
However, it was not the only scientific account available in the Mediterranean world 2,000 years ago.
Some astronomers, such as the Greek Aristarchus, who flourished four centuries before Ptolemy,
had argued again on the basis of the best evidence available and some quite sophisticated mathematics
