In each orbit, particles of matter are moving around very, very fast indeed.
And through the process of accretion, this is the crucial process that makes planets,
through accretion, these bits of material are slowly drawn together.
And they're drawn together in several different ways.
When they're very small, they may be drawn together simply by electrostatic forces.
I think most of us as children have taken a comb, rubbed it on something,
and then used it to pick up small pieces of paper.
What we're doing is we're using static electricity.
And the same principle can hold tiny bits of matter, tiny motes of dust together.
But as these motes of dust grow, other forces come in.
They start banging to each other.
Let's imagine we've got to the stage where we've got snowball-like objects
orbiting very, very fast in each of these orbits.
These objects can start colliding with each other.
And these collisions will get more and more violent.
Eventually, the objects are going to get larger and larger.
You're going to get very large snowballs.
Some of them are going to be rockier.
Some of them are going to be mushier.
And then eventually, particularly with the rockier planetissimals, as they're called,
when they collide, this is going to be a very violent process.
And they're going to stick together, but they're going to generate a lot of heat and energy as they do so.
So within each of these orbits, we must imagine larger and larger objects appearing
and a lot of violence going on, a lot of violent collisions.
Several stray bodies in the solar system, such as comets and asteroids,
may in some sense be remnants of this early stage of accretion.
As it went on, within a few million years, the large bodies in each orbit formed planetissimals.
The largest planetissimals become large enough to exert a gravitational pull on others,
and they slowly lure other objects in their orbit into themselves,
pulling them in until eventually, in each orbit, you have one single large body.
It swept up all the other objects in the orbit, and it's done so through the use of electrostatic forces,
violent collisions, and its own gravitational pull.
And this is how in each orbit you end up with one large body.
And that more or less explains the distribution of the planets around the Sun.
But there are differences in the materials in different orbits.
Let me just explain some of the crucial differences between the planets.
The heat of the young Sun we've seen prevented the Sun collapsing, but it did more than that.
It also drove more volatile elements away from the center, so that they collected further out,
towards the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn.
And that's one of the reasons why there was simply more stuff out there, particularly more gassy stuff.
As a result, the outer planets are dominated by gassy material.
Some of that's water vapor and other gases.
So from Jupiter onwards, we get this series of so-called gas giants.
The inner planets tend to be rockier.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars are much rockier,
and they're also smaller because there's just a bit less stuff in the inner parts of the solar system.
The asteroids raise an interesting problem.
They appear at the border between these two regions, between Mars and Jupiter.
And at the moment, the betting is that what they represent is a sort of failed planet
that was forming between Mars and Jupiter,
but that was broken up by the powerful gravitational force of Jupiter,
the largest planet in our solar system.
So what we find in the asteroid belt is something a bit like what you might have found
during the early stages of accretion,
a large number of small planetesimals orbiting and occasionally colliding quite violently.
How was the Earth's moon made?
Well, at the moment, the betting is that the Earth's moon was made
as a result of a collision between the Earth and a proto-planet,
a forming planet that was probably about the size of Mars.
Now, I've talked so far as if in each orbit, everything is orbiting in a perfect ellipse.
But of course, that's not true.
There are a lot of violent collisions going on,
and some of those collisions mean that some of these objects are sent out of orbit
and start traveling through space in very eccentric orbits.
And something like that could explain the sort of collision we're talking about.
So imagine the early Earth.
It's almost completely formed and an object the size of Mars hits it.
This would have been a very, very violent process.
It could have shattered both planets.
What probably happened is that the planet that hit Earth gouged
a huge chunk out of the Earth and then disintegrated,
leaving a sort of spray of vaporized material orbiting the Earth.
This would have been a bit like the solar nebula.
And so within that material orbiting the Earth,
you'd have had a process a bit like accretion.
And eventually that would have formed the moon.
That's the best bet at the moment.
Now, not everything is swept up inside the planets, of course.
The stuff that's left outside that just doesn't get caught up in this process
forms the other remnant bodies of the solar system.
It's comets, it's asteroids, it's meteorites, and many of its moons.
Okay, now, in this way, we can account for the creation
of most of the bodies we see in the solar system.
We can account for their distribution and the way they orbit the Sun.
Now, let me talk briefly about the evidence for this story.
How do we know this is the way it happened?
Why are astronomers really pretty confident that they've got this story right?
The idea that the Sun and solar system all condensed from a single solar nebula,
which collapsed under the pressure of gravity,
was actually proposed quite early by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant in 1755.
It fits very well with what we know of the workings of gravity
and what we know of the shape and structure of the solar system.
Even better, it fits very well with recent observations of other regions
where planetary systems seem to be forming.
So, recent observations and theory make this account of the origins of the solar system
seem extremely plausible.
What about the date of the solar system?
Now, we can't determine the age of the solar system by dating Earth rocks.
And this is because our Earth is so geologically active
that its original surface is now unrecognizable.
However, the surface of the Moon, like that of most meteorites and asteroids,
appears to have changed very little since the time of accretion.
So, if you use radiometric dating techniques to date meteorites or Moon rocks,
you find that you get very, very similar dates, about 4.5 billion years ago.
This is the date that Clare Patterson came up with in the early 1950s,
and it's the date that is still widely accepted as the date for the origin of our solar system.
Okay, let me summarize.
This lecture has described how planetary systems form,
and of course it's focused mainly on our own planetary system, the solar system.
As a result of this process of collapse of a solar nebula rich in chemical elements,
through accretion, we have a Sun and orbiting it a series of planets,
which in many ways are chemically more complex than the Sun at the center.
So now we have at least two different types of large astronomical objects.
Stars are relatively simple chemically, but they have these huge furnaces at their center.
They can generate lots of energy.
Planets are mostly smaller.
They have no furnace at their center, or at least not one large enough to fuse hydrogen,
but they are more chemically complex.
Partly this is because they exist at lower temperatures at which complex chemicals are not immediately broken up.
Greater chemical complexity and lower temperatures may explain why planets seem to be the ideal places
for the creation of new forms of complexity.
They hover around in the hinterland of these hot spots that we've described as stars,
and it's there on planets that we're going to find eventually later forms of complexity.
Thank you.
I hope it's clear that what's happening in this course is that we're slowly assembling the bits and pieces
that will make up the foundation for human history, the stage if you like, for human history.
We've seen how to make a universe.
That's the basic framework for all of this.
We've seen how to make stars.
We've seen that stars are going to be crucial because they provide energy.
They provide the key to later forms of complexity.
We've seen how to make chemical elements in the death of large stars.
And in the last lecture, we saw how you make planets.
And we saw that planets are going to turn out to be the best place for living organisms.
Now, of course, we say that on the basis of what we know of our own planet,
but nevertheless, it's a reasonable bet that this is true.
They are near the flows of energy provided by stars,
but they're not right in the stars, so the flows of energy are not too violent.
They're not too far away, so there is plenty of energy to use.
So we're assembling the bits and pieces for human history.
We have the recipes for most of the crucial elements now of a complex universe.
Now, for the very first time, we focus in on a particular object.
We've been looking so far at the whole universe at very, very large objects.
We've been, in fact, looking at the scale of astronomers and cosmologists.
Now, we look at our home planet.
But before we do that, I want to alert you to something else that's happening here.
And it might not be immediately obvious, which is why I want to draw your attention to it.
So far, in this course,
we've been exploring territory studied by cosmologists and astronomers.
They study the stuff that's out there beyond the Earth.
Now, what we do is we shift to topics that are right on the borderline
between astronomy and geology or Earth sciences,
as we begin to focus on our own Earth.
So what we're really doing is we're crossing disciplines.
But what I would really like you to notice is how natural the crossing can be.
There are no border patrols.
There are no geologists saying,
you've been travelling in astronomy, you need a visa to enter geology.
And there's a serious point here.
Though we tend to teach these disciplines and research them
as if they were entirely separate territories,
entirely separate countries with their own border controls and customs and so on,
the truth is, if we want to understand our universe,
we must see the ways that they overlap
and how these different disciplines illuminate each other.
So if you begin to get a sense that the crossing from astronomy to geology
is actually surprisingly easy from some perspectives, that's great.
And that's one of the main reasons for doing a course in big history.
As I said at the very beginning, I hope one of the things this course can do
is show very clearly the fundamental unity of modern scientific knowledge.
Now, back to Earth, our home planet,
this tiny little chunk of rock in an obscure bit of the universe that is our home.
As humans, of course, this is what we're really interested in.
The rest of the stuff is interesting in its way,
but this is much closer to us.
Inevitably, we want to ask why and how our Earth became our home,
how it was formed, how it managed to provide so hospitable an environment
for our ancestors and for ourselves.
Was it always like this? How did it become so?
How typical is it? How special is it?
The previous lecture described the origins of our sun and solar system
about four and a half billion years ago, and we saw that they're both formed together.
And the Earth is formed as part of that larger process.
In this and the next lecture, we zoom in on our home planet
and we look at the Earth in this lecture in its very early days,
the Earth in its infancy. What was it like?
How different was it from today's Earth?
Well, the short answer is it was very different from today's Earth.
To put yourself in the right frame of mind for thinking about the early Earth,
please don't think of a cute young baby.
Think instead of the violent process of accretion that I described in the last lecture.
If you were an alien astrobiologist and you came across the young Earth,
you might think at first this was an extremely unpromising place for life
unless you were a very sophisticated alien astrobiologist,
in which case you might see some interesting signs.
Our Earth, like all the planets, was formed by accretion.
What did it look like?
Let's start by looking at the earliest era of Earth history.
Now, strictly in geological terminology, this is known as the Hadean Eon.
It's not an era, it's an Eon, so let me explain this.
The Hadean Eon lasted from about 4.5 to about 3.8 billion years ago.
How do geologists divide up Earth history?
Let me just briefly describe what they do.
They use a whole hierarchy of labels.
This is a bit like the taxonomy of animals that we'll come to later.
And they use several different labels that refer to different scales.
The very largest of all these chunks of time is the Eon, E-O-N.
There were four main eons in the 4.5 billion years of the Earth's existence.
And I'll describe them in a moment.
The next level below the Eon is the era.
Each Eon is broken into several eras.
And below that comes the period.
That's the technical term for it.
And this is perhaps the most familiar category of all to most non-geologists.
It includes, for example, periods such as the Cambrian or the Carboniferous or the Devonian.
Now let's go back to the eons.
The four main eons of the Earth's history are, first, the Hadean.
Those of you who can remember any classical education at all will remember that Hades was hell in Greek thinking.
So this is the hellish era of Earth history.
It began about 4.5 billion years ago with the creation of the Earth during accretion.
And it ended about 3.8 billion years ago.
That 3.8, we'll see, is a slightly arbitrary date.
But there's some good reasons for partitioning or for ending the Hadean there.
Second, the Archaean, A-R-C-H-A-E-N, is the Eon of the earliest life forms.
It runs from about 3.8 billion years ago to about 2.5 billion years ago.
So that's the second Eon.
And by its end, 2.5 billion years ago, the Earth is almost halfway through its life.
The third Eon is the Proterozoic.
That's P-R-O-T-E-R-Z-O-I-C.
And it lasts from about 2.5 billion years ago to about 550 million years ago.
That's half a billion years ago.
The fourth Eon is the Phanerozoic, P-H-A-N-E-R-O-Z-O-I-C.
This is the Eon of multi-celled organisms.
And it lasts from about 550 million years ago to today.
And it's worth noting that the Eon of multi-celled organisms
only accounts for about the last eighth of the Earth's history.
Okay, now if you've got a clear sense of the Eons,
let's go back to the very earliest of the Eons, the Hadean.
Now, remember the process of accretion.
It's a very, very violent process that takes place in each of these orbits
around the spinning solar nebula that's flattened out
like a sort of spinning pizza around the Sun.
Within each orbit, there are all these violent collisions, remember,
and slowly, through this process of accretion,
a large object appears in each orbit.
As the young Earth formed,
and this is probably true of all the rocky planets, to some degree,
as the young Earth formed through accretion, it heated up and it melted.
It actually became molten or semi-molten.
Why? Why should it melt?
It was heated, in fact, by three quite distinct forces.
Let me just describe them.
The first is collisions.
We've seen that the process of accretion was extremely violent.
When two large chunks of stuff collide together,
if you want to get a sense of the sort of release of energy involved,
think hydrogen, think hydrogen weapons.
When a large asteroid hits another large asteroid,
this is the sort of energy release we're talking about.
So as bodies collided to form the early planets,
huge amounts of energy were released.
And that's the first source of heat that melted the early Earth.
Each of these tracks, the track in which the Earth was formed,
was a bit like a sort of cosmic demolition derby.
That's the way to think about accretion.
So collisions, that's the first source of energy.
The second is radioactivity.
Now, why should there be a lot of radioactivity in the early Earth?
Well, let's go back to the process of element formation.
Remember, the Sun is formed in an area where there are a lot of other chemical elements that have been formed.
And it's very likely that this area had been seeded by quite recent supernova explosions.
And those supernova explosions would have created the whole range of chemicals,
including many chemical elements that were highly radioactive.
So there's very good reason to think that the early Earth was significantly more radioactive than the Earth today.
The Earth today has had 4.5 billion years for radioactive materials to break down.
So that's the second main source of heat, radioactivity.
Within the early Earth, within the baby Earth, there's a lot of radioactive stuff, much more than there is today.
And then the third force, it's one we've seen before, and it's simply pressure.
As each of the planets built up, as more and more stuff is squashed together,
the pressure builds up inside each planet.
