The biggest stars, such as Rigel in Orion, shine with a bluish light,
and they appear at the top left of the main sequence.
They may live for just a million years or so
because they gobble up their fuel so voraciously.
But note once again that none of these stars on the main sequence
can generate temperatures high enough to create elements with atomic numbers higher than two.
That is to say helium.
All they can do is turn hydrogen into helium.
Things get really interesting when stars approach the end of their lives.
So now we need to undertake the slightly ghoulish task
of surveying what stars do in their death agonies.
The death of a star begins when it runs out of the hydrogen
that's kept it running for most of its life.
At this point, you'll see the star sort of wandering away
from the main sequence on the HR diagram.
It starts going a bit mad, frankly.
But where it goes depends once more on its mass.
Now let's begin with our sun and what is likely to happen to our sun.
When it's used up all the hydrogen in its core, the core will cool and collapse.
So suddenly the furnace that's held the sun up
for four and a half billion years so far will suddenly splutter out
and it'll stop propping the star up.
Remember star formation began with gravity collapsing a cloud of matter in on itself.
Now, without the furnace created by fusion, that collapse can continue.
But the collapse itself compresses the star center,
creates such pressures that its temperature starts to rise again
and it'll rise quite quickly to temperatures much higher
than those at which hydrogen fused into helium.
Eventually, at about 100 million degrees, about 10 times higher
than the minimum temperature needed to fuse hydrogen into helium,
helium atoms will start fusing to form carbon.
So now the star can burn helium.
Now for the first time, remember, stars are starting to build larger chemical elements
because now we've got the high temperatures we need.
At this point, you have a new furnace at the center of the sun.
The sun will start to expand again.
It'll reach beyond the orbit of Mercury and it'll turn into a red giant
like Aldebaran in the constellation of Taurus.
As it burns helium, it will move away from the main sequence
to the upper right of the HR diagram.
This is because it'll get brighter.
It'll get brighter because helium burns at higher temperatures than hydrogen.
So this moves it up the graph but it will also get redder
and this is because hydrogen continues to burn in its upper layers
lowering its surface temperature.
So this places it over to the right of the graph
towards the end where surface temperatures are cooler.
So now you'll find it in the upper right-hand corner of the HR diagram
along with other red giants such as Aldebaran.
Now, it's going to burn through its helium much more quickly
than it burns through its hydrogen.
It's burning at a much higher temperature, remember.
Once all the helium is burnt up, the process is going to repeat itself.
Our sun will collapse again,
temperatures will rise in the center and it will expand again
until this time it includes the orbits of Mars and Earth
and it'll vaporize both planets as it does so.
So any unfortunate descendants of ours that are still living on Earth
will be toast.
The sun itself will have become a red supergiant
like beetle juice in the constellation of Orion.
Incidentally, if you haven't seen it,
look for it at the northern corner of Orion.
Diagonally opposite Rigel, it really is red.
Now, our sun is too small to take these processes further.
It cannot create temperatures hot enough to start fusing carbon
and further elements.
Eventually, it'll shed its outer layer
and it'll collapse around its carbon core
and it'll turn into a white dwarf about the size of the Earth.
Now, though it's still quite hot, it has no internal furnace
and it'll gradually burn out.
Sirius B, the companion star to Sirius A,
which is the brightest star in the night sky, is a white dwarf.
Our sun at that point will move swiftly below the main sequence
of the HR diagram towards the bottom left of the diagram.
It'll become smaller and less bright,
but with a high surface temperature.
Then, over billions of years, it will cool
until eventually any surviving astronomers will start calling it a black dwarf.
And now it'll just sit there, a mere cinder,
completely invisible, doing nothing for countless billions of years,
side by side with an increasing number of other dead stars
until eventually the universe as a whole
will slowly turn into a vast ghostly cemetery of dead stars.
So that's the fate of our sun.
Now, what about smaller stars?
Stars that are smaller than our sun will burn much longer
because they burn more slowly.
When they run out of fuel, some will simply collapse into white dwarfs,
or they may briefly burn helium and then collapse into a white dwarf.
So this is not terribly exciting.
What is much more interesting is the death of really large stars.
Stars much larger than our sun.
Now, what happens when they run out of hydrogen?
At first, the story is a bit like our sun.
They start burning helium, and when that's gone,
temperatures will still be high enough for them to burn their way through carbon
and a number of other elements including oxygen and silicon
until eventually they start producing large amounts of iron in their cores.
And the temperature at their core reaches four billion degrees.
Now, these processes start speeding up as temperatures rise,
and these things start happening faster and faster,
and things get more and more dramatic.
Here's a wonderful description of what happens
from Cesare Emiliani's wonderful scientific companion.
This is how he describes this phase.
A star 25 times more massive than the sun
will exhaust the hydrogen in its core in a few million years.
And as the core continues to contract and the temperature continues to rise,
it will burn carbon for 600 years.
Oxygen for six months and silicon for just one day.
During all of this iron,
the final product of these processes is building up in the center,
but iron marks the end of the road.
No star can go further than iron.
So eventually you've got a core full of iron and the furnace shuts down.
The star will then collapse catastrophically in just a second or two before exploding.
Most of its mass will be hurled into space.
And this, of course, is a supernova.
At this point, the supernova may shine with the brilliance of an entire galaxy.
The Crab Nebula, incidentally, is the remnant of a supernova
that was observed by Chinese astronomers in 1054.
So it's thrown out most of its outer layers.
Its core will then collapse, possibly into a neutron star.
A neutron star is a ball of matter so dense that all atoms are crushed into their nucleus.
The electrons that normally orbit way away from the nucleus are crushed right into the center.
So it's like nuclei next to each other.
It's been estimated that a spoonful of matter from a neutron star
would weigh about 90 billion kilograms.
It might have the mass of the Earth,
but it would be in a ball just 30 to 40 miles wide,
rotating many times a second.
As they spin, pulsars emit regular flashes of energy,
which can sometimes be detected on Earth,
which is why such stars are known as pulsars.
If the supernova is even bigger,
if what's left of the star is even bigger,
the collapse will go further than a neutron star and create a black hole.
Now, a black hole, I wish we could spend more time,
and I wish I had the expertise to talk more about black holes,
but a black hole basically is an object so dense
that not even light can escape its gravitational pull.
A black hole as a result can have hardly any further communication with the rest of the universe.
It's as if it had got almost completely pinched off from the universe.
So as we'll see, and as Stephen Hawking showed,
not completely pinched off.
Now, it's in the extreme temperatures of a supernova,
much higher than those in the center,
even of the largest collapsing stars,
that finally the remaining elements of the periodic table can be manufactured,
and they can be manufactured in just a few seconds,
all the way through gold and lead to uranium.
So in summary, it's taken three steps to create the chemical elements
from which you and I are constructed.
Hydrogen and helium, the simplest atoms in the periodic table,
were created during the Big Bang,
and that's why they are, although it's only recently been realized that this was so,
that's why they are by far the most common elements in the universe.
In the early universe, hydrogen made up about 75% of the universe,
and helium about 24%.
That leaves just 1% for everything else.
In their death throes, medium to large stars create elements such as carbon
with six protons, nitrogen with seven,
oxygen with eight, and silicon with 14,
up to iron with 26 protons.
Now here's the second stage.
In the dying phases of large stars,
you cook these successive elements up to iron,
and that explains why these elements up to number 26
tend to be much more common than later elements in the periodic table.
So as these dying large stars throw off their outer layers,
these elements are scattered through space.
So they're not as common as hydrogen and helium,
these elements are much more common than later elements.
That's the second phase, and then the third phase.
All remaining elements are manufactured and scattered through the universe
in supernova explosions.
Now think what this means.
If, like me, you're wearing a gold ring,
or if you're wearing silver jewelry,
look at it.
The silver or gold was made in a supernova explosion.
It's probably been around for billions of years,
and it's on very, very temporary loan to you.
And the same goes for all the elements in your body,
at least all the elements above iron.
So I hope this makes it clear why the life and death of stars
is a topic that should be very dear to us.
Without dying stars, we could not possibly exist.
So let's summarize what we know about the third of our major thresholds.
The first stars represented a new level of complexity in the universe,
but they also provided the energy flows
and the chemical ingredients needed to make even more complex entities,
such as our Earth.
So without stars, it would have been impossible to create new levels of complexity,
such as planets, or you and me.
They prepared the way for new levels of complexity
with new emergent properties,
and those properties are sufficiently different
from those studied by astronomy and physics
that they are the domain of a new scholarly discipline, chemistry.
And this is what we'll see repeatedly.
New levels of complexity and new emergent properties
give rise to new scholarly disciplines,
from cosmology to chemistry to geology,
the next threshold, then to biology, and finally, human history.
I hope you're beginning to get a sense
of the capacity of big history to unify knowledge.
What we've seen here is one of the many virtues of big history,
which is that it can help us see better both the links and the differences
between these different domains of complexity.
In the next lecture, we'll start looking at some of the new things
that could be constructed using this vastly expanded palette of chemical elements
that was cooked up inside stars.
And the first objects we'll look at are planets,
including our own Earth.
Thank you.
It's often said that life, death, and taxes
are among the few things that never change.
We've seen that the life and death of stars
both play crucial roles in the story of big history.
We'll get to taxes later,
and we'll discover that they, like life and death,
have not always existed.
There's actually a rather important point here.
In our story, in the story of big history,
there seems to be very little that is genuinely eternal.
In fact, this is one of the great findings of modern science.
Most pre-modern traditional cosmologies assumed
that there were large realms of reality, including the Earth itself,
the heavens, much of the landscape,
and perhaps biological species as well,
that were in fact eternal.
They were fixed. They never changed.
The domain of change was very small indeed,
and by and large it tended to be assumed
that human beings dominated the realm of change.
And that's one of the reasons why the word history
is so often assumed to be about change
in the life and society of human beings.
Now, what we'll see in this course over and over again
is that modern science over the last few centuries
has found that realm after realm
that was thought of as fixed in fact changes,
and that means that it in fact has a history.
And this is why in this course we argue
that history can embrace all realms of reality.
History, change over time affects all areas of reality,
and that's why big history is possible.
So, the previous lecture described the appearance
of new chemical elements in Dying Stars.
We saw that the elements too have a history as do the stars.
That was our third threshold of complexity,
and the first you remember was the creation of the universe.
The second was the creation of stars.
The third threshold, the creation of chemical elements,
all the elements in Mendeleev's periodic table
made possible for the first time the creation of new things
that were chemically complex.
Now what we get to do is to see some of the things you can do
with a greatly expanded palette of elements.
Suddenly matter itself gets a lot more interesting
because it can be constructed in many more permutations.
Now, what I want to describe is the first real manifestation
of this possibility of chemical complexity,
and that is the creation of planets.
And in particular, of our own Earth.
This is our fourth threshold.
So, here's our cocktail party question.
How do you create a planet?
How do you create an Earth?
Chemically speaking, planets are more complex than stars,
primarily because they're made from many more elements.
They also provided the environment needed
to cross a fifth threshold in complexity,
which was the creation of life.
So they're crucial to our story in two ways.
They represent a new level of complexity,
but they also provide the foundation
