We can see the rocket, we can see humans scurrying around.
But soon, very quickly, within just a minute or two,
we move to much larger scales.
At almost six miles, we can see Baikonur
as if we were seeing it from an international jet.
Now, that's a view that's very familiar to us.
You can't see humans any longer, but you can see large landscapes.
Most of us have seen what the Earth looks like
from an international jet.
Gagarin, though, went much higher.
He reached about 188 miles.
This is close to the orbit of the International Space Station,
which orbits at about 220 miles up.
This is still a scale we can sort of imagine.
Very few of us have been there,
but a lot of us have seen pictures of this scale,
and you can easily go on the Internet
and find pictures from the International Space Station.
And we know roughly what you can see.
You can see very clearly large geographical features.
You can see seas and mountains and large cities.
You can also see the Earth's curvature.
Like the anti-helicopter,
beginning to see some of the elephant's anatomy.
But you can't see Baikonur any more.
That particular wrinkle has vanished.
Now, let's move on, and let's move further with Gagarin.
From 6,000 miles up,
what we're going to see very, very clearly
is the Earth as a ball in space.
Now, we are really seeing the elephant.
We're way beyond the biological scale,
but we can still imagine it,
because all of us have seen photographs of this,
and we know that there are human beings
who've seen this directly from space.
Some of you will remember the power
of the first pictures of Earth from space
that came out in the 60s.
They had a tremendous impact,
because they enabled a lot of people
to make the Gestalt switch,
to see the Earth not as a divided place,
but as a single, fragile, isolated,
very beautiful object in space.
There's a wonderful book called Home Planet.
It's a coffee table book.
There are wonderful pictures of the Earth from space,
but accompanying them are quotations
from astronauts and cosmonauts,
describing what it felt like
to make this particular Gestalt switch.
And I want to just quote from one of them.
All of them, all of them,
had a sense of the power of seeing things
and above all seeing the Earth in a striking new way.
And all of them seem to have had a sense of shifting
from a tribal view to a human view of the Earth.
Here's just one illustration.
It's a comment by Sultan bin Salman al Saud,
who was the first Arab astronaut.
He flew on Discovery in 1985,
and this is what he said.
The first day or so, we all pointed to our countries.
The third or fourth day,
we were pointing to our continents.
By the fifth day, we were aware of only one Earth.
Once again, I think that's a very beautiful description
of the sort of Gestalt switch
that many of us experienced
when we first saw those beautiful pictures
of the Earth from space.
Now let's move on. Let's continue our journey.
What does the Earth look like from the moon?
Seeing the Earth from the moon is a fantasy
that humans have had for a long, long time.
It's been one of the staples of science fiction.
And then in 1969, it ceased to be a fantasy.
Neil Armstrong landed on the moon
at 10.56 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time.
On July the 20th, 1969.
And by doing so, he became the first human
to step onto another world.
Once again, this is a momentous event in human history.
But as he stepped onto the moon,
we find he himself was divided between different scales.
Most of his interest was focused on the biological scale.
He was concerned at the possibility
that he might be stepping into a quicksand.
But at the same time, he was also aware
of the momentousness of the event,
of the fact that this was an event at a very large scale.
We have transcripts of what he said
as he descends the ladder from the lunar module.
And I'm going to read some of it.
Please forgive the accent.
This is not a sort of imperial bid to claim
that Brits got there first.
You'll have to pretend this is an American accent.
So here we have Armstrong,
who is descending the ladder from the lunar module.
Here's what he says.
I'm at the foot of the ladder.
The LM, the lunar module, foot pads,
are only depressed in the surface about one or two inches.
Although the surface appears to be very, very fine-grained.
As you get close to it, it's almost like powder.
The ground mass is very fine.
So he's at the biological level.
He's concerned with the sort of details
humans need to concern themselves.
Then there's a pause, and he says,
I'm going to step off the LM now.
Then there's a long pause.
Then he says, that's one small step for a man,
one giant leap for mankind.
Now, whether this was scripted or not,
Armstrong seems to have shifted to a very, very different scale.
What does he say next?
This is a great cocktail party question,
and I'm going to give you the answer.
What does he say next?
The next thing he says is, yes, the surface is fine and powdery.
I can kick it up loosely with my toes.
It does adhere in fine layers,
like powdered charcoal to the sole and sides of my boots
and so on and so on and so on.
He's back to the biological scale.
So that for me is a lovely illustration
of making this Gestalt switch.
Now, the moon is just next door.
It's the nearest body in space to our Earth.
So far, no human has traveled further.
Though two human-made objects,
the voyage of satellites,
have now passed the outer planets of our solar system.
Now, let's move on
and try and appreciate the scale of the solar system,
and now I'm going to shift to a slightly different sort of thought experiment.
Imagine we're flying in a modern passenger jet
at roughly 550 miles per hour.
And my thanks to the late David Allen for this.
David Allen gave wonderful lectures on cosmology
in the first big history course I taught,
and I think to the extent that it succeeded,
it owed a lot to David Allen's willingness
to take part in this strange adventure.
So here's David Allen's thought experiment.
In a jet, it takes you about five hours
to cross the continental USA.
So the question is, how long would it take to reach the moon?
Just take a moment to try and think what your answer might be.
It doesn't have to be correct.
Just pick a number randomly.
And the answer is about 18 days of continuous flight.
As David Allen said, lecturing in Australia,
18 days of Qantas meals.
A terrifying prospect.
To reach the sun, about 20 years.
A substantial chunk of a human lifetime.
To reach Jupiter, it would take about 82 years.
To reach Pluto, at the very edge of our solar system,
it would take about 750 years.
That is several lifetimes.
Only a bristlecone pine could possibly survive such a journey.
We're now well beyond the capacity of our imagination.
We really can't easily grasp these scales anymore.
Yet having said that, solar system scales are easy.
The solar system is our local patch.
It's our backyard.
Stellar scales are very different indeed.
If it took 750 years to reach Pluto,
how long is it going to take to reach the nearest star?
Which is about 4.3 light years.
Or 25 trillion miles away.
25 trillion is 25 with 12 zeros after it.
And the answer is, you're going to have to sit in that plane
for about 5 million years.
And yet, that is a trip next door.
This is the next star to ours.
That's a walk next door.
It would take us as long as it took hominins to evolve
after the split from the chimp lines into modern human beings.
So here we have two stars.
And they're divided by a jet trip of 5 million years.
How many neighbors do we have in this galactic city, the stellar city?
There are about 100 billion stars in our stellar city, the Milky Way.
Most of them separated by at least a plane flight of 5 million years.
And how many of these galactic cities are there in our universe?
How many galaxies are there?
Probably, again, about 100 billion.
So how many stars are there?
This means, as Cesare Emiliani writes in The Scientific Companion,
which is a wonderful introduction to basic scientific concepts for non-scientists,
he writes,
This means that there are about as many stars in the universe
as there are sand grains in all the deserts and beaches of the Earth.
Now, clearly by now we're well beyond our capacity,
the capacity of our imagination to really grasp these things.
So we simply have to sort of tease ourselves with mind games like this.
If you want to do a bit more of this,
a wonderful example is called Powers of Ten.
You'll find several Powers of Ten websites,
they're inspired by a 1957 book, Cosmic View,
by a Dutch writer, Kees Boker.
What he does is he has an imaginary picture of the universe.
And then the next picture is at a scale of one-tenth of that.
And then the next picture is one-tenth of that.
And so he goes on constructing pictures,
each a tenth of the scale of the previous one,
and he asks what you see at each scale.
And you can ask how many steps would it take to get from the universe,
say to the human scale.
If you take six steps, you're shrinking your scale by a million.
This takes us from the universe to the scale of the Milky Way.
If you take six steps more, shrinking the scale again by a million,
you can start to see the Sun as a tiny dot.
Another six steps takes us to the scale of the Earth and Moon,
and six more takes us to the scale of a single kilometer.
We're now at the human scale.
And it's taken us twenty-four of these steps.
Another six steps, and you can see the detail on a bee's eye.
If you take six more, you can start to see individual atoms.
Another six, and you're looking at the surface of a proton.
But there are twenty more steps you could take
before you get to the smallest possible scale, the plant length.
So once again, these are games we can sort of tease ourselves with
to get a sense of these large scales.
So that's space.
Now I want to talk a bit about time, temporal scales.
What kind of scales we need to understand the chronology of this course?
The temporal scales of the modern creation story
of this modern account of origins are equally daunting.
But they're not uniquely large.
Many traditional cosmologies have imagined universes
that were much older than the one imagined by modern science.
For example, the Buddha almost 2,500 years ago
gave a delightful sense of infinite time in a story about a rock and a silken cloth.
Here's how it goes.
Suppose, oh monks, said the Buddha,
there was a huge rock of one solid mass.
It's one mile long, one mile wide, one mile high without split or floor.
And at the end of every hundred years,
a man should come and rub against it once with a silken cloth.
Then that huge rock would wear off and disappear quicker than a world period, a calper.
But of such world periods, oh monks, many have passed away.
Many hundreds, many thousands, many hundred thousands.
So that's a lovely metaphor for a scale,
a temporal scale even larger than that of modern cosmology.
I found that the best way of grasping the time scales and the chronologies
of modern cosmology and of big history
is to shrink them by a scale of about a billion.
So instead of taking 13 billion years,
let's imagine that the universe was created 13 years ago.
If we do that, then we can come up with a chronology which is at least manageable
because we all know what 13 years is.
So how does that chronology work?
Now this is a chronology we're going to come back and back and back to in this course.
The universe would have been formed 13 years ago.
You can imagine what you were doing 13 years ago.
The Earth would have been formed about five years ago.
That's about 4.5 billion years ago.
The first multi-celled organisms on Earth
would have evolved about seven months ago.
That's about 600 million years ago.
After flourishing for several weeks,
the dinosaurs would have been wiped out by an asteroid impact
and that would have happened about three weeks ago.
And again, you can probably remember what you were doing three weeks ago
when the dinosaurs were wiped out.
The first hominins, that is to say bipedal great apes that were our ancestors,
appeared about three days ago.
That's about six million years.
And our own species, 53 minutes ago.
That's 250,000 years ago.
The first farmers would have flourished about five minutes ago,
10 to 11,000 years ago,
and the first agrarian civilizations would have appeared just three minutes ago.
Finally, modern industrial societies would have existed for just six seconds.
So I hope this already begins to give you a sense of proportion
