First, he was astonished by the staggering variety of living organisms he saw,
and the many subtle variations between species.
This was not just the kind of list of species you might find in a textbook,
or the list of species you might collect two by two and put on Noah's Ark.
The range of species was vastly greater than he had imagined or that any textbook had imagined,
and so were the subtle variations between them.
That was the first thing, the sheer range of species.
For a young naturalist, think what a wonderful opportunity this was.
You can travel the whole world, you get to see a fantastic range of different species,
plants, animals, even fossils and rocks.
Second, he was struck over and over again
seeing many examples of species which were extremely similar but clearly not identical.
They were separate species, but they also lived very close to each other.
Now he could see this particularly clearly in the Galapagos Islands,
where he noted species of finches, of tortoises and iguanas that seem to vary just slightly from island to island.
And we'll come back to that.
But he saw it also elsewhere.
For example, in South America, he not only noted similarities between species that live close together,
he also noted that there were similarities between existing species and fossils,
such as those of armadillo-like creatures.
The fossils were clearly very similar to existing species, but slightly different.
They were not exactly the same.
This, just by sheer repetition, this evidence, seeing it over and over again,
eventually made him think more and more seriously about the possibility that in fact
what he was looking at was species that were related, that were linked in some way,
that were relatives on some sort of large family tree.
And he eventually concluded that all species, probably including humans,
must be the products of slow, continuous change.
In other words, life had a history.
It was as if there was no clear borderline between species.
On the contrary, over time, species could change radically.
The mix of species on Earth could change radically.
Let me quote what he wrote in a letter to a friend, Hooker, in 1844.
This is ten years after he got back.
He writes,
I was so struck with the distribution of the Galapagos organisms
and with the character of the American fossil mammifers, mammals in modern terminology,
that I determined to collect blindly every sort of fact which could bear on any way
on what are species.
At last, he writes,
gleams of light have come,
and I am almost convinced, quite contrary to the opinion I started with,
that species are not.
And now he puts something in brackets.
It is like confessing a murder, he says.
That species are not immutable.
He's accepted that species change.
The third thing that happened was that Darwin understood
that very few would accept this conclusion
unless he could explain how species change.
It was no good simply accumulating evidence that they did.
He had to be able to explain how.
You remember the parallel with Wagner.
Wagner could show that continents drifted,
but he never managed to show how they drifted.
Darwin was determined to show how species changed as well.
In other words, he had to solve the riddle of adaptation.
And this is what he wrote in his autobiography.
Until adaptation could be explained,
it seemed to me almost useless to endeavor to prove by indirect evidence
that species have been modified.
In other words, what Darwin was saying
was it was vital to determine the mechanism of adaptation.
Darwin stumbled on the beginnings of a solution to this riddle
two years after returning home.
He'd been reading the Reverend Thomas Malthus essay
on the principle of population, which was published in 1798.
Now we're going to meet Malthus again.
He was one of the pioneers of demography
or the study of population movements.
What are the factors that govern whether populations rise or decline
across many species, not just amongst humans?
He pioneered the study and he pointed out a curious fact.
This was that across many, many species,
in every generation the vast majority of individuals die
before they can reproduce.
In other words, the next generation is going to be descended
not from a majority of the previous generation
but just from a tiny sample of that previous generation.
Most individuals don't live long enough to reproduce.
If you think about it, this is a terrifying image of life.
And it may have pushed Darwin in the direction of atheism.
It means that the vast majority of living organisms die young.
They die often in infancy, in the womb, or in the egg.
Only a small number reach maturity and reproduce.
And of course, this is a conclusion that many found hard to square
with the idea of a benevolent God.
But Darwin saw something else in it.
He immediately saw an analogy with pigeon breeding.
He was fascinated by pigeon breeders and knew a lot about it.
And in fact, if you end up reading the origin of species,
which is something I recommend very strongly,
you'll find yourself reading quite a lot about Victorian pigeon breeding.
In pigeon breeding, as in the breeding of any other species,
it was breeders who decided which individuals would mature and reproduce
and which would not.
The breeders would pick particular individuals
because they liked the color of their feathers, the shape of their beak.
And they would say, you can reproduce.
The others, they would say, you can't.
And the idea of this was to slowly change the nature of the bird over several generations.
Darwin himself was fascinated by this process of how through artificial selection,
as it was known, breeders shape individual species.
In the expectation that those features that they favor
are going to become more common in subsequent generations.
And he eventually concluded that nature selected individuals to breed in a similar way.
Something similar is going on in nature. What?
What are the criteria by which nature might select which individuals breed and which don't?
His answer was fitness, how well they fitted their environment.
Of any particular brood, any particular group,
there's going to be a lot of tiny variations.
And those variations are going to mean that a few individuals are slightly better fitted
to their natural environment than the others.
Statistically speaking, what this means is that those have a better chance of surviving.
Now, in individual cases, it may work out differently,
but over many, many generations, statistically,
it's the ones that are best fitted to their environment that are going to survive best.
Just as in the pigeon world,
those best fitted to the specifications of the breeder were likely to survive best.
So all of these ideas were triggered by reading Malthus.
So let me quote Darwin on Malthus.
In October, 1838,
I happened to read for amusement Malthus on Population,
and being well prepared to appreciate the struggle for existence which everywhere goes on
from long-continued observation of the habits of animals and plants,
it at once struck me that under these circumstances,
favorable variations would tend to be preserved and unfavorable ones to be destroyed.
The result would be the formation of new species.
Here, then, I had at last a theory by which to work,
but I was so anxious, he writes, to avoid prejudice
that I determined not for some time to write even the briefest sketch of it.
So his idea is that repeated over many generations,
this sort of mechanism making tiny changes each generation
so that each generation is affected by the characters of those who survive, not by the rest,
and each generation is slightly different from its predecessors,
you could explain eventually why over thousands and thousands of generations
entirely new species appeared.
And you could also explain why the changes that occurred were adaptive.
They helped species fit at least well enough and sometimes better into their environment.
This could explain why the only changes that were preserved by reproduction were adaptive.
Darwin had solved the riddle of adaptation.
This is a great moment in the history of science.
Now, we've seen that his ideas had sort of crystallized by 1838, but he didn't publish.
He feared that many would find them offensive.
As he said in the passage I just quoted,
I determined not for some time to write even the briefest sketch of it.
He feared there would be outrage.
He eventually published only after another naturalist, Alfred Russell Wallace,
whose dates are 1823 to 1913, sent him a letter from Indonesia from the island of Ternate
in 1858, which made it clear that he had stumbled on the same explanation.
Now, Wallace wasn't quite as fortunate as Darwin.
He'd had to make his way, but he'd long been convinced of the reality of evolution
and had been looking for explanations on a series of expeditions that took him to Brazil
and what is now Indonesia.
What exactly he said we don't know, because his letter hasn't survived,
but it clearly shocked Darwin.
Now, Darwin was by many standards a very nice man, but he was ambitious.
He didn't want someone else to beat him to primacy with this idea.
But it's a sign of how civilized his circle of friends was
that the geologist Charles Lyle arranged for a sort of compromise solution.
Now, Charles Lyle is himself an important figure.
He is a pioneer of modern geology and one of the founders of the principle of uniformitarianism.
That's the basic idea that all geological change is based on existing processes.
It's very slow. It takes long periods of time.
And Darwin carried a copy of Charles Lyle's Principles of Geology with him on the Beagle,
because what that suggested was the earth had been around a long time,
and that suggested that natural selection might have enough time to work.
Lyle suggested that Darwin and Wallace's ideas be presented together
at a meeting of the Linnaean Society in London on July 1st, 1858.
The society published the two presentations in August,
and Darwin set to work furiously to turn his ideas into a book.
He'd been thinking for 20 years, so it went well,
and he was able to produce the book by 1859,
when he published On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
The first edition sold at 15 shillings,
and it's 1,200 copies sold out within a day.
Now, I want to go back to the idea of natural selection,
and the reason is because, though it's actually quite simple,
it's a very simple idea, but it's also slippery.
It's easy to get hold of it and then miss nuances and misunderstand it,
and it's slippery mainly because it's statistical,
and most of us, unless we're trained statisticians,
find it difficult to think statistically.
For example, I've had students who've told me that they don't believe in evolution,
and when questioned more closely,
it turns out that they've been taught a very confusing version of the theory.
I remember one student saying to me,
you're not seriously asking me to believe that a dog can turn into a cat, are you?
And, of course, I wasn't.
I was not talking about changes in individuals.
What I was talking about, and what Darwin was talking about,
was changes in the statistical features of large numbers of individuals,
changes in the average features of whole populations of whole species.
So, this is what we need to capture.
What I want to do now is summarize the argument step by step,
emphasizing that natural selection is about change, not in individuals,
but in the average qualities of entire species.
So, here are six steps.
First, species.
Let's begin with species.
Species for Darwin, and for modern biology today,
are groups of organisms that can breed with each other.
This has nothing about whether there's a limit to how changeable they are.
It simply says a group of organisms that can, in principle, breed together constitute a species.
That's the first point.
Secondly, variation.
Though members of the same species are similar, there are always tiny differences.
Now, next time you're in a crowded room, just look around you.
You'll see big noses, small noses.
You'll see people with hair.
You'll see some very nice people without any hair at all.
You'll see tall people.
You'll see little people.
You'll see a lot of variety.
So, this is what he meant by variety.
Species are not clones of each other.
They don't consist of clones.
Third, heredity.
Individuals inherit features from their parents.
We all know this.
So, features, these individual variations can be passed on.
Fourth, fitness.
Some of these variations may increase slightly or reduce slightly
an individual's chances of surviving and reproducing.
If you're an eagle chick and you happen to be born with poor eyesight,
you may survive, you may reproduce,
but the odds are certainly against you in comparison with your brothers and sisters.
Next, differential reproduction.
Because of variations in fitness,
some individuals have less chance of surviving and reproducing.
So, in each generation,
the odds are that only some of those variations are going to be passed on.
And the odds are that it's going to be the variations
that most helped to make individual organisms fit to survive in their environment.
Finally, gradual change.
Take this process, generation by generation,
over thousands of generations, over thousands of years,
and the changes accumulate.
The qualities of individuals with a lesser chance of reproducing
will vanish in subsequent generations.
Well, the qualities of those with greater chances will tend to increase.
And in this way, the entire species will slowly change.
Now, let me say right away, there's no absolute standard of perfection here,
though many 19th century Brits clearly believed that there was and they represented it.
The environment constantly changes.
So, what's going on here is that change generation by generation is in effect
tracking the environment.
Individuals are being made fit for rapidly changing environments.
There's no absolute standard of perfection.
Now, Darwin understood how shocking these ideas would be in Victorian England.
First, they implied that all species are related.
Perhaps, God forbid, humans were related to apes.
Now, in a highly class-conscious society, this mattered.
For many, it still matters.
The biologist Yves Copin remembers his grandmother saying
when he confessed that he was studying biology
and accepted the theory of natural selection,
she said to him, you may have descended from a monkey,
but I certainly did not.
And I think the attitude is still quite widespread today.
Perhaps, we descended also from plants and bacteria.
Perhaps we're relatives of plants and bacteria.
How closely are we related to bananas?
If Darwin's right, this is a serious question.
And the truth is, we probably share about 50% of our genes with them.
Second, the idea of natural selection implied that complex organisms
such as human beings could be created by blind, statistical,
algorithmic processes like a computer program acting over huge periods of time.
Natural selection has been described as Darwin's dangerous idea
by the philosopher Daniel Dennett.
It seemed to leave no room for a divine creator.
And this terrified Darwin's wife Emma,
who thought that when they died, they were going to be separated.
He was going to fry in hell, she was going to a much better place.
A third consequence was that biological change was endless.
As I've said, there's no absolute standard of perfection.
It's not going towards perfection
because environmental change ensured that adaptation would continue forever.
There were no perfect organisms.
I've tried to summarize Darwin's idea of natural selection.
