Because I'm a historian, I'll avoid most scientific technicalities.
For example, I'll introduce only one mathematical equation, that's E equals MC squared,
and it's going to appear in this course largely for symbolic reasons.
The course's central theme, which I owe in part to the work of Eric Chason,
an astronomer who's taught an astronomer's version of big history in Boston for many years.
The central theme is the appearance of increasingly complex entities in the universe.
So our course will be structured around eight fundamental thresholds.
Each of them is associated with new forms of complexity, each of which has new emergent properties.
Now we'll discuss the idea of complexity and emergent properties more fully in lecture three.
So these eight thresholds will provide the scaffolding for this course.
Let me go through them.
The first is the creation of the universe, threshold one, about 13.7 billion years ago.
That's a subject normally discussed within cosmology.
Lectures five to six will cover this.
Let me say that in the written materials that accompany this course,
you'll find eight timelines at different scales,
and I think you'll find it helpful to go back over and over again to those timelines
to get a clear sense of the unfamiliar chronology of this course.
So that's the first threshold, the creation of the universe, 13.7 billion years ago.
The second is the creation of the first complex objects, stars.
The first stars appeared more than 12 billion years ago, quite soon after the creation of the universe.
They provide the energy and the raw materials for later forms of complexity.
That's lecture seven.
Threshold three is the creation inside dying stars of the chemical elements
that allowed the creation of chemically complex entities, including planets,
and including you and me.
That's lecture eight.
The next threshold, which we cover in lectures nine to eleven, is the creation of our Earth.
And what we look at in that section is the creation of solar systems.
These are objects that are chemically significantly more complex than stars.
So that's why this is a new level of complexity.
Our Earth was created as a byproduct of the creation of our sun and solar system
about 4.5 billion years ago.
This group of lectures also surveys the history of our home planet,
and we're in the territory of geologists.
Threshold five is the creation and evolution of life on Earth.
The first evidence of life comes from about 3.8 billion years ago on this planet.
Now, the creation of life is a threshold that may also have been crossed many times,
billions of times before, in other parts of the universe.
But as yet, we have no firm evidence that this is true.
Life, so far, we can only study on our one planet.
This group of lectures will also survey the evolution of our own ancestors, the hominines,
from about six million years ago.
Then we come to threshold six.
Threshold six, by threshold six, we're now just 250,000 years ago.
We've now covered most of 13 billion years, and we're reaching the present moment.
Threshold six is the creation of our own species, Homo sapiens, about 250,000 years ago.
This section of the course discusses what makes us so distinctive.
It argues that we have a capacity to adapt and to change that is unprecedented amongst other organisms on Earth.
We also cover the Paleolithic era of human history, the oldest, the longest,
but also the least well-documented part of our history.
The Paleolithic era lasts until the appearance of agriculture 10,000 to 11,000 years ago.
Then we come to threshold seven, in lectures 24 to 37, the largest single group of lectures in this course.
Threshold seven is the emergence of agriculture and agricultural societies
from about 11,000 years ago.
And it introduces what I'll call the agrarian era of human history,
the second of three major eras of human history.
Agriculture marked a fundamental change in human history
because what it did was accelerate the pace of change.
It allowed population growth, the emergence of larger, denser and eventually more complex societies,
including the great agrarian civilizations such as the Roman Empire or the great empires of China.
And finally, we come to threshold eight, the modern revolution.
This introduces the modern era of human history.
In this part of the course, we'll cover the astonishing series of transformations that have created today's unified,
complex world in just a few centuries, three or four centuries.
Then what we'll do is widen the lens again.
In the last three lectures, we'll look at the future.
We'll look at the future of humans, of the earth and eventually of the universe as a whole.
What's going to happen to the universe?
And we'll end with an overview of the entire course.
Let me end by telling you what I regard as some of the crucial objectives of this course.
Here's the first.
I hope you'll find this huge journey exhilarating.
And I hope it will provide a chance for you to think deeply about the place of human beings and modern society in the larger scheme of things.
You won't always agree with my assessment of this, but I hope it'll give you a chance to think rigorously and seriously about these issues.
Secondly, a second objective that I have in mind.
I hope you'll gain a clear understanding of the overall shape of what I'm tempted to call a modern scientific creation story.
And an understanding of why this story is both important and in some ways very beautiful.
Third, I hope by the end of this course you will also have a much better sense of the underlying unity of modern knowledge.
And you'll see that behind the fragmented vision of reality that modern educational systems offer,
there is in fact a unified account offered by modern science of reality and its evolution.
So in summary, I've tried in this lecture to explain what big history is.
It's an account of the past at all possible scales.
The next lecture will focus on the unifying idea of multiple scales.
How big is the universe? How old is it?
And perhaps most important of all, how can we possibly get our minds around these huge scales?
Thank you.
Lecture 2 Moving Across Multiple Scales
We saw in the last lecture that big history surveys the past at many different scales.
Indeed, one of the unifying ideas of big history, and I think one of the sources of its intellectual power,
is the idea that what we see at one scale can illuminate what we see at other scales.
And this was one of Fernand Brodel's great ideas.
Big history therefore can be seen amongst other things as an attempt to link knowledge at multiple scales.
Now that makes it very different from most history courses.
Most history courses operate within a very specific range of scales.
Roughly speaking, we can say from a range of say a decade or two, if you're studying the French Revolution,
to perhaps a lifetime, a century, or in the case of a national history, perhaps a few centuries.
Now this may not seem like a limited range of scales if you operate within the history discipline,
but by comparison with the scales of the cosmologist, of course, this is extremely limited.
Now because historians operate within these ranges, within these particular scales,
the problem of scale in general does not normally emerge as a problem for historians.
These are familiar scales, they're comfortable scales,
and the result is you don't have to spend a lot of time thinking about the issue of scale
unless you're someone like Fernand Brodel.
But of course courses in geology or cosmology have to take it much more seriously.
If you're teaching a course in geology, you have to help your students deal with scales of many millions,
or even billions of years, and we will have to do the same thing.
And that's what this lecture is going to be doing.
Now to get a sense of the differences between different scales
and the ways in which different scales can illuminate each other,
we must try immediately to get a sense of these large scales.
But how can we?
How can we possibly grasp how big or how old our solar system is, or the entire universe?
Or how can we grasp the distance to the nearest star, or even to Pluto or Mars?
What I want to do in this lecture is to try to help you begin to deal with these multiple scales,
to get a sense of how to cope with a question like what does 13 billion years really mean, or a million light years.
Now the first thing to be said about these very large scales is that while understanding them is important,
in fact it's crucial for big history, it's also extremely difficult.
And the truth is, I suspect that no one, even scientists who work with these scales familiarly all the time,
I suspect that no one really grasps them fully.
Why? Well there's a very good biological reason.
It's not that we're stupid, it's not that we don't make the effort,
it's that we're not designed to grasp these scales.
Our brains and our sensory apparatus evolved through natural selection
to deal with a certain rather narrow range of spatial and temporal scales.
These are the scales familiar in our daily lives, we can perhaps refer to them as the biological scale.
Tigers are dangerous, galaxies are not.
Bump into a tiger, you have to be able to understand it, you have to be able to deal with it, bump into a galaxy,
and quite frankly, you're not going to need to deal with it.
Either it's going to obliterate you, and all of us, or it's not.
We don't need to deal with galaxies, our minds are not designed to deal with those scales.
The longest living organism we know of is probably the bristlecone pine,
and it lives for less than 5,000 years.
So 5,000 years offers a sort of outer limit to what we can call the biological time scale.
The oldest bristlecone we know, incidentally, is known appropriately as Methuselah.
It's about 4,800 years old, and it's in California's White Mountains.
So this is the problem.
The natural world didn't really design us to grasp large spatial or chronological scales.
If we find it difficult to do so, there's a very good reason for that.
As Stephen J. Gould writes, incidentally, Stephen J. Gould is wonderful.
He writes incredibly, engagingly, intelligently, and interestingly, about the natural world, above all about biology.
But when I started teaching this course, a colleague of mine, David Briscoe, a biologist who gave wonderful lectures on biology in this course,
recommended that I read almost anything by Stephen J. Gould.
He is indeed wonderful, and I recommend him highly for this course.
He died, as you may know, in 2002.
But this is what Stephen J. Gould wrote about the question of scale.
He wrote, an abstract intellectual understanding of deep time, by which he means very large time scales, comes easily enough.
I know how many zeros to place after the ten, when I mean billions.
And the answer, in case you're not sure, is eight.
But then he goes on, getting it into the gut is quite another matter.
And he said that in a wonderful book, On the Nature of Time, Times Arrow, Time Cycle.
So there are very good reasons why grasping large spatial scales and temporal scales is extremely difficult for organisms like us.
Nevertheless, we have to make the effort.
Like ants on an elephant, we can only see the wrinkles if we just stay up close to this.
Now, the metaphor of ants and elephants may seem banal,
but what I want to do is to take that metaphor a bit more seriously to illustrate the point I'm trying to make.
Let's imagine, with this ant, as an ant, you'll get familiar with the wrinkles.
Let's imagine the landscape.
Great grey, sand dune-like structures, very steep.
Quite mobile. We clamber over them.
They have huge hairs growing out of them.
And there are lots of other creepy crawlies moving around amongst them.
And occasionally we can imagine this entire landscape shakes extremely violently
in earthquakes which threaten to shake me off and have killed many of my ant friends.
Now, imagine that I now step back.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to offer our ant a ride in an ant helicopter.
So here's how it goes.
The ant accepts.
I strap the ant into the helicopter.
I have no idea how you'd strap an ant into a helicopter, but we do it anyway.
And we take off.
And here's what the ant says.
The ant says, oh, there's my wrinkle.
And there's my cousin's wrinkle.
And, oh, I can see a wrinkle that I once visited.
And now I can see wrinkles I've never seen before.
And then its panic level starts rising.
And it says, now, I can't see the wrinkles clearly.
And, oh my god, the wrinkles have gone.
I can't see a single wrinkle.
And the question is, what do you say to the ant, to console the ant?
And I think this is probably what you say.
You say, don't panic.
We're going to get back to the wrinkles.
I'm going to take you back there.
But meanwhile, this is what you must do.
Relax your eyes.
Let go of the wrinkles.
Forget about them.
And see if you relax your eyes if you can see something else.
And the ant replies, OK, OK.
I'll try and relax my eyes.
OK, now what can I see?
And it says, well, actually, I'm seeing this huge gray thing.
And now I see it more clearly.
It looks as if it's got a colossal nose
and two vast teeth-like things sticking out.
What the ant's done is made a sort of sort of gestalt switch.
It's stopped seeing what it's used to seeing, what it wants to see,
and it's allowing itself to see the sort of things that you see
at a very different scale.
In fact, it's seeing the entire elephant.
So we have to do something like this.
We're going to have to learn to let go of the wrinkles.
They won't go away entirely.
We can always come back to them.
But we have to let go of them temporarily
if we're to see what needs to be seen at large scales.
And something like this is going to happen within big history.
Each scale brings new things into focus,
even if it may also obscure other things.
It's like taking off in a plane.
You're seeing a plane on the runway.
You can see humans.
You can see perhaps a rabbit scampering across the field.
Then you take off very quickly within a few minutes.
You certainly can't see the rabbit.
You can't see individual humans.
But you start to see new things.
You can see an entire city,
which is something you can't normally see
as you walk through that city.
So this is what we need to do.
We need to learn how to move through different scales,
how to make this sort of gestalt switch.
And what we'll learn is, like the ant,
that if you combine these scales,
if you can see the different things that exist at different scales,
you'll end up with a richer sense of the reality around you.
Let's imagine that the ant, when it was up there,
saw that its home wrinkles were actually on the elephant's ear.
Now, that would explain the earthquakes.
And when it gets back, it's probably going to tell its friends,
let's head north.
The neck is a much safer place.
Okay, so that we can never really grasp the larger scales,
like geologists, astronomers, cosmologists,
or like the ant in the helicopter,
we need to find ways of dealing with them.
And the rest of this lecture is going to start the process
of trying to help you become more comfortable with large scales.
This is something you need to do with practice,
to practice making this gestalt switch.
Let's begin with spatial scales, large scales in space.
To get a sense of the scale of our solar system,
I'm going to suggest we go on a journey into space.
We'll begin with the human scale.
Then we'll slowly widen the lens.
And what we'll try and do is see what we lose as the lens widens
and also see what new things come into view.
It's April the 12th, 1961.
The time is 9.07 a.m.
Kazakh local time.
We are on top of a Vostok-1 rocket.
Vostok means east.
And sitting beside us is a young Soviet Air Force officer,
Yuri Gagarin.
We're at the Baikonur Cosmodrome.
And Yuri Gagarin cries out,
Pyakhalyi.
Now, Pyakhalyi literally in Russian means let's went.
But actually in practice, when you say Pyakhalyi,
people understand that what you're really saying is let's go.
And there's one more meaning to Pyakhalyi
that you need to understand.
If you're making a toast,
you have a group of people, each of them has a glass of vodka.
I said I'd done research on vodka.
Each of them has a glass of vodka.
At some point, someone's going to make a toast
and they're going to say Pyakhalyi.
And then you're going to drink your vodka.
So it also means cheers.
So this is what the young Yuri Gagarin says
as his rocket blasts off, Pyakhalyi.
This is a momentous turning point in human history.
Yuri Gagarin is about to become the first human being,
the first member of our species to enter space.
Now, we can picture the lift off
because we're still at the human scale.
