And we can offer a very good answer to Hoyle.
OK.
As with the earlier levels of complexity,
it'll help if I put in modern explanations
in context by comparing them with the answers
adopted in traditional societies
or pre-scientific traditions.
How have traditional societies
explained the appearance of life?
We can define traditional explanations
into two broad categories, the divine and the naturalistic.
Divine models, by now, we're familiar with.
They assume they're deistic.
They assume that life was created by divine being.
And we've seen the problems with such theories
over and over again.
And we've seen why they're not really admissible
within modern science.
Modern science does not assert that these theories are wrong,
merely that they are untestable
and therefore do not count as science.
What are naturalistic models?
Well, naturalistic models have a long history.
And they are, in fact, attempts to argue that life,
the appearance of life, can be explained
without necessarily assuming
that they were created directly by a god of some kind.
That life can be generated spontaneously
from existing materials and forces.
And this implies, of course, that life is not so utterly different
from the rest of the world.
There's a sort of continuum between life and non-life.
Just as Newton implied that there's actually a continuum
between the heavenly realm and the earthly realm.
This is how Aristotle put it.
Aristotle was a committed believer
in the possibility of the spontaneous generation of life.
He wrote,
the transition by which nature passes from lifeless things
to animal life is so insensible
that one can determine no exact line of demarcation,
nor say for certain on which side any intermediate form should be.
Thus, nature passes from lifeless things to animals
in an unbroken sequence.
For traditional scientists like Aristotle,
the evidence for spontaneous generation
was things like the appearance of maggots in rotting meat.
If you feel like it, you can try this as an experiment.
It's very, very cheap and it's very easy to conduct.
And this is the recipe as told to me by my colleague, David Briscoe,
who lectured on life in the early versions of my big history course.
And his lectures were wonderful.
This is his recipe.
He says, take a soup.
There must be something meaty in it.
Preferably don't take a very good soup.
And David used to conventionally recommend one of his own.
You stick it outside.
You leave it in a warm, exposed place for a few days.
Voila, maggots and all sorts of other creepy crawlies.
So there's the evidence for spontaneous generation.
It's a nice idea.
It's sort of commonsensical, a bit like saying that the earth is obviously not moving
because we don't feel the wind rushing past.
But unfortunately, of course, it's not quite that simple.
From the time of the scientific revolution,
scientists began to try to test such ideas much more carefully
as scientists became more and more committed to ensuring that their theories were based on hard evidence.
And the attempt to test the idea of spontaneous generation
led to some interesting toing and froing on the issue.
This is a long story and I'm just going to pick out some highlights.
In 1765, Lazzaro Spallanzani, an Italian biologist who lived from 1729 to 1799,
tried to test Aristotle's idea and he did it by showing that if you took a meat broth
and you boiled it to kill off all the bugs that were already in it
and then you placed it in an airtight container so that no bugs could get into it from outside,
nothing appeared, no maggots, no creepy crawlies.
Now, this is to us very familiar indeed.
We all know about sterilization.
We expect jars in supermarkets to be sterilized, so this is all very, very familiar.
But what did he actually show? What did Spallanzani actually show?
He showed that the maggots must have come from something outside the broth itself,
probably from eggs planted by their parents.
So this seemed to suggest that maybe spontaneous generation was not possible,
maybe every living thing has a parent.
All living things come from other living things.
Spallanzani didn't have it all his own way.
He had opponents who suggested an alternative and this was that what he'd actually done
by insulating his container was to exclude the life force that was necessary for the generation of life.
What they had in mind seems to have been something like this.
It was the idea that there was some special force in the air that got into things and made them alive.
Now, we've already seen a similar theory which was refuted as early as 1828
and that was the idea that there were some chemicals, organic chemicals,
that contained the sort of principle of life and that they were necessary for the creation of life.
And we saw that in 1828 Friedrich Wörler had disproved that idea
by synthesizing simple organic chemicals in the lab.
But here's the second version of that theory.
It is that maybe there's a life force floating around us in the air
and it needs to get in to a broth to create life.
Now, how can you test such an idea?
It's an interesting idea.
How can you prove it's right or wrong?
Testing this idea quite decisively was one of the great achievements of the French chemist Louis Pasteur
and his experiment is one of the most elegant of all scientific experiments.
Very, very simple, but he provided a wonderful test for this idea.
This is what he did in 1862.
Louis Pasteur's dates, by the way, are 1822 to 1895
and he's an immensely important figure in modern chemistry.
What he did was he created an apparatus which began with a glass flask.
At the top there was a long glass tube.
Now, it came out the top, then he bent it back down to the ground in a sort of u-bend and then bent it up again.
And he left the opening open.
He didn't plug it, he didn't close it at all.
So it's open to the air.
He put a sort of broth inside the flask
and then he heated it to sterilize it.
He boiled it to sterilize it and then he just left it.
That's the experiment.
Now, this is the idea.
If life actually came from pre-existing life, from pollen or from spores or from tiny organisms floating in the air,
then his argument was that such organisms could drop into the spout but they'd get caught in the u-bend.
They wouldn't be able to get into the broth, so no life would appear.
If, on the contrary, life came from a life force,
now surely the life force would be able to travel down the tube, up the u-bend and get into the broth.
So he boiled his flasks and waited.
And what happened?
I'm told, though I've not been there myself, that you can still see his flasks in the Pasteur Institute in Paris
and that they're still a sterile as the day when he first boiled them.
That seemed to be the end of the story.
That was more or less the end of the theory of a free-floating life force of some kind.
And it also seemed to have put paid the whole notion of spontaneous generation.
That, of course, created a new problem.
Pasteur seemed to have proved that life could only come from previous life, from eggs or spores.
Spontaneous generation was impossible.
If so, how were the first living organisms created?
In the early 20th century, biologists faced a real dilemma
because he seemed to have proved that spontaneous generation was not possible.
How can you explain the origins of life?
Well, now I want to move towards modern explanations of this.
Biologists began to get some purchase on this knotty problem in the first half of the 20th century.
And I'm going to describe their explanations in three stages.
And let me say immediately there are a lot of technicalities here.
So this is an extremely simple description of some very, very complex and elaborate arguments.
But nevertheless, I think we can capture the essence of the arguments.
The first stage, let me summarize the stages here.
The first stage is the creation of the simple chemicals,
each with only a few atoms that were necessary for the creation of life.
These are the chemicals such as amino acids that form proteins and nucleic acids
that are the basis of the genetic material of all living organisms.
That's the first stage.
The second stage is the creation from these simple components of huge, complex molecules,
mostly taking the form of long, long chains that form the molecules that we find in living cells.
That's the second stage.
The third stage, and at present the thorniest, is to explain the creation of the modern mechanism of reproduction,
which is based on the extraordinarily complex molecule DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid.
Let's take each of these steps in turn.
So first, the creation of the simple chemicals of life.
These are chemicals that consist of just a few atoms that are present in all living organisms,
such as the amino acids that make proteins, the nucleic acids that are the basis of DNA, our genetic material,
carbohydrates that make sugars and starches and act as sort of stores of energy,
and the lipids that make fats and hormones and membranes.
How can you make these simple chemicals?
So we need to explain the creation of the chemicals vital for life.
These are the structural basis for most living organisms.
Today, atmospheric oxygen destroys such molecules.
We've seen that oxygen is fantastically reactive, and that's why, as Pasteur claimed, life can no longer be generated spontaneously.
With an oxygen-rich atmosphere, it seems as if life cannot even get off the ground,
because you cannot make even the simplest chemicals of life.
That was the real problem scientists faced in the early 20th century.
However, in the 1920s, Alexander Oparin in Russia and J.B.S. Haldane in Britain pointed out a solution,
and this was that maybe these chemicals could have appeared, could have been formed spontaneously,
in an atmosphere that didn't have free oxygen in it.
So where would you find such an atmosphere?
Now, I hope by now you already know the answer to this.
The answer was in the atmosphere of the early Earth.
We saw that free oxygen didn't start building up in the Earth's atmosphere until about two and a half billion years ago.
So this means that though we wouldn't have liked the early Earth,
it turns out that in fact it might have been a more benign environment than today's Earth for the very simplest and earliest stages of life.
Now, once again, let's ask the question, how would you test such an idea?
And again, we can describe a beautiful, simple experiment that tested it very well indeed.
And it's associated with the work of Stanley Miller, a graduate student,
who worked under the supervision of a very well-known biologist, Harold Urie.
In 1952, Stanley Miller organized a very famous experiment to test the idea
that in an oxygen-free environment it might be easy to generate these simple molecules.
Let me describe the apparatus for you.
So he gets, once again, we've got a glass flask.
Coming out of it is a tube which loops around in a square and comes back into the flask.
He fills the glass tube with gases that might have been present in the early atmosphere
and there's no free oxygen amongst them.
He used methane, ammonia and hydrogen but later versions have used many other mixtures.
He then added water and supplied energy in the form of heat from below and electric charges.
Now, why water? Why was water so crucial?
Well, why do biologists assume that any planet with life must have water in liquid form?
Here's the naive non-chemists answer and we've briefly seen this before.
Water provides an ideal environment for complex chemical reactions.
In gases, molecules are charging around at huge distances from each other.
They encounter each other actually quite rarely and when they do it's very violent and they often bounce apart.
In solids, atoms are locked in and they barely move.
So there's not much possibility for rearranging themselves there.
Not much possibility for interesting chemical things to happen.
In liquids, atoms and molecules can move close to each other but they also have a lot of freedom to move around.
A bit like dancers on a dance floor and water itself provides a chemically benign atmosphere for such movements
as it's not itself terribly reactive.
So this is why water was so crucial and this is why water is probably always crucial in the creation of life.
Okay, now what happened inside Miller's apparatus?
He leaves it humming there for a few days and then after a few days a dark red sludge appears
and when you take the sludge out and you analyze it you find it contains amino acids, nucleotides and phospholipids
the chemicals you need to form membranes.
This experiment has been repeated many, many times and it's now very, very clear.
It's been repeated using different gases that creating these simple chemicals is really not a huge problem
in an environment without free oxygen.
So that's the first stage and it seems that that was fairly simple.
We can explain the creation of these very simple molecules consisting of just a few atoms or a few tens of atoms
from which living things are made.
Now there's the second step.
How do you take those and build from them huge elaborate molecules of the kind that you find in living cells?
The URI Miller experiment produced just these very simple molecules.
How do you take the next stage?
Even the simplest viruses contain billions of atoms in very complex configurations
and many of these molecules take the form of huge chains of atoms arranged in very specific ways
and along those chains you'll find tiny electric charges
so that the chains tend to sort of wrap up on themselves forming complex balls with very specific shapes
and very often the specific shapes they form determine the precise chemical or physical role they play within them.
So the exact sequence of chemicals along them is vital.
Now how can you create such huge and complex molecules?
Well not by chance and that was the point that Fred Hoyle was trying to make in the example I've given already
about whirlwinds and bowings.
Hoyle made the comparisons as we've seen because yeast cells and bowings both existed about the same level of complexity.
So how can we get past the riddle that Hoyle posed?
Fortunately there is an answer and this takes us back to natural selection.
Though random changes, imagine all these chemicals sloshing around within a liquid environment,
random changes are unlikely to create perfect long molecules.
But let's imagine something else, we had a new rule which is that if each successful step towards life can be locked into place
then the odds improve drastically.
Now this is precisely how natural selection works by locking into place random variations that create something viable and stable.
So here's the idea and it's a central idea in modern biology.
It is that some complex chemicals or chemicals that are becoming more complex can actually evolve through a chemical version of natural selection.
This is the idea of chemical evolution.
If you get chemicals that have a certain stability, well they're going to survive.
And they're going to be on the dance floor and they're going to mix with other chemicals so that slowly you can build up complexity.
In the 1950s and 1960s Sydney Fox showed how chemical evolution might work.
He showed some of the specific pathways that might be taken.
For example under certain conditions long chains form spontaneously similar to those in living organisms.
Some of these long long molecules naturally curl up to form spheres that are beginning to look a bit like simple cells.
And some of them have semi permeable membranes through which they can take in chemicals from the outside and they can get rid of stuff they don't need that they reject.
So we already have things that are beginning to look a bit like very simple cells.
They have a metabolism, they can take in energy and food from outside.
They have the ability to reproduce because some of these when they get big enough simply split.
They simply break apart and they can also adapt over time.
This gives them all of the emergent properties of life in a sort of simple and rough and ready form.
So here we have a sort of chemical proto-life.
Now while we're on the subject where did the earliest organisms appear?
Where did this sort of chemistry probably take place?
Where was the dance floor for all of this?
Darwin assumed that life first appeared in what he called some warm pond.
He knew it had to be liquid. He knew that have to be some warmth, some energy.
He understood all of that perfectly well.
But now it's generally thought that the surface of the earth would have been a dangerous and hostile place for early life.
So a more likely environment may be these deep sea volcanic vents that we described in describing modern plate tectonics.
Ideal conditions for chemical evolution probably existed near these mid-oceanic vents.
There was lots of energy as magma poured up from the interior of the earth.
There was a rich mixture of organic chemicals again coming up from the inside of the earth.
And there was protection from ultraviolet radiation because you're deep inside the oceans, you're way below the surface.
And it's been discovered that there are very rich colonies of chemical eating bacteria around mid-oceanic vents.
So at the moment this looks like our chemical dance floor.
That's stage two.
We've explained the creation of large elaborate chemicals and some of them are beginning to look a bit like simple cells.
Now, stage three, it's actually the trickiest part of all.
How do we explain the creation of the most complex molecules of all, those involved in reproduction?
DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid.
DNA is the software that controls reproduction and explaining how DNA evolved is really the trickiest part of the puzzle.
Without DNA, reproduction is bound to be inaccurate.
And that means that chemical evolution would have been slow and unreliable.
It wouldn't have been very good at preserving valuable variations, adaptive changes or mutations.
What's DNA like? Let me try very quickly to try and describe it.
You'll all be familiar with pictures.
DNA consists of two linked chains of nucleotides, millions of these nucleotides.
These are little groups of clusters of atoms.
And each DNA molecule consists of two of these chains.
They're linked with bonds like rungs on a ladder.
Now it's the bonds that are the really interesting part of DNA.
