These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses covered a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Big History, the Big Bang, Life on Earth and the Rise of Humanity Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor David Christian.
Professor Christian is Professor of History at San Diego State University, where he teaches courses on Big History, World Environmental History, Russian History and the History of Inner Eurasia.
Professor Christian received his BA in History from Oxford University, his MA in Russian History from the University of Western Ontario and his Doctorate of Philosophy in 19th Century Russian History from Oxford University.
Before joining the faculty at San Diego State University in 2001, Professor Christian taught Russian History, European History and World History at Macquarie University in Sydney from 1975 to 2000.
In the late 1980s, Professor Christian began an experimental history course with the help of colleagues in astronomy, geology, biology, anthropology and prehistory.
A course that started with the origins of the universe and ended with a final lecture on prospects for the future.
In 1992, he described this approach as Big History. Since then, similar courses have appeared independently in various universities.
Professor Christian's recent publications include Maps of Time, An Introduction to Big History, which won the 2005 World History Association Book Prize and This Fleeting World, A Short History of Humanity.
Professor Christian is a member of the Australian Academy of the Humanities and the Royal Holland Society of Sciences and Humanities.
He is Affiliates Chair for the World History Association and was one of the editors of the Berkshire Encyclopedia of World History.
He also participated in the creation of the World History website, World History for us all.
Professor Christian prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, timelines, a glossary and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 What is Big History?
Have you ever wondered if it's possible to understand the whole of the past, literally, from the beginnings of everything to the present day?
Is it possible to tell such a story? If so, what would the story look like?
Telling such a large, unified account of the past is what we'll attempt in this course.
So, welcome to this course in Big History.
Big History assembles accounts of the past from many different disciplines into a single, coherent account of the whole of the past.
It starts at the beginning, literally, with the origins of the universe, and it ends today.
In fact, it's going to go into the future as well.
In this lecture, I'll begin by introducing myself and explaining how I began teaching such a course.
I hope by doing that, you'll get some sense of the logic behind Big History.
Then, we'll look more closely at what Big History is, and we'll also look at some of the problems we face when we attempt it.
So, what is Big History? How does it differ from conventional history courses?
I'll end this lecture by describing the overall structure of the course, and I hope by doing that, I can give you a sort of road map
so you know the main landmarks in this course and where we're going to go with it.
It may help you get a better sense of what Big History is if I describe my own path to Big History.
My own somewhat confused background is relevant here.
When someone says to me, where are you from, I'm frankly never sure of the best answer. This is the problem.
My father was English. My mother was American, though she was born in Beijing.
My parents married in Izmir in Turkey at the end of the war.
I was born in Brooklyn, despite the accent.
I lived as a child in Nigeria. I went to school and then university in England.
I married in Canada, and I studied in Russia.
In fact, I had a fascinating year as a graduate student living in Leningrad, today St. Petersburg, in the Brezhnev years.
And that was a wonderful introduction to what seemed at the time during the Cold War a completely different world, a sort of dark side.
Then I completed my PhD at Oxford, and I got a job in Sydney, Australia.
And there I taught for 25 years before coming to the US in 2001.
But that mixed background may explain why I've always been uncomfortable with the idea of history as essentially a national story,
or the story of particular cultures or particular groups, and always interested in the idea of some sort of global approach to the past.
I am perhaps in some ways what Stalin might have called a rootless cosmopolitan.
Maybe part of the background that explains my interest in a sort of universal history.
Now let me try and explain why and how I started teaching big history.
As a graduate student at Oxford, I studied Russian history.
Why Russian history?
I think it was partly a sort of adolescent romance with the Russian soul.
I read Dostoevsky, I read Tolstoy, I fell in love with them, and growing up in England I thought,
this is a completely different world from the one I live in.
But also I had curiosity about Russia as a sort of dark side.
Now this is Russia during the Soviet Union.
I remember the Cuban Missile Crisis very vividly.
I was in England, I was at school, and I remember the height of the crisis.
One evening, just as we were all about to go home, one of my friends came up to me,
shook my hand and said goodbye, and I said, what's that all about?
And he said, I'm not sure we're going to see each other again.
And that really brought home to me with a real shock what was happening.
Here was a moment in which millions of people could die.
A lot of human civilization could be wiped out and it could happen within the next 12 hours.
And something else crossed my mind, I remember very vividly,
it flicked through my mind the question, are there kids over there on the other side
who are thinking exactly the same thing?
So those are the sort of things that explain my fascination with Russia,
a sort of sense of it being a different world.
And to understand my own world, I had to understand that world as well.
For 25 years, I taught Russian and Soviet history at Macquarie University in Sydney.
During the Cold War, teaching about Russia and the Soviet Union seemed very important indeed,
because now I was trying to teach my own students something about the other side,
and I was trying to teach them that yes, there were real people there, people like you and me,
and they were trying to cope with the real world,
but it was a rather different world from the one that we had to cope with.
During that time, I did research on the diets of Russian peasants in 19th century Russia.
Now this may sound an odd topic, but I took it up under the influence of the great French historian,
Fanon Brodel, who was one of the leading figures in the French Annales School of Historiography.
The Annales School had an immense impact on historians of my generation.
One of the things they did was insist on seeing human history in its geographical and ecological context.
What Brodel taught was that if you look at the past on different scales,
you'll see very different things, and you can see the past in entirely new ways.
Let me quote.
The way to study history, says Brodel, is to view it as a long duration,
as what I have called the long durée.
Now this French phrase, long durée, would become a sort of catchphrase for historians who admired Brodel.
It is not the only way, but it is one which by itself can pose all the great problems of social structures past and present.
It is the only language binding history to the present, creating one indivisible whole.
So Brodel showed that if you look at the past at unusually large scales, at the scale of the long durée,
by which he meant things that change on scales of several centuries, rather like geological changes.
You find you're looking at things that at smaller scales will seem unchangeable, such as slow changes in landscapes,
or changes in what he called material life, how people live, their clothing, their diets, their health.
And it was the diets that interested me.
Suddenly he argued, at these large scales you see an entirely new dimension to history,
because you'll see these things, they may seem not to change much at small scales, but at larger scales,
they clearly do change, and that changes how you understand other scales.
That was a powerful introduction to the basic idea of big history,
which is that to get a rounded view of the past, you need to see it at multiple scales.
In fact, one of my first articles on big history was called The Longest Durée, and yes, I was thinking about the film.
I should add that research into peasant diets was wonderful.
It was a lot of fun, very interesting, and it led to some interesting and very enjoyable research on the role of vodka,
both in Russian state finances and in the life of ordinary Russians.
And I mustn't get diverted into vodka, except to say that it played a huge role,
both in the world of the peasantry and in Russian finances.
It paid basically for most of the costs of the Russian army.
Okay, that's enough on vodka.
There was something else that drove me to explore large scales.
As a history teacher, I was always concerned about the significance of history.
Why was I teaching it? Why should students study it?
And I was particularly worried that we always seemed to be teaching bits and pieces of the past,
but we never seemed to be teaching the whole thing.
So I taught Russia, another colleague taught the USA, or another colleague taught ancient Greece, and so on.
But what was it that tied all these separate histories together?
This question nagged away at me.
And then, in the 1980s, I tackled the problem the most ambitious way I could imagine,
by trying to construct a course that began at the beginning of the universe and ended now.
Could it be done? How would you do it? What would such a course look like?
When my colleagues agreed to let me teach it, that's when I panicked,
because I realized I had no idea of how to do it.
I didn't know of any courses like this. We had to make it all up from scratch.
I was fortunate enough to find wonderful colleagues, and I began teaching it with a team of lecturers
that included astronomers, geologists, biologists, anthropologists, and historians.
But none of us knew of any course like this, so we really had to make up the rules as we went along.
Now, one of the things we found very quickly was that teaching big history was exhilarating.
It was exciting. After all, we were teaching 13 billion years in a 13-week semester.
So I could say to my colleagues, how many years do you cover in a week?
I cover one billion years.
Quite frankly, I don't ride motorbikes, but for me, this is as close as I'll ever get
to riding a very powerful motorbike very fast along a windy, cliffside road.
It was exciting. It was exciting for teachers, but it was also exciting for a lot of the students.
And I think the reason it was exciting for them in particular was because it raised fundamental questions
about the meaning of history and about our place in the cosmos.
Now, as a teacher, I believe that young students should be asking those questions,
and they should be encouraged to pursue them seriously.
So one of the things I enjoyed most about the course was that it legitimized their questions.
It allowed them to think that these large questions were worth pursuing,
and there were interesting and sensible things you could say about them.
In 1992, I wrote an article on the course, and because I needed a label to describe it,
I used the somewhat whimsical label Big History.
I was thinking, of course, of the Big Bang.
It's not the ideal label. I can think of many reasons why other labels might be better,
but it seems to have stuck, and that's why we're going to keep using it.
Since I started teaching, I've discovered that the rapidly emerging field of world history
is also aiming at a much larger vision of the past, a less tribal vision of the past, if you like.
World history really took off in the USA in the 1960s.
It was invisible in Australia when I was teaching,
but it took off in the States partly as a result of the success
of W. H. MacNeill's brilliant bestseller, Rise of the West, which appeared in 1963.
Now, in the first decade of the 21st century,
world history scholarship and teaching are booming in the States.
There's a new AP course, which is flourishing.
There are two major journals, there are conferences,
and there's a very generous intellectual community
which has produced a wonderful, rich body of scholarship in the last 20 years.
And while most world history courses begin with the appearance of agriculture,
some 10,000 years ago, some go further back,
and they start out with the origins of the first human beings.
Big History tackles even larger scales.
It can be thought of, if you like, as a sort of expansion of the world history approach.
So there's a very natural link between the two approaches.
Now, I want to look more closely at what big history is.
So here's a quick definition.
Big History surveys the past at the largest possible scales,
and it does so using the best available information from many different disciplines.
Now, this project has some consequences that need to be emphasized immediately.
First, in this course, we won't try to cover everything.
What we're going to be trying to do is to construct a coherent narrative of the past.
So we're looking for the through line.
We won't try and cover everything.
Second, because of the scale on which we look at the past,
you should not expect to find in it many of the familiar details,
names and personalities that you'll find in other types of historical teaching and writing.
For example, the French Revolution and the Renaissance will barely get a mention.
They'll zoom past in a blur. You'll barely see them.
Instead, what we're going to see is some less familiar aspects of the past.
The sort of things that Fanon Brodell was looking for at the long durée at the large scale
will be looking above all for the very large patterns, the shape of the past.
And here's a third implication.
Though we touch on many disciplines, we're going to cross many disciplines.
This is a genuinely interdisciplinary course.
My own expertise is as a historian.
There are many expert courses that focus on astronomy or geology,
and some of you will have great expertise in some of these fields.
But this is not the course in which to learn in intricate detail how DNA works
or how fusion reactions occur within stars.
What you'll find instead is how the insights of these different disciplines
can be woven together into a coherent, unified account of the past at all scales
in which the insights of each discipline can illuminate those of the others.
You'll find a coherent story.
Now, though it uses modern scientific information,
I soon realize that big history is in some important ways similar to traditional creation stories.
These also used the best available information in the societies in which they were constructed
to create credible stories that gave people a sense of their bearings in space and time.
And that was what made them so powerful.
They offered maps of space and time within which people could say,
That's where I am.
And that's why I called my book on big history maps of time.
But creation stories are not unique.
Within all the great religious and cultural traditions, you'll find maps of this type.
People have tried to understand human history as part of the larger story of the whole universe
within all these traditions.
This, for example, was the aim of Christian writers such as Augustine,
who early in the fifth century helped create a universal history that began about 6,000 years ago,
which was when he assumed, or calculated rather, that God had created the earth.
And that story would shape Christian historiography for over a thousand years.
What Augustine's story did was to embed the history of humanity, the city of man,
in the history of the universe, the divine world, the city of God.
In fact, historians have attempted universal histories in all eras.
Over time, I've realized that the project of big history is not really that original.
H. G. Wells' outline of history, which was published just after World War I,
is perhaps the most famous 20th century attempt.
Wells wrote the book because of his horror at what was happening during World War I.
And he found when he looked at the historians that far from helping humanity
avoid such crises in the future, the historians were part of the problem,
because each of them presented a sort of tribal myth that encouraged tribalism and conflict.
So they were the historians of Germany, the historians of Britain, the historians of Russia.
Could one find a larger story that might encourage a sense of unity between humans?
That's what H. G. Wells was looking for.
And his idea was that you'd find such a larger story
if you attempted to create a unified history that embedded human history in larger histories.
Unfortunately, a lot of the science that makes big history possible now,
including all the dating techniques that allow us now to put absolute dates on events
in the remote past, wasn't available when he wrote.
Since his time, big history has become possible in a way it was not before,
because of a whole series of scientific breakthroughs in the middle of the 20th century.
So it's possible now in a way that it wasn't before,
and yet oddly, universal histories have been quite unfashionable in recent decades.
Modern education focuses almost exclusively on specialized knowledge.
For example, most history teaching and scholarship is concerned with just the last 2,000 years
and most of that with the last 300 or 400 years.
And very few historians work closely with biologists or geologists or astronomers.
And the result is a fragmented vision of reality.
And that's what we seem to teach in most of our schools and universities.
A vision of reality in which you get a bit of chemistry, a bit of history,
a bit of this, a bit of that, but no coherence.
Now this fragmented vision of reality that we teach in the modern world is profoundly unsatisfying.
The problem and its solution are described very well in a book that a physicist wrote in 1944
about the origins of life.
The physicist was Erwin Schrödinger.
His dates are 1887 to 1961.
He wrote a book on the origins of life after giving a series of lectures on the subject in Dublin in 1943.
Now he was acutely aware that he was a physicist.
He was one of the pioneers of quantum physics.
But he was not really qualified to write a book on life.
Yet he argued a unified understanding of reality was vital
and that required that scholars be prepared to cross disciplines.
So if no one else would do it, let me quote Schrödinger.
He puts it very well.
We have inherited from our forefathers the keen longing for unified, all-embracing knowledge.
The very name given to the highest institutions of learning reminds us that from antiquity and throughout many centuries
the universal aspect has been the only one to be given full credit.
But the spread, both in width and depth of the multifarious branches of knowledge
during the last hundred odd years, has confronted us with a queer dilemma.
We feel clearly that we are only now beginning to acquire reliable material
for welding together the sum total of all that is known into a whole.
But on the other hand, it has become next to impossible for a single mind fully to command
more than a small, specialized portion of it.
And he concludes,
I can see no other escape from this dilemma than that some of us should venture to embark on a synthesis of facts and theories
albeit with secondhand and incomplete knowledge of some of them
and at the risk of making fools of ourselves.
So much he writes for my apology and all I can say to that is, amen.
So big history tries to meet the need that Schrödinger identified for a more unified account of reality.
But let me remind you that this is one attempt to tell the story.
In the future, we can imagine many different approaches with different emphases.
We can imagine biologists' versions, we can imagine geologists' versions, we can imagine astronomers' versions.
And they may tell the same essential story, but they'll differ in important ways.
So this is one account.
Okay, so much by way of discussing what big history is.
Now what I want to do in the last part of this lecture is give you a roadmap of where we're going.
In this course, we'll serve a modern, scientific account of the origins of our universe, our earth, the biosphere, and human society.
This is, as I've said, a historian's version.
There are also versions taught by astronomers and geologists.
But in some way, historians are peculiarly well-placed to weave together such a story,
because they're used to dealing with extraordinarily complex phenomena such as human societies that can't be handled with a few beautiful equations,
and they're also trained to weave stories from the complex details of the past.
Because I'm a historian, I'll avoid most scientific technicalities.
For example, I'll introduce only one mathematical equation, that's E equals MC squared,
and it's going to appear in this course largely for symbolic reasons.
The course's central theme, which I owe in part to the work of Eric Chason,
an astronomer who's taught an astronomer's version of big history in Boston for many years.
The central theme is the appearance of increasingly complex entities in the universe.
So our course will be structured around eight fundamental thresholds.
Each of them is associated with new forms of complexity, each of which has new emergent properties.
Now we'll discuss the idea of complexity and emergent properties more fully in lecture three.
So these eight thresholds will provide the scaffolding for this course.
Let me go through them.
The first is the creation of the universe, threshold one, about 13.7 billion years ago.
That's a subject normally discussed within cosmology.
Lectures five to six will cover this.
Let me say that in the written materials that accompany this course,
you'll find eight timelines at different scales,
and I think you'll find it helpful to go back over and over again to those timelines
to get a clear sense of the unfamiliar chronology of this course.
So that's the first threshold, the creation of the universe, 13.7 billion years ago.
The second is the creation of the first complex objects, stars.
The first stars appeared more than 12 billion years ago, quite soon after the creation of the universe.
They provide the energy and the raw materials for later forms of complexity.
That's lecture seven.
Threshold three is the creation inside dying stars of the chemical elements
that allowed the creation of chemically complex entities, including planets,
and including you and me.
That's lecture eight.
The next threshold, which we cover in lectures nine to eleven, is the creation of our Earth.
And what we look at in that section is the creation of solar systems.
These are objects that are chemically significantly more complex than stars.
So that's why this is a new level of complexity.
Our Earth was created as a byproduct of the creation of our sun and solar system
about 4.5 billion years ago.
This group of lectures also surveys the history of our home planet,
and we're in the territory of geologists.
Threshold five is the creation and evolution of life on Earth.
The first evidence of life comes from about 3.8 billion years ago on this planet.
Now, the creation of life is a threshold that may also have been crossed many times,
billions of times before, in other parts of the universe.
But as yet, we have no firm evidence that this is true.
Life, so far, we can only study on our one planet.
This group of lectures will also survey the evolution of our own ancestors, the hominines,
from about six million years ago.
Then we come to threshold six.
Threshold six, by threshold six, we're now just 250,000 years ago.
We've now covered most of 13 billion years, and we're reaching the present moment.
Threshold six is the creation of our own species, Homo sapiens, about 250,000 years ago.
This section of the course discusses what makes us so distinctive.
It argues that we have a capacity to adapt and to change that is unprecedented amongst other organisms on Earth.
We also cover the Paleolithic era of human history, the oldest, the longest,
but also the least well-documented part of our history.
The Paleolithic era lasts until the appearance of agriculture 10,000 to 11,000 years ago.
Then we come to threshold seven, in lectures 24 to 37, the largest single group of lectures in this course.
Threshold seven is the emergence of agriculture and agricultural societies
from about 11,000 years ago.
And it introduces what I'll call the agrarian era of human history,
the second of three major eras of human history.
Agriculture marked a fundamental change in human history
because what it did was accelerate the pace of change.
It allowed population growth, the emergence of larger, denser and eventually more complex societies,
including the great agrarian civilizations such as the Roman Empire or the great empires of China.
And finally, we come to threshold eight, the modern revolution.
This introduces the modern era of human history.
In this part of the course, we'll cover the astonishing series of transformations that have created today's unified,
complex world in just a few centuries, three or four centuries.
Then what we'll do is widen the lens again.
In the last three lectures, we'll look at the future.
We'll look at the future of humans, of the earth and eventually of the universe as a whole.
What's going to happen to the universe?
And we'll end with an overview of the entire course.
Let me end by telling you what I regard as some of the crucial objectives of this course.
Here's the first.
I hope you'll find this huge journey exhilarating.
And I hope it will provide a chance for you to think deeply about the place of human beings and modern society in the larger scheme of things.
You won't always agree with my assessment of this, but I hope it'll give you a chance to think rigorously and seriously about these issues.
Secondly, a second objective that I have in mind.
I hope you'll gain a clear understanding of the overall shape of what I'm tempted to call a modern scientific creation story.
And an understanding of why this story is both important and in some ways very beautiful.
Third, I hope by the end of this course you will also have a much better sense of the underlying unity of modern knowledge.
And you'll see that behind the fragmented vision of reality that modern educational systems offer,
there is in fact a unified account offered by modern science of reality and its evolution.
So in summary, I've tried in this lecture to explain what big history is.
It's an account of the past at all possible scales.
The next lecture will focus on the unifying idea of multiple scales.
How big is the universe? How old is it?
And perhaps most important of all, how can we possibly get our minds around these huge scales?
Thank you.
Lecture 2 Moving Across Multiple Scales
We saw in the last lecture that big history surveys the past at many different scales.
Indeed, one of the unifying ideas of big history, and I think one of the sources of its intellectual power,
is the idea that what we see at one scale can illuminate what we see at other scales.
And this was one of Fernand Brodel's great ideas.
Big history therefore can be seen amongst other things as an attempt to link knowledge at multiple scales.
Now that makes it very different from most history courses.
Most history courses operate within a very specific range of scales.
Roughly speaking, we can say from a range of say a decade or two, if you're studying the French Revolution,
to perhaps a lifetime, a century, or in the case of a national history, perhaps a few centuries.
Now this may not seem like a limited range of scales if you operate within the history discipline,
but by comparison with the scales of the cosmologist, of course, this is extremely limited.
Now because historians operate within these ranges, within these particular scales,
the problem of scale in general does not normally emerge as a problem for historians.
These are familiar scales, they're comfortable scales,
and the result is you don't have to spend a lot of time thinking about the issue of scale
unless you're someone like Fernand Brodel.
But of course courses in geology or cosmology have to take it much more seriously.
If you're teaching a course in geology, you have to help your students deal with scales of many millions,
or even billions of years, and we will have to do the same thing.
And that's what this lecture is going to be doing.
Now to get a sense of the differences between different scales
and the ways in which different scales can illuminate each other,
we must try immediately to get a sense of these large scales.
But how can we?
How can we possibly grasp how big or how old our solar system is, or the entire universe?
Or how can we grasp the distance to the nearest star, or even to Pluto or Mars?
What I want to do in this lecture is to try to help you begin to deal with these multiple scales,
to get a sense of how to cope with a question like what does 13 billion years really mean, or a million light years.
Now the first thing to be said about these very large scales is that while understanding them is important,
in fact it's crucial for big history, it's also extremely difficult.
And the truth is, I suspect that no one, even scientists who work with these scales familiarly all the time,
I suspect that no one really grasps them fully.
Why? Well there's a very good biological reason.
It's not that we're stupid, it's not that we don't make the effort,
it's that we're not designed to grasp these scales.
Our brains and our sensory apparatus evolved through natural selection
to deal with a certain rather narrow range of spatial and temporal scales.
These are the scales familiar in our daily lives, we can perhaps refer to them as the biological scale.
Tigers are dangerous, galaxies are not.
Bump into a tiger, you have to be able to understand it, you have to be able to deal with it, bump into a galaxy,
and quite frankly, you're not going to need to deal with it.
Either it's going to obliterate you, and all of us, or it's not.
We don't need to deal with galaxies, our minds are not designed to deal with those scales.
The longest living organism we know of is probably the bristlecone pine,
and it lives for less than 5,000 years.
So 5,000 years offers a sort of outer limit to what we can call the biological time scale.
The oldest bristlecone we know, incidentally, is known appropriately as Methuselah.
It's about 4,800 years old, and it's in California's White Mountains.
So this is the problem.
The natural world didn't really design us to grasp large spatial or chronological scales.
If we find it difficult to do so, there's a very good reason for that.
As Stephen J. Gould writes, incidentally, Stephen J. Gould is wonderful.
He writes incredibly, engagingly, intelligently, and interestingly, about the natural world, above all about biology.
But when I started teaching this course, a colleague of mine, David Briscoe, a biologist who gave wonderful lectures on biology in this course,
recommended that I read almost anything by Stephen J. Gould.
He is indeed wonderful, and I recommend him highly for this course.
He died, as you may know, in 2002.
But this is what Stephen J. Gould wrote about the question of scale.
He wrote, an abstract intellectual understanding of deep time, by which he means very large time scales, comes easily enough.
I know how many zeros to place after the ten, when I mean billions.
And the answer, in case you're not sure, is eight.
But then he goes on, getting it into the gut is quite another matter.
And he said that in a wonderful book, On the Nature of Time, Times Arrow, Time Cycle.
So there are very good reasons why grasping large spatial scales and temporal scales is extremely difficult for organisms like us.
Nevertheless, we have to make the effort.
Like ants on an elephant, we can only see the wrinkles if we just stay up close to this.
Now, the metaphor of ants and elephants may seem banal,
but what I want to do is to take that metaphor a bit more seriously to illustrate the point I'm trying to make.
Let's imagine, with this ant, as an ant, you'll get familiar with the wrinkles.
Let's imagine the landscape.
Great grey, sand dune-like structures, very steep.
Quite mobile. We clamber over them.
They have huge hairs growing out of them.
And there are lots of other creepy crawlies moving around amongst them.
And occasionally we can imagine this entire landscape shakes extremely violently
in earthquakes which threaten to shake me off and have killed many of my ant friends.
Now, imagine that I now step back.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to offer our ant a ride in an ant helicopter.
So here's how it goes.
The ant accepts.
I strap the ant into the helicopter.
I have no idea how you'd strap an ant into a helicopter, but we do it anyway.
And we take off.
And here's what the ant says.
The ant says, oh, there's my wrinkle.
And there's my cousin's wrinkle.
And, oh, I can see a wrinkle that I once visited.
And now I can see wrinkles I've never seen before.
And then its panic level starts rising.
And it says, now, I can't see the wrinkles clearly.
And, oh my god, the wrinkles have gone.
I can't see a single wrinkle.
And the question is, what do you say to the ant, to console the ant?
And I think this is probably what you say.
You say, don't panic.
We're going to get back to the wrinkles.
I'm going to take you back there.
But meanwhile, this is what you must do.
Relax your eyes.
Let go of the wrinkles.
Forget about them.
And see if you relax your eyes if you can see something else.
And the ant replies, OK, OK.
I'll try and relax my eyes.
OK, now what can I see?
And it says, well, actually, I'm seeing this huge gray thing.
And now I see it more clearly.
It looks as if it's got a colossal nose
and two vast teeth-like things sticking out.
What the ant's done is made a sort of sort of gestalt switch.
It's stopped seeing what it's used to seeing, what it wants to see,
and it's allowing itself to see the sort of things that you see
at a very different scale.
In fact, it's seeing the entire elephant.
So we have to do something like this.
We're going to have to learn to let go of the wrinkles.
They won't go away entirely.
We can always come back to them.
But we have to let go of them temporarily
if we're to see what needs to be seen at large scales.
And something like this is going to happen within big history.
Each scale brings new things into focus,
even if it may also obscure other things.
It's like taking off in a plane.
You're seeing a plane on the runway.
You can see humans.
You can see perhaps a rabbit scampering across the field.
Then you take off very quickly within a few minutes.
You certainly can't see the rabbit.
You can't see individual humans.
But you start to see new things.
You can see an entire city,
which is something you can't normally see
as you walk through that city.
So this is what we need to do.
We need to learn how to move through different scales,
how to make this sort of gestalt switch.
And what we'll learn is, like the ant,
that if you combine these scales,
if you can see the different things that exist at different scales,
you'll end up with a richer sense of the reality around you.
Let's imagine that the ant, when it was up there,
saw that its home wrinkles were actually on the elephant's ear.
Now, that would explain the earthquakes.
And when it gets back, it's probably going to tell its friends,
let's head north.
The neck is a much safer place.
Okay, so that we can never really grasp the larger scales,
like geologists, astronomers, cosmologists,
or like the ant in the helicopter,
we need to find ways of dealing with them.
And the rest of this lecture is going to start the process
of trying to help you become more comfortable with large scales.
This is something you need to do with practice,
to practice making this gestalt switch.
Let's begin with spatial scales, large scales in space.
To get a sense of the scale of our solar system,
I'm going to suggest we go on a journey into space.
We'll begin with the human scale.
Then we'll slowly widen the lens.
And what we'll try and do is see what we lose as the lens widens
and also see what new things come into view.
It's April the 12th, 1961.
The time is 9.07 a.m.
Kazakh local time.
We are on top of a Vostok-1 rocket.
Vostok means east.
And sitting beside us is a young Soviet Air Force officer,
Yuri Gagarin.
We're at the Baikonur Cosmodrome.
And Yuri Gagarin cries out,
Pyakhalyi.
Now, Pyakhalyi literally in Russian means let's went.
But actually in practice, when you say Pyakhalyi,
people understand that what you're really saying is let's go.
And there's one more meaning to Pyakhalyi
that you need to understand.
If you're making a toast,
you have a group of people, each of them has a glass of vodka.
I said I'd done research on vodka.
Each of them has a glass of vodka.
At some point, someone's going to make a toast
and they're going to say Pyakhalyi.
And then you're going to drink your vodka.
So it also means cheers.
So this is what the young Yuri Gagarin says
as his rocket blasts off, Pyakhalyi.
This is a momentous turning point in human history.
Yuri Gagarin is about to become the first human being,
the first member of our species to enter space.
Now, we can picture the lift off
because we're still at the human scale.
We can see the rocket, we can see humans scurrying around.
But soon, very quickly, within just a minute or two,
we move to much larger scales.
At almost six miles, we can see Baikonur
as if we were seeing it from an international jet.
Now, that's a view that's very familiar to us.
You can't see humans any longer, but you can see large landscapes.
Most of us have seen what the Earth looks like
from an international jet.
Gagarin, though, went much higher.
He reached about 188 miles.
This is close to the orbit of the International Space Station,
which orbits at about 220 miles up.
This is still a scale we can sort of imagine.
Very few of us have been there,
but a lot of us have seen pictures of this scale,
and you can easily go on the Internet
and find pictures from the International Space Station.
And we know roughly what you can see.
You can see very clearly large geographical features.
You can see seas and mountains and large cities.
You can also see the Earth's curvature.
Like the anti-helicopter,
beginning to see some of the elephant's anatomy.
But you can't see Baikonur any more.
That particular wrinkle has vanished.
Now, let's move on, and let's move further with Gagarin.
From 6,000 miles up,
what we're going to see very, very clearly
is the Earth as a ball in space.
Now, we are really seeing the elephant.
We're way beyond the biological scale,
but we can still imagine it,
because all of us have seen photographs of this,
and we know that there are human beings
who've seen this directly from space.
Some of you will remember the power
of the first pictures of Earth from space
that came out in the 60s.
They had a tremendous impact,
because they enabled a lot of people
to make the Gestalt switch,
to see the Earth not as a divided place,
but as a single, fragile, isolated,
very beautiful object in space.
There's a wonderful book called Home Planet.
It's a coffee table book.
There are wonderful pictures of the Earth from space,
but accompanying them are quotations
from astronauts and cosmonauts,
describing what it felt like
to make this particular Gestalt switch.
And I want to just quote from one of them.
All of them, all of them,
had a sense of the power of seeing things
and above all seeing the Earth in a striking new way.
And all of them seem to have had a sense of shifting
from a tribal view to a human view of the Earth.
Here's just one illustration.
It's a comment by Sultan bin Salman al Saud,
who was the first Arab astronaut.
He flew on Discovery in 1985,
and this is what he said.
The first day or so, we all pointed to our countries.
The third or fourth day,
we were pointing to our continents.
By the fifth day, we were aware of only one Earth.
Once again, I think that's a very beautiful description
of the sort of Gestalt switch
that many of us experienced
when we first saw those beautiful pictures
of the Earth from space.
Now let's move on. Let's continue our journey.
What does the Earth look like from the moon?
Seeing the Earth from the moon is a fantasy
that humans have had for a long, long time.
It's been one of the staples of science fiction.
And then in 1969, it ceased to be a fantasy.
Neil Armstrong landed on the moon
at 10.56 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time.
On July the 20th, 1969.
And by doing so, he became the first human
to step onto another world.
Once again, this is a momentous event in human history.
But as he stepped onto the moon,
we find he himself was divided between different scales.
Most of his interest was focused on the biological scale.
He was concerned at the possibility
that he might be stepping into a quicksand.
But at the same time, he was also aware
of the momentousness of the event,
of the fact that this was an event at a very large scale.
We have transcripts of what he said
as he descends the ladder from the lunar module.
And I'm going to read some of it.
Please forgive the accent.
This is not a sort of imperial bid to claim
that Brits got there first.
You'll have to pretend this is an American accent.
So here we have Armstrong,
who is descending the ladder from the lunar module.
Here's what he says.
I'm at the foot of the ladder.
The LM, the lunar module, foot pads,
are only depressed in the surface about one or two inches.
Although the surface appears to be very, very fine-grained.
As you get close to it, it's almost like powder.
The ground mass is very fine.
So he's at the biological level.
He's concerned with the sort of details
humans need to concern themselves.
Then there's a pause, and he says,
I'm going to step off the LM now.
Then there's a long pause.
Then he says, that's one small step for a man,
one giant leap for mankind.
Now, whether this was scripted or not,
Armstrong seems to have shifted to a very, very different scale.
What does he say next?
This is a great cocktail party question,
and I'm going to give you the answer.
What does he say next?
The next thing he says is, yes, the surface is fine and powdery.
I can kick it up loosely with my toes.
It does adhere in fine layers,
like powdered charcoal to the sole and sides of my boots
and so on and so on and so on.
He's back to the biological scale.
So that for me is a lovely illustration
of making this Gestalt switch.
Now, the moon is just next door.
It's the nearest body in space to our Earth.
So far, no human has traveled further.
Though two human-made objects,
the voyage of satellites,
have now passed the outer planets of our solar system.
Now, let's move on
and try and appreciate the scale of the solar system,
and now I'm going to shift to a slightly different sort of thought experiment.
Imagine we're flying in a modern passenger jet
at roughly 550 miles per hour.
And my thanks to the late David Allen for this.
David Allen gave wonderful lectures on cosmology
in the first big history course I taught,
and I think to the extent that it succeeded,
it owed a lot to David Allen's willingness
to take part in this strange adventure.
So here's David Allen's thought experiment.
In a jet, it takes you about five hours
to cross the continental USA.
So the question is, how long would it take to reach the moon?
Just take a moment to try and think what your answer might be.
It doesn't have to be correct.
Just pick a number randomly.
And the answer is about 18 days of continuous flight.
As David Allen said, lecturing in Australia,
18 days of Qantas meals.
A terrifying prospect.
To reach the sun, about 20 years.
A substantial chunk of a human lifetime.
To reach Jupiter, it would take about 82 years.
To reach Pluto, at the very edge of our solar system,
it would take about 750 years.
That is several lifetimes.
Only a bristlecone pine could possibly survive such a journey.
We're now well beyond the capacity of our imagination.
We really can't easily grasp these scales anymore.
Yet having said that, solar system scales are easy.
The solar system is our local patch.
It's our backyard.
Stellar scales are very different indeed.
If it took 750 years to reach Pluto,
how long is it going to take to reach the nearest star?
Which is about 4.3 light years.
Or 25 trillion miles away.
25 trillion is 25 with 12 zeros after it.
And the answer is, you're going to have to sit in that plane
for about 5 million years.
And yet, that is a trip next door.
This is the next star to ours.
That's a walk next door.
It would take us as long as it took hominins to evolve
after the split from the chimp lines into modern human beings.
So here we have two stars.
And they're divided by a jet trip of 5 million years.
How many neighbors do we have in this galactic city, the stellar city?
There are about 100 billion stars in our stellar city, the Milky Way.
Most of them separated by at least a plane flight of 5 million years.
And how many of these galactic cities are there in our universe?
How many galaxies are there?
Probably, again, about 100 billion.
So how many stars are there?
This means, as Cesare Emiliani writes in The Scientific Companion,
which is a wonderful introduction to basic scientific concepts for non-scientists,
he writes,
This means that there are about as many stars in the universe
as there are sand grains in all the deserts and beaches of the Earth.
Now, clearly by now we're well beyond our capacity,
the capacity of our imagination to really grasp these things.
So we simply have to sort of tease ourselves with mind games like this.
If you want to do a bit more of this,
a wonderful example is called Powers of Ten.
You'll find several Powers of Ten websites,
they're inspired by a 1957 book, Cosmic View,
by a Dutch writer, Kees Boker.
What he does is he has an imaginary picture of the universe.
And then the next picture is at a scale of one-tenth of that.
And then the next picture is one-tenth of that.
And so he goes on constructing pictures,
each a tenth of the scale of the previous one,
and he asks what you see at each scale.
And you can ask how many steps would it take to get from the universe,
say to the human scale.
If you take six steps, you're shrinking your scale by a million.
This takes us from the universe to the scale of the Milky Way.
If you take six steps more, shrinking the scale again by a million,
you can start to see the Sun as a tiny dot.
Another six steps takes us to the scale of the Earth and Moon,
and six more takes us to the scale of a single kilometer.
We're now at the human scale.
And it's taken us twenty-four of these steps.
Another six steps, and you can see the detail on a bee's eye.
If you take six more, you can start to see individual atoms.
Another six, and you're looking at the surface of a proton.
But there are twenty more steps you could take
before you get to the smallest possible scale, the plant length.
So once again, these are games we can sort of tease ourselves with
to get a sense of these large scales.
So that's space.
Now I want to talk a bit about time, temporal scales.
What kind of scales we need to understand the chronology of this course?
The temporal scales of the modern creation story
of this modern account of origins are equally daunting.
But they're not uniquely large.
Many traditional cosmologies have imagined universes
that were much older than the one imagined by modern science.
For example, the Buddha almost 2,500 years ago
gave a delightful sense of infinite time in a story about a rock and a silken cloth.
Here's how it goes.
Suppose, oh monks, said the Buddha,
there was a huge rock of one solid mass.
It's one mile long, one mile wide, one mile high without split or floor.
And at the end of every hundred years,
a man should come and rub against it once with a silken cloth.
Then that huge rock would wear off and disappear quicker than a world period, a calper.
But of such world periods, oh monks, many have passed away.
Many hundreds, many thousands, many hundred thousands.
So that's a lovely metaphor for a scale,
a temporal scale even larger than that of modern cosmology.
I found that the best way of grasping the time scales and the chronologies
of modern cosmology and of big history
is to shrink them by a scale of about a billion.
So instead of taking 13 billion years,
let's imagine that the universe was created 13 years ago.
If we do that, then we can come up with a chronology which is at least manageable
because we all know what 13 years is.
So how does that chronology work?
Now this is a chronology we're going to come back and back and back to in this course.
The universe would have been formed 13 years ago.
You can imagine what you were doing 13 years ago.
The Earth would have been formed about five years ago.
That's about 4.5 billion years ago.
The first multi-celled organisms on Earth
would have evolved about seven months ago.
That's about 600 million years ago.
After flourishing for several weeks,
the dinosaurs would have been wiped out by an asteroid impact
and that would have happened about three weeks ago.
And again, you can probably remember what you were doing three weeks ago
when the dinosaurs were wiped out.
The first hominins, that is to say bipedal great apes that were our ancestors,
appeared about three days ago.
That's about six million years.
And our own species, 53 minutes ago.
That's 250,000 years ago.
The first farmers would have flourished about five minutes ago,
10 to 11,000 years ago,
and the first agrarian civilizations would have appeared just three minutes ago.
Finally, modern industrial societies would have existed for just six seconds.
So I hope this already begins to give you a sense of proportion
in the timescales we'll be dealing with in this course.
I once did a workshop in which I got people to stand along a corridor
and I got someone to volunteer to be the Big Bang
and then someone else volunteered to be the first slimy creature that crawled out of the sea
and someone else to be the first multi-cell organism, the first dinosaur, and so on.
And I placed them along the corridor at appropriate points and I primed them.
And then I got other members of the workshop just to walk down the corridor.
And it was wonderful.
You could walk down the corridor and you could chat with the Big Bang,
or with the early Earth,
or with the first slimy amphibian to crawl out of the sea.
Now, what can these scales tell us?
At first sight, they may seem to deprive our planet and our history of any significance.
We seem so small, so short-lived.
This used to depress my students.
But we'll see in the next lecture that this is not quite the end of the story.
We may seem small and short-lived,
but by some criteria such as complexity, which is the theme of the next lecture,
we humans and our history are significant even on cosmological scales.
The French philosopher Pascal wrote,
For what is man in nature?
A nothingness in respect to infinity.
A whole in respect to nothingness.
A median between nothing and everything.
Thank you.
In the previous lecture, we discussed one unifying idea.
We discussed one unifying idea in this course.
As we've seen, this course covers so much territory
that it's very important to be clear about the ways in which we can construct
a coherent account across all these disciplines.
The idea we looked at in the last lecture was the idea that
to fully understand the past on the scales of big history,
we need to explore it at multiple scales.
And we saw that each scale can illuminate the others.
We also saw that each scale can affect how we understand other scales.
For example, I ended with the idea that I said depressed many of my students,
and indeed it did, which is that the colossal scales of big history
seem to make humans and human history utterly insignificant.
As we'll see in this lecture, that is really not the end of the story.
So now what I want to look at is a second unifying idea of big history.
Because we face another fundamental difficulty,
not just the difficulty of scales, but the problem of coherence.
What thematic coherence can you possibly find
across all these scales and all these disciplines?
If you tell a story that begins with cosmology,
includes geology, then biology, and human history,
isn't it bound to be just a rag bag of completely separate stories?
After all, in universities each of these stories is told in quite separate departments,
and most of the time very little attempt is made to link them to string them together.
Is there anything that all these scales and all these different disciplines share?
Well, what I want to argue in this lecture is that there is a central idea,
and that idea is the idea of increasing complexity.
And we've seen already that the idea of increasing complexity
provides a sort of structural framework for this course.
It's an idea that's emerging in the writings of a number of scholars
who are thinking about the implications of big history, of unified accounts of the past.
And what I'll do is that this idea links all the different parts of our story in very powerful ways.
Furthermore, I'll argue that it shows how each part of the story can illuminate
and deepen our understanding of the others.
Just as we saw that understanding different scales
can help us understand more familiar scales in new ways.
Okay, so our theme is complexity.
Let's begin by asking, what do we mean by complexity?
What is complexity?
Now, we all have an intuitive idea of the difference between simple and complex things,
and that intuitive sense of complexity will take us quite away.
There is an incredibly rich body of mathematical, sociological, and biological theory on complexity.
I'm really not going to go too far into the nuances, and we don't really need them.
Some fairly basic ideas about complexity will take us a long way for this course.
So here is an attempt to pin down some of the properties of complex things.
Here's the first thing.
Complex things like stars or planets or you and me
consist of diverse components bound into larger structures.
And I need to add that those structures are patterned in very precise ways.
So that's the first thing.
You take a lot of components and you put them together in a particular structure.
Now here's a second slightly less obvious feature of complex things.
These structures that bring together diverse components display distinctive emergent properties.
Now the phrase emergent properties I'm using in a slightly technical sense.
I mean features that are not present in the components from which they are constructed,
but appear only when those components are assembled in specific ways.
Now the idea of emergence is going to be immensely important in this course.
So I'm going to take a bit of time to try and clarify it.
Here's a very simple illustration.
You could study the properties of hydrogen and the properties of oxygen as long as you liked
without being able to predict properties of water,
which is what you get when you combine two hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom in a very specific way.
The properties of water are emergent properties.
They exist not intrinsically in the components, but because of the way those components are arranged.
They arise from a particular arrangement of those atoms, rearrange them differently,
and you may get different properties.
The idea of emergence, it turns out, is actually a very old one.
And there's a lovely illustration of this in a Buddhist sutra, which is known as the Questions of Melinda.
And I want to go back about 2,200 years to the Questions of Melinda to explore the idea of emergence
and to try and capture the magical quality of emergence.
What's magical about emergence is properties appear that seem not to reside in anything in particular.
They just suddenly appear when you rearrange those things in a particular way.
They appear not to be present, then suddenly they appear.
They appear only in a particular arrangement.
OK, so the Questions of Melinda.
Melinda is the name in this Buddhist sutra for a Greco-Bactrian ruler
who ruled a kingdom and empire that stretched from Central Asia to Kashmir in about the 2nd century BCE.
He's debating with a Buddhist monk, Nagasena.
And what they're debating is the Buddhist idea of the self.
The Buddha famously argued that in some sense the self doesn't really exist.
We all have a very strong sense of the self.
But the Buddha argued in some sense it's illusory, and this is what they're debating.
The emperor, Mananda, Melinda, as he's described in the sutra, says to Nagasena that the self is real.
Nagasena says to the emperor, how did you come to this meeting?
Melinda says, in a chariot.
Nagasena asks, then please explain to me what a chariot is.
Is the pole the chariot?
No, reverent sir, says the emperor.
Is then the axle the chariot?
No, reverent sir.
Is it then the wheels or the framework or the flagstaff or the yoke or the reins or the gold stick?
No, reverent sir.
And with all the Buddhist sutras, this goes on and on and on for pages, to and fro.
Then, and I'll skip all of that.
Then eventually Nagasena says, then is this chariot outside the combination of pole, axle, wheels, framework, flagstaff, yoke, reins and gold?
No, reverent sir.
Then says Nagasena, ask as I may.
I can discover no chariot at all.
Just a mere sound is this chariot.
And at this point he claims victory.
And he says, it is just so with me.
In other words, with the self.
Independence on the 32 parts of the body and the five scanners, these are simply Buddhist technical terms for the components of the self.
There takes place this denomination, Nagasena, this designation, this conceptual term.
In short, what he's saying is that the self, like the chariot, doesn't exist in any of the bits and pieces from which it's made.
It exists, or rather it emerges as a property when you assemble those things in a certain way.
And this is characteristic of emergent properties in general.
When assembled into larger structures, new things appear.
The sociologist Durkheim, one of the founders of modern sociology, was also acutely aware of emergence.
And it was very important to establish the credentials of sociology as a discipline.
Because what Durkheim tried to establish was that in society there are properties that do not reside in individuals.
Society has emergent properties of its own.
And here's how Emile Durkheim described what I'm calling emergence.
Whenever any elements combine and, by the fact of their combination, produce new phenomena,
it is evident that these phenomena are not given in the elements, but in the totality formed by their union.
And then he goes on to talk about life as an emergent property.
The living cell he writes, and he's writing the 19th century, remember, contains nothing but mineral particles.
Just as society contains nothing but individuals.
It is obviously impossible, however, for the phenomena characteristic of life to exist in the atoms of hydrogen,
oxygen, carbon and nitrogen.
For how could the properties of life exist within inanimate elements?
Life is in the whole, not in the parts.
So I've spent some time with this property of emergence.
It's absolutely crucial, this magical appearance of new qualities when you get a new level of complexity.
So that's the second property of complex things, emergence.
Now the third property, this is much simpler.
Complex entities have a certain stability.
Now this is, in a sense, stating the obvious.
If they didn't have any stability, we simply wouldn't notice them.
They'd pop up, they'd vanish, we wouldn't see them.
So they have to be stable to a certain extent.
Atoms or stars survive for billions of years, butterflies survive for just a few days.
So they've survived long enough to be interesting.
But the stability is never absolute.
Eventually they all break down.
And in the case of living organisms, we call this breakdown death.
Now a fourth property that's less immediately obvious.
And this is that to maintain complex things, you need energy flows to bind simple components into more complex structures.
Without these flows, the structures simply break down.
If you want to try this experimentally, try not eating for a year.
Very simple, your structure depends on energy flows.
So we study complex things, partly because we are complex.
But there are also good biological reasons for this.
To survive, we must be extremely good at detecting complex things in our surroundings,
such as tigers or tax inspectors.
We need to be good at detecting complexity.
We need to be complexity detectors.
And that is why this course will focus more on complex things, such as stars,
than on the simple things, such as empty space to take up most of the universe.
After all, if I were to try and make this a sort of equal time course,
we'd spend most of our time talking about empty space.
And I don't think that would be very exciting.
Okay, now the next point about complexity.
Though one of my heroes, Stephen J. Gould, has disputed this claim,
there are powerful reasons for thinking that over 13 billion years,
the upper level of complexity in the universe has increased.
Now, how can we demonstrate this?
Well, intuitively, it seems pretty clear.
The early universe, we'll see, was very simple.
It consisted of hydrogen, helium, and energy, not much else.
Now, 13 billion years later, there are lots of complex things,
such as planets and pythons and people.
So that's the intuitive demonstration of what I mean.
But there may also be more rigorous ways of trying to say this.
The astronomer, Eric Jason, has been teaching an astronomer's version of big history
in Boston for at least 20 years.
And he has argued that if it takes energy to create and maintain complex things,
that ought to mean that it takes more energy to make more complex things.
Now, what this means, roughly speaking, is that if he's right,
we ought to be able to roughly measure levels of complexity by measuring energy flows.
And this is an experiment that Jason himself has attempted in a rough and ready way.
He's tried to estimate using what at the moment are little more than back-of-the-envelope calculations,
but as we'll see, they're quite powerful.
He's tried to estimate the amount of energy that flows through a given amount of mass
in grams in a given amount of time in seconds.
And he calls this the energy density.
This is a measure of energy flows.
And here are some of his results.
Now, his unit is ergs flowing through a gram in a given second.
But it's the numbers that really matter here.
So here are his units, stars.
You do the sum for stars, and you come up with the figure 2.
2 ergs per gram per second are flowing through stars.
Now, you do the same calculation for planets.
And the figure he comes up with is 75.
Note immediately, it's a lot more than two.
Now, you do it for animals, and the figure is 20,000.
And you do it for human society today, modern human society.
And the answer is about 500,000.
Now, the point is that even if these calculations are out quite significantly,
the differences are so striking that they suggest that there is something to this rough correlation
between energy density flows and complexity.
So, Chesson's results, if they're accurate,
suggest conclusions of fundamental importance for big history.
Most of the universe we've seen has remained very, very simple.
Imagine someone picks you up.
They plonk you randomly, somewhere in the universe, completely randomly,
and you reach out and you grab a handful of the universe.
What are you going to grab?
You're not going to grab a person.
You're not going to grab a planet or a star.
The odds are overwhelmingly that you will grab a piece of cold, empty vacuum.
So, most of the universe is extremely simple,
yet the upper level of complexity has increased.
And Chesson's calculations suggest that living organisms are more complex than stars,
and modern human societies may be amongst the most complex things we know.
This, I think, may be the answer to the student who's depressed,
by the sense that the scales of the modern accounts of creation of big history
make them seem small and insignificant.
Now, I have to say that Stephen Jay Gould disputed this sort of conclusion
in a famous book called Full House, which is full of baseball statistics.
But his real objection, I think, was not to the idea that I'm suggesting,
but to the idea that the average level of complexity has increased.
In fact, as I've said, the universe remains very simple.
It's simply that some very complex objects have appeared,
and those are the things we're going to be interested in.
It's not that the average level of complexity has increased.
Now, there's something else we can say about complex things.
More complex objects appear to be rarer and more fragile than simpler objects.
And that's why, even though they've appeared,
they may not have changed the average level of complexity of the universe as a whole.
Stars, for example, are more common and survive longer than butterflies.
And the simplest thing of all the vacuum is, of course, much more common than either.
So if you're complex, you're probably rare, you're probably also fairly fragile,
which is an idea that I think has quite a striking message for modern human society,
which is fantastically complex.
Okay, let me summarize these ideas.
Roughly speaking, it seems that complexity can be measured
by the density of the energy flows through different complex entities.
And these calculations suggest what intuition suggests as well,
which is that over time, the highest levels of complexity have increased.
More complex things have appeared in the course of the 13 billion years
that the universe has existed.
Now, it has to be said straight away that a physicist hearing this sort of argument
might be worried that there's something paradoxical about them.
For at first sight, it seems to contradict one of the most fundamental laws of physics,
and that's the second law of thermodynamics.
Now, to deal with this argument, I'm going to talk very briefly.
Remember, as a historian, not a physicist, about the laws of thermodynamics,
because we have to get this argument straight.
What are the laws of thermodynamics?
They describe the relationship between energy and work.
Work simply means the ability to make things happen, to cause change.
So it's a very fundamental concept in any understanding of the universe
and the nature of change.
The first law of thermodynamics, and I should say both of them were formulated in the 19th century,
says that the total amount of energy available in any closed system
that's any system closed off to other flows of energy,
and the universe itself is a closed system, is fixed.
The total amount of energy in a closed system is fixed.
That's the first law.
However, at any particular point in the universe or any particular time,
the form, the distribution, and the intensity of energy can vary.
And this matters, because work can be done only when energy is distributed unevenly.
If it's distributed unevenly, it can flow from one place to another,
from one level to another, from the top to the bottom of a waterfall,
from the boiler to the condenser of a steam engine.
So for energy to do work, there have to be inequalities,
gradients, differences of some kind.
Now there's one more thing about these flows of energy.
As energy flows along these gradients, along these inequalities,
its distribution tends to even out.
And what this does is reduce the capacity of energy to perform work.
Let me just give a very familiar example, the battery.
A battery, a charged battery, is charged in the sense that one of its terminals
has a surplus of electrons, the other has a deficit of electrons.
There's an imbalance of electrons at the two ends of the battery.
As the battery does work, electrons flow from one terminal to the other,
until eventually the distribution of electrons has evened out.
And at this point we say the battery has run down.
Now note that energy has not disappeared.
Nothing contradicts the first law of thermodynamics.
Energy is simply distributed more evenly, so it cannot flow or do work.
What the physicists say is that the level of simplicity or disorder
and the word they use is entropy has increased.
Entropy has increased.
Things are evened out.
There's less possibility of energy doing work.
The second law of thermodynamics was formulated by a German physicist, Rudolf Clausius,
who lived from 1822 to 1888.
And what it does is it generalizes these principles
and states them in the form of a scientific law.
And what it states essentially is that differences in energy levels
tend to diminish as work is done,
and entropy, this measure of disorder or simplicity, increases.
What this means in layman's terms, I think, is the amount of energy that can do work
is steadily diminishing.
I think what that means when applied to the universe as a whole.
Applied to the universe as a whole, what this seems to mean
is that energy flows ought to be decreasing over time.
Incidentally, if you doubt that the second law of thermodynamics affects your daily life,
think of the bedroom of a teenager.
And the question is, does disorder naturally increase?
Well, yes.
How do you re-establish order?
You have to put a fair bit of work into it.
So this is a sort of very elementary personal example of what we mean by entropy.
Now, one of the consequences of this argument is, as Stuart Kaufman puts it in a book on complexity,
as follows, the consequence of the second law is that order,
and I've used the word structural complexity,
order, the most unlikely of all possible arrangements, tends to disappear.
It follows that the maintenance of order requires that some form of work be done on the system.
This incidentally explains why you need energy flows to maintain complexity.
And he goes on.
In the absence of work, order disappears.
Hence we come to our current sense that an incoherent collapse of order is the natural state of things,
or to put it in very simple terms,
the universe ought to be getting simpler and simpler and simpler rather than more and more complex.
Complexity ought to be decreasing, not increasing.
So that's the problem.
And it's a problem that scientists are likely to see very quickly in facing this idea of increasing complexity.
So how can we deal with it?
How can the upper levels of complexity increase if energy flows in the universe are constantly being run down?
There have been several attempts to solve this apparent paradox.
And once again, I'm describing these in extremely simple terms,
but I think nevertheless we can get the gist of it.
The Nobel Prize winning chemist, Ilya Prigorzhin,
whose dates are 1917 to 2003,
suggested that there may exist within matter itself a spontaneous tendency towards self-organization.
In other words, what he's hinting at is the possibility that there are laws of nature
that we don't yet fully understand that tend to counteract the breakdown of order
described in the second law of thermodynamics.
As yet though, it has to be said, his ideas are immensely stimulating and immensely rich,
but it's been impossible to identify such laws clearly.
So this remains a hypothesis to be tested,
but there is fortunately a much simpler answer to the problem of entropy, and it goes like this.
It may well be true that energy differentials are diminishing over the entire universe,
so that in some sense the amount of energy that can do work and create complex things is diminishing.
Nevertheless, it may still be true that locally in little pockets these differentials, these gradients are increasing.
Let me give you one example which is going to take us into our next few lectures.
The force of gravity packs energy and matter into smaller spaces.
It's a force that attracts matter and energy together, so it tends to pack stuff into smaller spaces.
That itself creates differentials because it means that there are areas of greater density and areas of lesser density,
areas of higher temperature, areas of lower temperature.
And eventually we'll see these differences are crucial to the construction of stars.
So gravity tends to increase these differentials, and by doing so, it allows local flows of energy.
That, incidentally, is why planets are good places for complex beings such as us.
Once you've created a star, you have a massive flow of energy because stars pump energy into the cold of surrounding space.
Like little hot spots dotted throughout the universe.
For us, this is very, very important indeed.
Gravity fortunately has created these powerful energy differentials and we depend on them.
And what it reminds us is that complexity has its own geography.
Once complex things appear, like stars, they create the preconditions for more complex things.
And that's why when complexity appears, it seems to appear in the universe in little pockets
hanging around the first complex things, which are stars.
So complexity, we can say, appears in the hinterland of stars.
But it doesn't appear in the stars themselves or rather higher levels of complexity don't appear in stars.
What happens?
In stars, the energy flows are too violent.
In empty space, well away from stars, the energy flows are too weak.
Planets, which hang around stars in their hinterlands, are just right.
And we can think of this as the Goldilocks principle.
So it's no accident that increases in complexity are likely to occur around stars.
So whether a sustained energy flows, for example, near stars,
but not too violent flows of energy, complexity can build and accumulate over long periods of time.
Eric Chesson has suggested a third possible source of free energy, of energy that can do work.
And that's the expansion of the universe itself.
He suggested that the universe, as it expands, constantly creates new energy imbalances.
And this ensures that work can always be done somewhere in the universe.
But the crucial thing for us is the knowledge that even if the second law affects the universe as a whole,
it doesn't necessarily affect every particular corner of the universe.
And we live in a corner where there are huge energy flows, where complexity can be created.
So my conclusions about complexity do not contradict the second law.
Because in the long run, local energy flows do diminish energy differentials in the universe,
but while they exist, they can create complex things.
So wherever there are local flows of energy, it's possible to create complex things.
Now, that's a long and elaborate tour around the second law of thermodynamics.
And it's necessary to clear the ground for our understanding about the nature of complexity.
The rest of this course will trace the astonishing creative process of increasing complexity,
as new complex things appear leading eventually to you and me and modern human societies.
The idea of increasing complexity will provide a thematic unity for this course.
In the next lecture, we'll ask another unifying question about big history, and that is this.
Why should we trust the astonishing claims made by modern scientific accounts of the past?
What is the status of the story that we can tell within big history?
Thank you.
This series of introductory lectures is looking at what big history is,
and at some of the challenges we face in trying to construct an account of the past at all possible scales.
I've argued that the problem of dealing with multiple scales can be handled.
In fact, we can turn it into a virtue, because we'll find that each scale illuminates the others.
And in the last lecture, I argued that something like this is also true with the problem of coherence.
Instead of a rag bag of disparate stories, we find that there are some central themes,
and I suggested one of the most powerful of them might be that of complexity.
And this theme can help each scale to illuminate the others.
What we'll be doing is seeing complexity taking many, many different forms.
Now, here's one more problem, one more challenge we have to face
if we're to construct a viable account of big history.
And we can describe it, if you like, as the question of trust.
How can we possibly know all these things?
Or rather, how reliable is the account of big history that I will offer in this course?
After all, I've already made some outrageous statements about things such as the size and age of the universe.
Why should you trust those claims?
So this lecture asks why we should take the claims of modern science,
because this course, after all, is based on modern science.
And I'm using science in a very general term, so that it includes historical science, also known as history.
Why should we trust the claims of modern scientific research into the nature of things?
But I'll also argue in this lecture that we should never treat any of the claims of modern science dogmatically.
In short, this lecture is about the nature of truth and the types of claims on truth that we can make in a course on big history.
Now let's explore this issue of truth and trust in more general terms.
Whatever society you live in, everyone needs to ask the same fundamental question over and over again,
which is why should I believe the stories the experts tell me?
How can I distinguish between competing claims about the nature of reality, the nature of the universe?
How should I decide which of these claims to trust?
Now put more deeply and more fundamentally, the question we're asking is, what is truth?
And the question, what is truth and how can we know truth when we find it is discussed in the branch of philosophy known as epistemology.
If epistemology discusses, how do we know what we think we know?
How can we know anything about our world?
I'm not a philosopher and I'm not going to attempt a highly nuanced account of this.
But the ideas I offer will, I think, capture enough of these arguments for us to go a long way.
So I'm really skimming the surface of some very complex philosophical discussions here.
What I'm going to focus on is certain types of claims about reality and those are the claims made within modern science.
These are essentially claims about the nature of the real world, of its past and present.
What is the world like? What has it been like in the past?
They are not ethical or moral claims.
That's a completely different branch of philosophy and I'm not going to be talking about that sort of claim.
I'm going to be talking about statements about the way the world is and has been, statements about reality.
Now, in principle, there are two extreme positions we could take to any statement about reality
or any broad claims about the nature of reality.
I'll call the first of them absolutism and it goes something like this.
The absolutist claim is there is a real world out there.
With a bit of effort, we can get real knowledge of that world.
So this is what I'll call absolutism and it has the implication that any particular claim that's made about the real world
can in principle be adjudicated to be correct or incorrect.
That's the first position. The second position we'll describe as relativism and it goes something like this.
We can never really know if what anyone says is true or not.
We can't even know whether to trust our own senses because they may be conveying inaccurate impressions about the real world.
All we really have is a lot of stories.
You might as well pick one of those stories randomly in order to choose which one to believe in.
And that's an extreme statement of the relativist position, epistemological relativism.
One of the great explorations of this sort of argument comes in the work of René Descartes in the early 17th century.
Descartes famously imagined that there was an evil demon who inserted sensations and thoughts into his head
and what that did was create a fake impression of a real world.
So all the experiences Descartes had were simply inserted there by the evil demon.
And his question is this, sounds absurd, probably it is absurd, but how could we tell if this was true or not?
How could we prove it's wrong?
It turns out that it's surprisingly hard to prove that it's not true.
There's a modern version of this sort of experiment, it's known as the brain in the vat.
There's a brain, it's in a vat of chemicals, it's plugged in to lots of electrodes
and the mad scientist is pumping information into the brain and keeping it alive in this soup of chemicals.
And you are the brain.
Everything you think about the world around you is completely unreal.
It's simply an impression that the mad scientist is pumping into your brain.
That's an illustration of how seriously one must take extreme relativist positions.
Now in practice, neither absolutism nor relativism is tolerable in its extreme forms.
Now if you're a philosopher, maybe you can tolerate them.
And if you're just living in the ordinary world, you actually have to take up a position.
We can't live with either of these positions.
Why not?
Well let's take extreme relativism.
Why is extreme relativism intolerable?
It's intolerable because as I live my life, I have to act.
And to act, I have to commit to statements about the world I live in.
I cannot act unless I make a commitment to the truth of some statements.
Let me give a banal example.
Whenever I cross a road with traffic on it, I get a lot of information about cars moving towards me, moving away from me.
Eventually I commit to the idea that there's a space wide enough for me to cross without getting run over.
We have to do this all the time, day in, day out.
We cannot dither forever.
So I must trust in some information.
Is that a tiger I see in the shadows?
Or is it a deer?
It's really important to get it right.
But we can't wait forever.
We have to commit to one solution or another, or a more modern problem.
I have a sudden excruciating headache.
What do I do?
It really scares me.
Do I trust my new age friend who offers a mantra over a crystal?
Or do I go to a hospital?
So over and over again, we actually have to take up positions.
We cannot dither forever.
We have to decide who to trust, what information to trust.
That's why relativism, extreme relativism, is intolerable.
Something similar is true also of extreme absolutism.
Why can't we tolerate extreme absolutism?
Well, the reason is equally simple.
We all know that some information, including some of the information we receive from our senses,
and some people are unreliable.
We can be deceived about the way the world is.
Again, let me give a banal example.
It seems so obvious that the earth that we walk and live on doesn't move.
You throw a ball up in the air, it comes down the same point where you throw it.
Clearly the earth isn't moving.
And yet, in fact, we have very good reasons for thinking that the earth is moving around the sun
at a speed of about 66,000 miles per hour.
We can be very easily deceived.
So the real question is not should we choose extreme absolutism or extreme relativism.
It's how can we negotiate a sort of reasonable, workable position between those two extremes?
How do I decide what claims about reality to trust?
From all the information I receive, how do I pick the information that's most likely to be right?
Now, I've said we can think of epistemology, these questions about the nature of truth in terms of trust.
What information do you trust?
To this question too, I think there are two very broad types of answer that are worth distinguishing.
The first is that you trust information because it's authoritative.
You trust authority.
We trust the source of the information.
We trust a priest.
Or we trust a sacred text such as the Quran or the Bible.
Or we trust a scientist because they're wearing a white lab coat and have a beard.
In many situations we have little option but to accept the word of the experts.
If I take my car to be fixed, I'm going to trust the work of the mechanic because I haven't a clue how to fix it.
Every time you fly in a plane or undergo surgery, you're putting a lot of trust in the expertise of those around you.
So we cannot entirely avoid simply relying on authority on trust.
But in pre-modern societies, the role of trust was probably even much greater because so few people were educated
and there didn't exist modern forms of science.
There's a second type of answer to this question, what types of information do you trust?
And that is evidence.
You use evidence.
The alternative is to trust no claims unless they're based on strong evidence.
Descartes, who I've mentioned already, lived between 1596 and 1650.
And in his thinking, he offers an extreme example of this commitment to evidence.
He's writing in the early days of the Scientific Revolution.
The Scientific Revolution as a whole is characterized by a tendency to reject authoritative judgments and prefer judgments based on evidence.
He decided, in a famous thought experiment, to distrust everything for which he didn't have firm evidence.
To not leave anything unless he had good evidence for it.
This is an extreme commitment to evidence.
He concluded, after reasoning that his senses could not be trusted because of the evil demon, which could be manipulating them,
he concluded that there was one thing of which he could be certain.
And that was that he was thinking.
And if he was thinking, that must mean he exists.
This is the famous Koikito ergo sum.
Think about it.
Even the evil demon wants us to have a self that can be deceived.
So this, for Descartes, was rock bottom.
And this is a wonderful example of trying to rely as much as possible on evidence.
Unfortunately, in practice for most of us, life is too short to get direct evidence about everything.
So we always have to rely on both evidence and authority.
We often simply have to trust people who assure us that the evidence is there if we want to look for it.
Now, one of the distinctive features of modern science, and Descartes sets the benchmark here,
is that it prefers as much as possible to rely on evidence rather than authority.
It obeys, if you like, the rules of the law court.
And there are several important implications of this fundamental fact about modern science.
To just tease out some of them.
The first is that it applies to all modern forms of scholarship.
All modern scholarship, not just experimental science.
It applies also to history.
It runs the gamut from cosmology to geology to medicine to biology to astronomy to history.
Your opinions in all of these fields in modern scientific scholarship don't count unless you can offer evidence for them.
So they all share the same basic rules of evidence, even if the specific types of evidence they use are different.
A chemist may rely on a carefully conducted lab experiment,
while a historian may rely on the use of archival evidence.
So in this sense, all, let me say, historical disciplines.
Thus to say, all disciplines concerned with the past, from cosmology to human history, can be described as scientific.
Now, a second implication of this commitment to evidence.
Even if we rely on authority, and we've seen that a lot of the time it's unavoidable, we have to rely on authority.
We want some assurance that the authority in turn relied on evidence.
Even if you can't check the evidence yourself, and sometimes it's just too difficult to do that,
you need some reassurance that the evidence is available somewhere,
so that if you are willing to spend the time and effort, you could check it.
This means that science tries to avoid all claims that rely purely on authority.
Always you'll find a scientist or a historian saying,
this is where the information comes from, if you want, you can check it.
Now, a third consequence of relying on evidence, all scientific scholarship,
makes some concessions to relativism.
Science very rarely makes absolute claims on its statements about reality.
It sometimes makes very, very strong claims, very confident claims,
but rarely are they made absolutely.
There's always the sense that as in a law court, the evidence is never perfect.
New evidence could kick in, and that might change the story we're telling.
So there's a certain quality of provisionality about science,
that some more dogmatic views of the world lack.
Yet despite this, science is not relativistic.
The fact that it's a bit tentative sometimes doesn't mean it's relativistic.
All stories are not equal.
Modern science did not believe that all stories are equal.
Some evidence is always better than none.
And the story based on lots of good evidence should always be preferred to the story based on none.
Think of it in a law court.
If I say, your honor, I feel in my bones that my client is innocent,
despite the fact that she was caught standing over the murder victim
with a bloody knife in her hand and blood spattered all over her body.
How far am I going to get?
I've simply offered an opinion. That's all. I'll get nowhere.
And there's one final point about science and evidence,
which is that science has an advantage that the law courts often don't have.
The law courts have to make a verdict, and often it's final.
Science can keep revisiting the verdicts it makes.
It can change its mind. It can evolve and improve.
And over time, the story should slowly get more trustworthy as more evidence accumulates.
And sometimes this accumulation of evidence leads to changing the verdict
to a new idea about reality, such as the introduction of Big Bang Cosmology,
which is the subject of the next lecture.
Modern science is powerful because it's been improving its stories in this way for several centuries.
So in summary, scientists are by and large pretty confident that they're on the right track
because their claims rest on a vast amount of carefully tested evidence
accumulated over many centuries and subjected to multiple tests.
This is the basis of the claims made in this course,
which is why in this course we will spend a fair bit of time discussing the evidence
on which particular claims are based.
Now, I want to move on and give a sort of illustration of some of the ways
in which evidence builds a more convincing picture of reality.
And I'm going to do it by focusing on a theme of immense importance in big history.
And that is what I'll call chronometry.
I've referred already to chronometry.
By chronometry, I mean the techniques we use to date past events.
How we assign absolute dates to events in the past.
Dating techniques, if you like.
It is, after all, a remarkable achievement that we can assign dates to past events.
So, dating techniques.
And I'm not, of course, talking here about going out on a Saturday night,
something I have to explain in my first year course when I say this.
So the question is, how do we date past events?
What evidence has been used to construct the chronologies
that provide a fundamental framework for this course in big history?
Now, I want to very briefly survey changes in the techniques we use.
And I'll be focusing mainly on the Western tradition,
which has played a dominant role in modern historiography.
Similar techniques have evolved within many different cultural traditions.
Okay.
Chronology is fundamental to history.
It's so fundamental that we often take it for granted.
The ability to simply assign dates to things that happen in the past
without that ability our account of the past would have no real structure.
It would be fluid.
It would lack shape entirely.
So, to tell a decent historical story, we must be able to assign dates to past events.
Now, how do we do this?
It's possible to identify two major revolutions in chronometry,
in our ability to assign dates to past events.
In societies without writing, such as those that existed throughout most of human history,
in the Paleolithic and in many parts of the world until very recently,
the sense of the past depended on memory, on oral tradition.
Now, oral tradition can actually hold, as anthropologists know, a lot of rich information.
But it also tends to lose chronological precision within a few generations of today.
So it's very hard within oral tradition to construct an account of deep time
that has much chronological structure to it.
And this is why most communities without writing seem to have projected time back
just a few generations into the past,
before which time seems to sort of turn a corner of some kind.
And it flattens out and loses structure.
This is the time of the Aboriginal-Australian dream time, for example.
But it's also something we all experience in our personal memory, going back too far.
And your sense of the past begins to lose structure and to flatten out.
So that's our first sense of time, depends on memory and oral tradition.
Then came the first Tronometric Revolution.
And it's associated with the appearance of writing from about 5,000 years ago.
What writing could do was to fix information outside human minds.
And it could fix information also about dates.
So as written documents accumulated over many centuries and eventually millennia,
it allowed those interested in the past to construct a more rigorous
and better structured account of the past.
The Jewish historian Josephus, writing in the 1st century CE,
captures this difference very well, and this is what he writes.
The Egyptians, the Chaldeans and the Phoenicians
have preserved the memory of the most ancient and lasting traditions.
For all these nations, he wrote, inhabit such countries
as our least subject to destruction from the climate and atmosphere.
And, he goes on, they also take in a special care
to have nothing forgotten of what was done among them,
but their history was esteemed sacred and ever written in the public records
by men of the greatest wisdom.
So here we have a sense of the power of writing to preserve dates in the past
and therefore to enable us to create a structured account of the past.
But written documents, even if they allowed us to extend our sense of history further back in time,
were also a trap because they could warp our account of the past.
They highlighted the activities, above all, of those who wrote and those who read.
And this meant that what stood out in this account of history
and this system of dating, if you like, based on writing,
was the activities of elite groups.
A sense of history based on writing obscured the activities of most humans
and, above all, it excluded the history of the natural world
or of anything that existed before the invention of writing.
So we get a sense that history, our understanding of the past,
because it's based on written records,
essentially means the deeds of great, above all, literate human beings
and excludes the natural world.
The French naturalist Bouffan captured something of this warped view of the past in the 18th century.
The past, he wrote, is like distance.
Our view of it would shrink and even be lost entirely
if history and chronology had not marked out the darkest points by beacons and torches.
That's the power of chronometry, yet he writes,
Despite these lights of written tradition,
let us go back a few centuries and how uncertain are our facts.
Besides, history tells us only about the deeds of a few nations,
i.e. the doings of a very small part of mankind.
The rest of the human race is as nothing, either for us or for posterity.
So, this first chronometric revolution allows us to date events based on written records,
but it gives us a rather warped view of history,
and that view of history eventually became naturalized
and became what we normally think of as history.
Now, written evidence could also deceive.
Christian theologians, such as Eusebius of Caesarea, who died about 340 CE,
used written evidence to attempt the sort of project we're attempting here,
to date the origins of the universe.
What they did was they took written evidence from sacred texts, the Old Testament.
They're focusing, of course, on the bagats.
So and so, bagats, so and so, who bagats, so and so.
And they took all these bagats and they calculated that God had created the universe in about 4000 BCE.
This was good evidence-based work based on literary evidence for dating.
And their calculations would dominate Christian cosmology for 1500 years.
Now, from the 17th century, new evidence began to undermine the traditional Christian chronology.
The 17th century geologists already began to doubt the traditional timescale of four or five or six thousand years.
The Danish geologist Nicola Steno, for example, who lived between 1638 and 86,
and the English physicist Robert Hook, who lived between 1635 and 1703,
were both struck by finding fossils that seemed to be of marine creatures but were high up in mountains.
Now, both immediately understood what this seemed to mean.
It seemed to mean that the mountains had once been under the sea.
And what this hinted at was long, slow geological processes which must have taken many, many thousands of years,
much longer than the traditional Christian chronology.
In fact, it turns out their suspicions had been anticipated as so many things
by the artist Leonardo da Vinci, who found fossils of marine animals in the Tuscan hills.
In 1795, the geologist James Hutton, often described as the real discoverer of deep time,
argued that the Earth's surface had been formed by very slow processes such as erosion and uplift,
acting over unimaginably long periods of time.
And he wrote famously,
We find no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end.
So geologists were beginning to cotton on to the fact that the Christian dating scheme didn't quite work.
They could also come up with relative dating.
They could say which layer preceded which layer in geographical strata,
but what they couldn't do is assign absolute dates to those layers.
Despite the skepticism about the possibility of assigning absolute dates to events in the geological past,
attempts were made to date the age of the Earth scientifically from as early as the 18th century,
and they were based on the idea that the Earth was like a slowly cooling body of metal.
In the 19th century, William Thompson, Lord Kelvin, who lived from 1824 to 1907,
calculated using this method that the Earth was probably about 20 to 40 million years old,
though he allowed the possibility that it might be perhaps 100 or even 200 million years old.
But would it ever be possible to construct an absolute chronology for events before written records?
As late as the early 20th century, written records remained the basis for most of our dates.
The archaeologist Colin Renfou writes,
Before World War II, for much of archaeology, virtually the only reliable absolute dates were historical ones.
Tutankhamun reigned in the 14th century BC.
Caesar invaded Britain in 55 BC.
Even archaeology is relying mainly on written evidence.
And in his outline of history, written just after World War I,
H.G. Wells attempted a sort of big history,
but he knew perfectly well that he had no real dates before the first millennium.
Chronology, he wrote, only begins to be precise enough to specify the exact year of an event
after the establishment of the eras of the First Olympiad and the building of Rome.
The situation was transformed by a second chronometric revolution,
whose impact was felt after World War II.
The real breakthrough came with the discovery of radioactivity at the end of the 19th century,
and the realization that radioactive materials break down so regularly
that if you could take a lump of material and estimate how much the radioactive material had broken down,
you could estimate when it was formed.
Marie and Pierre Curie discovered radioactivity and both eventually died of cancer,
caused by handling radioactive substances.
A New Zealand-born physicist, Ernest Rutherford,
showed that radioactive materials break down with such regularity
that you could use them to date events in the remote past.
But it was not until the Second World War that Willard Libby at the University of Chicago
made these methods practical with his pioneering of carbon-14 dating.
And from the Second World War, there appeared a whole range of different techniques,
many of them, but not all of them, based on radiometric dating,
that allowed us to do something quite remarkable.
And that was to assign absolute dates to events before writing
and as far back as the origins of the universe.
In 1953, Claire Patterson of the California Institute of Technology
showed that the Earth was about 4.5 billion years old.
Now, these dating techniques provide the chronological framework for a course in big history.
We couldn't have constructed such a framework
before the emergence of radiometric dating and other chronometric techniques after the Second World War.
So we've seen that science makes strong but not absolute claims on the truth
and I've tried to show how evidence was used to build up our modern account
of the chronology of the universe. Thank you.
applause
music
Lecture 5, Threshold 1, Origins of Big Bang Cosmology
applause
In the previous lecture, we talked about evidence.
I was asking why and how should you trust the stories that modern science tells
about the origins of everything, about the universe, the stars, the planet and so on.
And I focused on the idea of evidence, arguing that science focuses above all on evidence.
So in the light of that discussion, here's a question you might want to ask at a flagging cocktail party.
It is, how did the universe begin?
Now, I think there's a sporting chance that you'll actually get an answer to that question.
So you might have to go to the next step, and the next step is the next question, which is,
so how do you know? Were you there? What's your evidence?
How can we know about something as remote as the origins of everything?
What I want to do in this lecture is to approach that question.
I'll be describing the modern answer in the next lecture.
But what I want to do is show how over several centuries, evidence and argument slowly built up
that provided the foundations for the modern scientific answer
to the most fundamental historical question of all, which is, how did everything begin?
And we'll see that the crucial breakthroughs came in the 1920s.
Now, one reason for going back into the past and looking at how the modern story was constructed
is so that we avoid taking the modern answer for granted.
It's all too easy. You'll hear about Big Bang cosmology and you'll think, oh, that's the way it is.
If we see how painstakingly over many centuries that modern answer was constructed,
it may be a reminder of the power of evidence and the difficulty and effort
with which the modern scientific claims about the past were constructed.
So that's what I want to do.
I want to look at how over several centuries, evidence accumulated
from which the modern answer was constructed to this deepest of all possible questions.
I'm focusing on evidence.
Now, this is something I'll do in many of these lectures.
Instead of just describing the modern answer, I want to contrast it with traditional answers,
both to see some of the similarities and to see some of the differences
between modern scientific accounts of reality
and the traditional accounts that have shaped people's thinking for so long in human history.
As far as we know, all societies have asked this question, how did everything begin?
And as far as we know also, many societies have offered deep, rich and powerful answers to that question.
We'll look at some of them in the next lecture before describing the modern answer to this question.
But here, I want to focus just on one tradition and that's the Western Christian tradition.
The reason for that is not that rich and powerful ideas about the origins of everything
didn't emerge anywhere else.
It's simply that the modern answer emerged out of the Western cultural tradition,
out of that particular cultural environment.
So, let's look at traditional ideas within Christian culture about cosmology
and the origins of the universe.
Christian ideas about the universe were dominated for almost 1800 years
and still to some extent today, for many people, by a combination of Christian theology,
which of course saw God, the Christian God, as the ultimate creator of everything,
the prime mover of this process, the ultimate explanation for everything.
That's the first part. And secondly, a model of the universe that was created by
an astronomer and mathematician Ptolemy of Alexandria, whose dates were 90 to 168 CE.
So, he lived the second century after Christ.
And Ptolemy's model, I'll argue, counts as scientific by the best standards of his time.
What Ptolemy's model did was to put the earth at the center of the universe.
So, this is an earth-centered model of the universe.
Now, I want to look briefly at Ptolemy's model.
In the Western tradition, it was hugely powerful.
It was influential, as I said, for 1500 years before it started losing some of its power.
By the standards of the time, Ptolemy's model was good, empirical, evidence-based science.
However, it was not the only scientific account available in the Mediterranean world 2,000 years ago.
Some astronomers, such as the Greek Aristarchus, who flourished four centuries before Ptolemy,
had argued again on the basis of the best evidence available and some quite sophisticated mathematics
and observation that, in fact, the sun was at the center of the universe.
So the idea of an earth-centered universe was not the only model of the cosmos available.
There was also this other quite powerful, evidence-based model of a sun-based universe.
Why did Ptolemy's version end up dominating?
Well, it's a combination of two things.
Perhaps the most powerful reason is because it acquired eventually the backing of the Christian church.
It dominated thought in the Christian world as a result for at least 1500 years.
But as I said, it was also a pretty good scientific account
in the sense that it was based on a lot of careful thought, careful observation, and evidence.
So what did Ptolemy's model of the universe look like?
Let me describe it briefly.
Ptolemy's model presupposed a universe with a radius, and we're sort of calculating backwards to estimate this.
He didn't put it quite like this, of course, but with a radius of about 80 million miles,
a diameter, in other words, of 160 million miles.
Now, as it turns out, this is quite close to the true distance from the earth to the sun.
At the center of this universe was the earth itself.
Around it were several perfect, transparent, rotating spheres.
These were solid and crystalline.
And what they did was they carried the heavenly bodies.
So they carried the sun, the stars, the planets, some of the comets.
Each of them moved in different ways, and it was the movements of those spheres
that explained the way the heavenly bodies seemed to move in the sky.
But there was another crucial point to his model of the universe, and it was this.
The spheres existed in a heavenly realm that was perfect.
This was a realm of perfection. This was the divine realm, Augustine City of God, the realm of God.
The earthly sub-lunar zone, the world beneath the moon, was the world of imperfection.
So here you have a universe split into two realms, a heavenly perfect realm and an imperfect earthly zone.
Now, both evidence and authority gave powerful support to this model.
First, the evidence. It did a very good job of explaining the movements of heavenly bodies.
And in fact, that was the result of the fact that it was based on very, very careful observation
and a lot of very careful and hard calculation. It was designed very well.
It also explained something else that we're all familiar with,
and that's a common sense fact about reality, is that the earth appears to be still.
So it made sense to a lot of people to say that the earth is the still center of this entire thing.
Think about it.
If the earth is moving at many thousands of miles an hour, shouldn't we feel the wind rushing past us?
If we throw a ball into the air, shouldn't it fall down to the right or the left or in front of us or behind us?
Intuitively, the idea seems right.
Ptolemy's model was also supported by our authority.
It was supported by the authority of the Catholic Church, which had argued since the third century CE
that God created the universe in about 4,000 BCE, about 4,000 years before Ptolemy wrote.
And the Church eventually put its backing behind Ptolemy's model of the universe.
So these two things, evidence and authority, explained the power and authority of this model of the universe.
Then, from the 16th century, new evidence and questions began to accumulate that undermined this familiar traditional story.
Now we're going to move 1,500 years forward to the 16th century, to the early days of the Scientific Revolution.
And one of the main features of the Scientific Revolution in Europe was, of course, that authority began to give way more and more to evidence.
Authority, the fact that something had been said for a thousand years, became less and less a reason for accepting it.
And more and more, people such as Francis Bacon demanded evidence for any large claim he made about the universe.
And this is when the Ptolemy model began to break down.
Here are some of the reasons.
The first type of problem emerged was really logical and mathematical.
The Polish-born astronomer Nicholas Copernicus, whose dates are 1473 to 1543,
showed that if we switch our thinking in a sort of gestalt switch of the sort I mentioned before,
like the sort of switch that Ant and the Helicopter underwent,
and if we suppose that perhaps, let's consider the possibility that the Earth is moving,
that the Earth, like all the planets, is actually orbiting the Sun,
let's consider the possibility of a Sun-centered universe.
If we do this, he showed, then some of the problems of the Ptolemaic system, and it had quite a few, seemed to vanish.
Let me give one illustration.
This is the so-called retrograde motion of the planets.
Every year, if you watch the orbits of the planets, or you watch the movements of the planets in the sky,
they seem to move and then suddenly stop and reverse and move back in a sort of curve and then carry on in the same direction.
The Ptolemaic system always struggled to deal with that.
You had to add various sort of mechanisms to this machinery in order to explain it.
They were known as epicycles, but it was a bit ad hoc and a bit arbitrary.
What Copernicus showed is that if you assume that the Earth is orbiting around the Sun along with the planets,
you're bound to see something like this.
So Copernicus proved that a Sun-centered model probably made as much sense as the traditional one.
A second type of evidence was based on careful observation of planetary movements and combined with careful mathematics.
A Danish astronomer, Tycho Brahe, who lived 1546 to 1601 and is widely regarded as probably the finest of all naked-eye astronomers,
showed a curious thing.
He showed that comets appear to be moving not around the Earth, but sort of through the crystalline spheres.
And this immediately suggested perhaps the crystalline spheres weren't so rigid or as impenetrable as the Ptolemaic system assumed.
And here's another problem.
A German astronomer and mathematician, and actually he was an astrologer as well, Johannes Kepler, who lived from 1571 to 1630,
showed that the planets don't move in the perfect circles the Ptolemy system required.
After all, this was a realm of perfection.
He showed that in fact they move in ellipses in sort of squashed circles.
There was a third type of problem and this derived from new observational techniques, a new observational technology, the telescope.
Galileo Galilei, the great Italian astronomer, whose dates are 1564 to 1642, was one of the first astronomers to use telescopes.
And what he showed, or one of the things he showed, was that the heavens are far from perfect.
He was able to show, for example, that if you look at the sun, it seems to have spots and they looked like a rash on someone's face.
They come, they go.
That's not quite what the Ptolemaic system required.
Now, that may seem rather trivial, but it's actually an idea that had really fundamental implications.
And the main implication was this.
Ptolemy, we've seen, had divided the universe in effect into two realms, a perfect heavenly realm and a very imperfect earthly realm.
If Galileo was right, that in fact the heavenly realm too was imperfect, if its circles were ellipses, if Jupiter had red spots on it, what did this mean?
Well, one possibility was that the two realms weren't so separate.
Perhaps, and it was Newton who would first say this very clearly, perhaps all of the universe operated according to the same fundamental laws.
That was a profound breakthrough in thinking about cosmology and the universe.
Now, the new Earth-centered system also faced problems of its own, and one of the main ones was, why don't we feel the Earth moving?
Why don't we feel the wind rushing past us?
Well, here, it was simply a matter of some careful logic and thinking, and Galileo was one of the people who explained this anomaly.
He explained that we don't experience our movement through space because everything around us shares it.
Now, think about this.
If you're traveling in a plane and you throw a ball up in the air, what do you expect to happen?
Do you expect it to sort of whizz to the back at 500 miles an hour?
No.
You expect it to just drop placidly back into your hand.
And that's because everything in the plane is moving along with you.
So this is why we don't experience movement on the Earth.
Right.
We have the Ptolemaic system breaking down, a number of new ideas emerging, and during the scientific revolution of the 17th century, a new model of the universe emerges.
And it builds on these mathematical, logical, and observational findings.
One of the crucial figures in the scientific revolution is, of course, Isaac Newton.
His dates are 1642 to 1727.
In 1687, he publishes the Principia Mathematica.
And what he did here is, for the first time, to construct a law of the universe that clearly applied both to the heavens and on Earth.
He showed that Kepler's laws of planetary motion with elliptical orbits made sense if you made one assumption.
It's a very simple one.
And the assumption is that there exists throughout the universe a single force, which he called gravity, by which every object with mass is attracted to every other object with mass.
And he argued, to be more precise, that the power of gravity depended on the mass of the objects involved and the distance between them.
It increased as they got more massive.
It decreased as the distance between them increased.
Now this became the basis for a whole new view of the universe.
The cosmology that emerged out of the scientific revolution had no obvious limits in time or space.
And what this suggested was that the universe might be, though no one was sure, infinitely large and infinitely old.
But the idea of an infinitely large universe raised new problems.
It was no perfect solution to the problems that had been raised about Ptolemy's universe.
Kepler had pointed out, for example, if the universe was infinite, there ought to be in the universe an infinite number of stars.
And they ought to be emitting an infinite amount of heat and light, and everyone on Earth and you and me should be burnt to a crisp.
And that's painfully what's not happening.
That was one problem.
In an infinite universe there ought to be too much energy, too much light, too much heat.
A second problem only really emerged in the 19th century, and it's linked to the second law of thermodynamics that I discussed in lecture three.
The second law of thermodynamics implies that the amount of usable energy in the universe is slowly running down.
And a consequence of that, of course, is that in an infinite universe there ought to be no usable energy.
And again, this was painfully not true.
So there were always problems with an infinite universe, but probably the consensus for several centuries was that this was at least a possible picture of how the universe was.
Now let's look at how these various problems were resolved in the 20th century with the appearance of an entirely new model of the universe.
And the crucial figure here is an American astronomer, Edwin Hubble, whose dates are 1889 to 1953.
The Hubble Space Telescope, of course, is named after him.
And he did his crucial work in the late 1920s.
He came up with evidence in that period suggesting something that seemed, for most astronomers and cosmologists, completely unexpected.
And this was that the universe seemed to be expanding.
Everyone had assumed that infinite or finite, it was sort of fixed in size.
What he showed was that it seemed to be expanding.
And the crucial piece of evidence was known as the red shift.
Now I'll come back to the red shift in a minute, but briefly let me talk about Hubble because he's himself a fascinating character.
He was one of the first American Rhodes scholars to study at Oxford.
And Bill Bryson, in his delightful short history of everything, which I'll quote several times because it's a wonderful short introduction to the history of science, says this of Hubble's experiences of Rhodes scholar.
Three years of English life evidently turned his head, for he returned to Wheaton, Illinois, his hometown in 1913, wearing an Inverness cape, smoking a pipe, and talking with a peculiarly oratund accent.
Not quite British, but not quite not.
And it would remain with him for the rest of his life.
It's as if he was trying to be Sherlock Holmes.
He clearly had pretensions.
He was also a remarkably lucky person.
He was a superb athlete.
His Bryson again on Hubble as a school athlete.
At a single high school track meeting in 1906, writes Bryson, he won the pole vault, shot put, discus, hammer throw, standing high jump and running high jump, and was on the winning mile relay team.
You can count them.
That's seven first places in one meeting.
He could have made a career as an athlete.
He could have made a career as a boxer.
In fact, he ended up as an astronomer.
One more thing about Hubble.
He never won a Nobel Prize, despite having made one of the great discoveries of the 20th century.
And this rankled.
And the reason he didn't was because astronomy was not recognized as a branch of physics.
So you couldn't award Nobel Prizes for astronomy.
And Hubble spent most of the last part of his life in a bitter campaign to persuade the awarders of the Nobel Prize that astronomy should be regarded as a branch of physics.
Okay, back to Hubble's achievement in the 20s.
To understand what he did, we must go back to the 19th century.
We must go further back in time.
And what we must look at is attempts to map the universe.
These became much more sophisticated in the 19th century.
And there were two crucial problems.
Can you measure the position of stars?
And that meant, essentially, can you measure how far away they are from the Earth?
And secondly, can you measure their motion?
Can you measure whether they're moving towards us or away from us?
Now, if you can do those two things, you've got a much better idea of the shape of the universe.
So this is what 19th century astronomers spent a lot of time doing.
Now, let's take these in turn.
First, how far away are the stars?
The first precise measurements of stars, of distances to stars, were made in the 19th century.
And they were based on the principle of parallax, which was very familiar to Greek astronomers.
They knew how to do it.
They just didn't have the observational equipment needed to do it.
What's parallax?
Hold your finger up in front of you, then waggle your head back from side to side, okay, like this.
Now, what you'll notice is that the finger seems to move against the background.
Something similar happens with the Earth and stars.
The Earth orbits around the Sun, so it's moving back and forth.
That's like me waggling my head.
A near star, we can imagine, is in the position of the finger, and remote stars count as the background.
So that's how parallax works with stars.
Now, the Greeks understood that in principle, if I knew several things, for example,
I knew how distant the remote stars were, and I can take them as infinite, if you like, that'll do it.
I can measure how far the near star seems to move, and I know how far my head is moving, or how far the Earth is moving.
If I know these three things, I can use trigonometry to find out how far my finger is, or how far the near star is.
So that's parallax.
The principle is very simple.
It requires high school trigonometry.
Unfortunately, even the nearest stars are so remote that we cannot see the shifts with the naked eye.
And that's why the first precise measurements of stellar parallax and distances to near stars were made in the 19th century.
They depended on improved telescopes and more careful observations, and they were not made until about 1838.
And what they showed, as we've seen already, is that even the nearest stars are trillions of miles away, trillions of miles away.
Now, that tells you something about nearby stars.
What about more remote stars?
Finding a way of measuring distances to more remote stars was the work of another American astronomer, Henrietta Levitt,
whose dates are 1868 to 1921.
Henrietta Levitt is not generally given enough credit in this story, and it's partly, quite frankly, because she was a woman in a quite patriarchal world.
But what she did was something very, very impressive indeed.
She developed a way of measuring the distance to more remote stars.
She studied Cepheid variables.
They're named after the constellation Cepheus in which they were first found.
And they're stars which pulse their light increases and fades in a regular pattern.
And we now know this is because they're very old stars in the final stages of their life.
What she found is that the cycle of the pulse correlates with the size and brightness of the star.
Now, in other words, if you know the cycle, you know how bright that star is and how big it is,
because size or mass and brightness correlate as well.
Now, this gave you a way of measuring their distance.
You measure their apparent brightness on Earth, you know now what their real brightness is,
and you can estimate how much light has been lost between you and the star, and therefore you can estimate its distance.
So Cepheids gave us a sort of benchmark, a candlestick out there to measure the distance to more remote stars.
And it was using Cepheids that Hubble made his first great discovery.
He found that there were some Cepheids outside our galaxy, the Milky Way.
This was revolutionary, for it showed that the universe consisted, as the philosopher Kant had suggested,
of many, many galaxies, not just of one.
That was already a revolutionary idea for astronomers.
Now we need to ask other stars moving.
How can we tell if remote stars are moving?
And to understand this, we need to go back to 1814 to the work of a German glassmaker, Joseph von Fraunhofer.
He invented the spectroscope.
What the spectroscope does is it's like a prism.
It takes light, it breaks it up into its various frequencies, into its component wavelengths.
This means you can study light, including the light from stars, and you can see the different frequencies it contained.
What Fraunhofer saw was that if you take star light, you'll very often find absorption lines.
These are dark lines where some of the energy of a particular frequency seems to have vanished.
What are these? What's going on here?
Laboratory experiments showed that these absorption lines corresponded to particular elements in the stars,
because each element absorbs light at a particular frequency.
So hydrogen, for example, absorbs at a particular frequency, or a particular group of frequencies, and the same for other elements.
So using the spectroscope, you can tell the chemical composition and temperatures of stars.
That itself was a remarkable achievement.
But more was to follow.
In the late 19th century, another American astronomer, Vesto Schleifer,
who's working at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona,
showed that some stellar absorption lines looked odd.
They didn't quite correspond to the elements you expected.
They seemed to be shifted either towards lower frequencies, towards the red end.
They were redshifted, in other words, or to higher frequencies, to the blue end.
They were blueshifted.
What was going on?
What does it mean if you suddenly find the hydrogen line is shifted?
He interpreted these as redshifts, as the results of a Doppler effect,
that we all know the Doppler effect.
An ambulance is coming towards you.
The sound goes...
Why does it drop?
As it's coming towards you, the sound waves are sort of squashed up.
So the pitch seems to be increased as it's moving away from you.
The sound waves seem to be stretched out, so the pitch drops.
And what Schleifer said is something like this is going on with starlight as well.
If a star is moving away from us very fast, or a distant galaxy,
the waves are going to be stretched out.
They're going to be redshifted.
If it's moving towards us, they'll be blueshifted.
It's a Doppler effect.
And it's using these devices that Hubble transformed cosmology.
He combined the technique for measuring the distance to stars
and the technique for measuring their movements.
And he showed in the 20s that all the most remote objects in the universe
were redshifted, all of them.
This was already strange.
They're all moving away from us.
Then he showed a second thing even more profound.
This was that the further away they were, the more redshifted they are.
In other words, what this is showing is that the further away an object is,
the faster it's moving away from us.
What does this mean?
Well, if our part of the universe is typical,
what it means is that the entire universe is expanding.
It's as if we're sitting on part of a hand grenade,
and we're watching other bits flying away from us.
And the most remote bits are going to be flying away from us faster than the others.
A Belgian astronomer, George Lemaître, pointed out,
he implied that in the distant past, everything in the universe
must have been crushed into a single, tiny, dense hot point.
A primeval atom, as he called it.
And it followed remarkably that by measuring the rate of expansion of the universe,
we could date the moment of creation.
This was a remarkable breakthrough and a remarkable achievement.
It solved the problems posed by an infinite universe
for an expanding universe had to be finite,
and it had to contain finite amounts of light and heat.
It also fitted well with Einstein's recent theories,
which, though he was reluctant to admit this at first,
implied that the universe must be either expanding or contracting.
Nevertheless, for two decades, hardly anyone took the idea seriously.
The name Big Bang was coined for it by one of the naysayers, Fred Hoyle,
who we're going to meet again.
He'd worked with Gamov.
He used the phrase with derision.
This was just a Big Bang that this is all about.
In fact, the theory, as we'll see in the next lecture,
would be clinched in the 1960s.
So what I've done in this lecture is show how evidence accumulated
over many, many centuries for a rather startling new image of the universe,
and it showed that the universe was expanding,
and that meant that the universe had a beginning,
and that meant that the universe had a history.
And that is why the universe deserves to be regarded as a part of history,
and that's why it's part of this big history course.
Thank you.
Lecture 6 How Did Everything Begin?
So, here we are.
We're at the very beginning.
There's nothing around us.
Don't be fooled by the stuff you can see here.
There's nothing around us.
No space.
There's not even any time.
Zilch.
But something is about to happen,
and that will be the first of all historical events.
In fact, what's about to happen is that a universe is about to be created.
So, what's the recipe for making a universe?
Another great cocktail party question is you're swigging your margaritas.
To survive the cocktail,
you'll need another non-technical answer like the one I tried to give to earlier questions.
So, that's the sort I'll offer.
100 years ago, this question would still have seemed the purest metaphysics.
How did everything begin?
It would have seemed a question beyond evidence,
and only be answered philosophically or within religious traditions.
Now, we have the evidence, and I described some of it in the last lecture,
to offer a powerful, rigorous, evidence-based scientific answer to this fundamental question.
And what I want to do in this lecture is look at the outlines of that answer
and some of the evidence on which it's based.
In the last lecture, I described the origins of modern cosmology
and how western cosmology evolved over 2,000 years.
And what we saw was that in the early 20th century,
careful scientific work and a lot of observation began to yield a powerful answer
to questions that had previously seemed unanswerable, such as how the universe was created.
So, now I'm going to look at that answer.
Okay, so this is clearly, for any attempt, like this course in big history,
at a unified count of the past, this has to be the first question of all.
Where did everything start? How did everything start?
Where did all the stuff around us come from?
The living and the dead? The simple and the complex?
Our parents? Our aunt Edna? Our grandparents? Our children?
As far as we know, all human societies have asked this question.
It's one of the deepest questions one can ask and every society must have asked it.
And they've also offered answers to it.
But we also know that most of the answers that were offered in earlier societies
were based on very, very limited evidence.
And that explains in part why they're so astonishingly variable.
But we should not dismiss those answers.
They may seem naive to us.
Often embedded in them was a huge amount of good empirical observational evidence.
They were rich, they were intelligent.
They were based often on as much evidence as a society could muster.
And even more important, they mattered. They really counted.
And the reason they counted was that they told people who they were and where they were.
Imagine a group of people in the Paleolithic sitting around a campfire,
wondering how did everything start?
Imagine the kids asking all these questions about the stars, about the mountains, and so on.
And saying, finally, one of them saying, yeah, but how did everything start?
Someone is going to have to give them an answer.
And that answer, whether we like it or not today, is going to be powerful.
So it's very important when we look at the scientific account of origins
to also pay our dues to the many other alternative accounts
that have been developed in the past.
It'll also help us understand the modern answer
if we compare it briefly with those traditional answers.
So let me try and summarize the types of answers.
This is just a very loose summary of the types of answers
that different societies have offered to this fundamental question.
Here's the first, and perhaps the most common.
Traditional answers to the question of the origins of everything often begin with a god, or gods.
They say the universe was created by a deity or deities.
Now, sometimes the gods are a bit amorphous.
They sort of lurk in the background, but they're there nevertheless.
Here's a passage from a Mayan text
that hints at how the gods may always be lurking in the text there, in the back there.
This is a very rich text, and I'm just quoting a sentence or two from it.
So I hope it just captures the power of the idea of a deity to explain origins.
Here's how it goes from the Popul Vuh, the council book.
Whatever might be is simply not there.
Only murmurs ripples in the dark in the night.
And now a god will appear.
Only the maker, modeler alone.
And notice how this god is a bit like a potter.
It's a very, very common image of God as a potter, making the world as a potter makes clay.
Only the maker, modeler alone, sovereign, plumed, serpent.
And now the gods seem to multiply.
The bearers, baguettas, are in the water, a glittering light.
They are there.
They are enclosed in ketzal feathers in blue-green.
Now that's one very common strategy to explaining the origins of everything, to suppose the existence of a god.
But there's a problem with it, of course.
You can imagine a bratty kid at the back of this group who's discussing the origins of the universe saying,
yeah, but who made God?
Who made the modeler?
Who made the guy in the ketzal figures?
And this is actually a very deep question.
It's always going to be there.
And I suspect most people in most societies were aware of at the back of their minds that there was this dilemma.
Who made God?
Okay, second strategy.
And these strategies aren't separate.
They often overlap, as we'll see.
Many creation stories posit a sort of initial chaos out of which something emerged.
Now the word emergence is very, emerged is very appropriate here.
I've talked about emergence, the way that out of chaos something new can emerge.
And I think something similar is going on in these stories.
Here's a source.
It's the Rig Veda.
The basic Hindu scriptures, which were probably written down about 3,200 years ago.
And once again, I'm just picking a tiny passage from a very, very rich religious tradition.
Here's how it goes.
There was neither non-existence nor existence then.
What we're talking about is a sort of state in which there's not quite nothing,
but there's not quite something, the sort of potential.
That, in fact, is very like modern accounts of the vacuum.
There was neither non-existence nor existence then.
There was neither the realm of space nor the sky which is beyond.
What stirred?
Where?
In whose protection?
Can you see how a sort of conscious being of some kind seems to be creeping into the story?
There was neither death nor immortality then.
There was no distinguishing sign of night nor of day.
And then we get very clearly the idea that lurking somewhere is a conscious presence, a deity of some kind.
That one breathed, windless, by its own impulse.
I love that phrase and I think it captures very beautifully the difficulty of explaining origins.
So that's another strategy.
The universe emerged out of a primeval chaos, perhaps with a nudge from a god.
Many creation stories talk about a birth from egg.
Some accounts describe the universe as a sort of living organism,
which, like living organisms, was born from a parent or from a sort of cosmic egg.
Note the analogy with Lemaitre's idea of a primeval atom.
And then another alternative is to think of the origins of the universe as a sort of awakening.
This is poetically perhaps even a deeper idea.
There are many traditions that describe it as a sort of awakening, but here too you'll find
there always seems to be a god lurking in the background.
Here's a story from the Kararu people of South Australia.
Inside a deep cave below the Nullarbor Plain slept a beautiful woman, the sun.
The great father spirit, this is where the god appears of course,
but the great father spirit gently woke her and told her to emerge from her cave
and stir the universe into life.
The sun mother opened her eyes and darkness disappeared as her rays spread over the land.
She took a breath and the atmosphere changed.
The air gently vibrated as a small breeze blew.
It's a lovely image.
Okay, now let's move on to the modern account of origins.
One of the things the modern account doesn't do is posit a divine creator
and it does so very, very systematically and very deliberately.
And there are two real reasons for this.
The first is one we've already seen.
If you posit a creator you may be not solving your problem of creation,
but actually simply creating a new one.
There's an infinite regress.
You have to explain the creator.
You have to explain how the creator of the creator was created and so on.
But there's a second problem with deistic accounts of the origins of the universe.
There's no evidence.
Science knows of no evidence-based way of showing the existence of a creator god.
So this is something, even if you believe in such a god,
you cannot talk about that god in terms of science.
Nevertheless, the modern account of origins faces the same problem that all creation stories face.
And I'll call that the paradox of beginnings.
Who created god? Who or what laid the egg?
How can you get from nothing to something?
And quite frankly, the modern account of creation has no better solution than any other story.
We just don't know what there was before the Big Bang.
We don't even know if time or space existed.
It's actually characteristic of science,
unlike some forms of institutionalized religion, that it admits its ignorance at this point.
Most cosmologists will say, we reach a point where we can say nothing more.
Now, cosmologists are also human.
And this means that many of them actually are desperately trying to think their way through this puzzle.
Stephen Hawking has famously suggested that perhaps the question's a bad one.
Perhaps we're simply getting caught in a bad question.
If the universe, if the geometry of time-space, of space-time is actually circular,
then to ask what there was before the beginning is as ludicrous as to ask what is north of the North Pole.
Perhaps it's a silly question.
Others are pursuing different directions.
You may be aware of the fact that at CERN, on the Swiss-French border,
they're building the Large Hadron Collider, which will be the largest particle collider ever built.
CERN is the European Organization for Nuclear Research.
The Large Hadron Collider will be a 27-kilometer-long circular tunnel.
It's running under the French Swiss border.
It's designed to smash particles together with almost as much violence as during the Big Bang.
In other words, to take us back to the conditions of the Big Bang and to see what happens.
This is evidence with a vengeance.
We may actually get new evidence about what happened at that moment.
So watch this space. It'll be interesting.
Okay, so at the beginning, the modern account of creation is really as arbitrary as any other.
We just don't know.
Then, from a tiny, tiny fraction of a second after the moment of creation,
we can tell, and this is itself quite remarkable,
we can tell a well-grounded scientific story based on masses of carefully tested evidence.
It begins 13.7 billion years ago.
Now, to explain this story, I'm going to need some very, very large and very, very small numbers
for which we'll use exponential notation.
So let me briefly explain what I mean how exponential notation works.
Some of you will be very familiar with this, but in case you're not, let me try and explain it briefly.
You remember Powers of Ten?
I talked about that in the second lecture.
It's a similar sort of principle.
A figure one with two zeros after it is a hundred.
That represents two tens multiplied together.
The figure one thousand with three zeros represents three tens multiplied together.
So in exponential notation, what we do is we write ten,
and then we put a tiny superscript two for a hundred,
and ten to the three for a thousand.
That means ten multiplied by itself three times.
One million is ten to the six on the same principle.
Now, we can do the same with fractions.
One hundredth is naught point zero one.
It's one tenth, one over ten, multiplied by itself twice.
So one tenth multiplied by itself.
So what they do is they write ten to the minus two.
That means instead of ten multiplied by itself, it's one over ten multiplied by itself.
Ten to the minus three is one thousandth and so on.
So I hope you've got the basic principle of exponential figures
because now I'm going to start using them.
Okay, now imagine we're back at that campfire.
I'm a modern scientist trying in very simple language to explain what actually happened.
Here's the story.
At the very beginning, we can't say anything.
So our story is going to start ten to the minus thirty-five of a second
after the moment of creation.
Yes, that's a decimal point followed by thirty-four zeros with a forlorn one later.
It's that small a bit of a second.
From that moment on, we can tell a good scientific story.
So just before that, something appeared.
What can we say about this thing that appeared?
Well, it was tiny.
It was probably the size of an atom.
It was also inconceivably hot.
Think as many gazillion centigrade as you like and you're probably not there yet.
The other thing we know about it is that it's expanding very, very rapidly,
like a sort of huge explosion.
That was the point of Fred Hoyle calling it the Big Bang.
And as it's expanding, it's cooling.
So already we know quite a lot about it.
It's tiny. It's very hot. It's expanding.
And as it's expanding, like every expanding gas, it's cooling.
At the very beginning, matter and energy are indistinguishable.
It's a sort of mishmash of stuff and forces and things.
Then what we'll see happening is that out of this mishmash, distinct things start to appear.
It's as if through the fog we can start to see clear things.
It may help to think of phase changes.
A phase change occurs when steam cools and turns into water.
Steam gets cooler, cooler, cooler, cooler, cooler.
Then suddenly, at 100 degrees centigrade, it turns into something else.
It turns into water.
Now a whole series of phase changes, a bit like that,
happened in the early universe as it cooled.
Things and forces appeared.
Gravity appeared.
And the strong and electromagnetic forces,
and also the fourth fundamental force, the weak nuclear force.
Now I'm not going to talk about the weak nuclear force.
We don't need it. I don't want to go there.
But the four fundamental forces appear.
The strong force holds the nuclei of atoms together.
The electromagnetic force holds atoms together
because it holds particles with opposite charges together
and drives apart particles with the same charge.
It drives electricity and magnetism.
Now something quite bizarre happens.
It's not the only bizarre thing happening.
It's known as inflation from, now another figure,
10 to the minus 33 to 10 to the minus 32 of a second,
the universe expands much faster than the speed of light.
Now even the non-scientists amongst you will have heard
that nothing can move faster than light.
So what's going on? Well, what's happening is
nothing is necessarily moving faster than light.
The fabric of space-time itself is expanding faster
than the speed of light.
And the universe grows from the size of an atom
to the size of a galaxy.
So this phase is known as inflation.
Then something else bizarre happens.
And remember we're still in the very early moments
of the first second of the universe's history.
Particles start to appear out of the murk, quarks,
which are what protons and neutrons are made from.
And they appear in opposite forms.
And when these forms meet, they annihilate each other.
So a huge amount of matter appears,
and then immediately it annihilates itself,
releasing energy according to Einstein's formula,
E equals mc squared.
And what this means is that of all the matter created
in the beginnings of the universe,
only perhaps something like a billionth remains.
So all the matter around us seems to consist of about
a billionth of the matter created in the Big Bank.
The rest was annihilated in this bizarre game
of subatomic musical chairs.
Okay, it leaves just a few survivors this game.
And these full-on survivors form protons,
which are positively charged, and neutrons,
which are electrically neutral.
And they will form the core of atoms.
Electrons also form.
They're lighter than protons and negatively charged.
They play the same game of musical chairs
as electrons with positive charges annihilate electrons
with negative charges, leaving just one billionth
of all the ones that are created.
And the rest goes in a flash of energy.
Now let's move forward.
A few minutes after the Big Bank,
what does the universe look like?
Well, it's now bigger than the galaxy.
It consists of a hot plasma.
That is to say, a mixture of energy
and charged subatomic particles.
It's a bit like the center of the sun.
Because the universe is so hot,
particles and energy are moving fast
and interacting violently.
The particles, the subatomic particles,
they're all charged.
They all have electrical charges.
They're all sparkling.
Energy and matter have sort of separated,
but not yet completely.
Now we move on 380,000 years, OK?
And we come to the next crucial episode in the story,
the next crucial phase change, if you like.
Suddenly, at a certain point, at a certain temperature,
a lot of things change.
And this is what happens.
The universe is now cool enough
that protons with positive charges
can capture electrons with negative charges.
And they form simple atoms of hydrogen and helium.
Now atoms are neutral
because the two charges cancel out.
So imagine all the matter in the universe
suddenly turns into atoms
and goes electrically neutral.
And now energy and matter
are more separate than they've ever been before.
In fact, energy can now flow through the universe freely
without getting entangled in the charges
of these loose subatomic particles.
And early Big Bang theorists hypothesized
that at that point there would be a sort of flash of energy.
Now what happens?
The universe cools.
It enters what we can think of as a sort of dark age
that may have lasted several hundred million years.
If you want to try and imagine it,
though honestly there's a lot of guesswork here,
you should probably imagine empty space
with a very, very faint glow of energy through it.
Now that's a very simple account,
attempt to capture the modern story of creation.
I hope you'll agree that in some ways it's quite as strange
as any creation story you can find in any culture.
And we also have to say one other thing about it.
Scientists are very confident that most of what they say
is about the origins is more or less accurate.
It's evidence-based.
But there's a lot we don't know.
Let me just give you one powerful illustration.
We know that there's a lot of stuff out there
that we know nothing about.
This is known, the scientists call this,
because I can't think of anything better to call it,
dark matter or dark energy.
We know it's there
because studies of the movements of galaxies
show that the stuff out there
that's exerting a powerful gravitational pull.
But we can't figure out what it is.
We can't identify anything associated with that stuff.
And yet this stuff may account for up to 95%
of the universe's total mass.
I think how bizarre that is.
What we're saying is that we seem to understand
only 5% of the universe.
Now that's the downside.
We have to admit that our understanding is still fairly limited
in that area.
There's a lot of the universe we don't understand.
But now we're going to put that aside
and carry on with the story.
Of that stuff, by the way,
70% may consist of undetected forms of energy
and 25% may consist of matter-in-forms we can't detect
because they don't emit radiation,
such as cold, dead stars or planets,
or perhaps because they're too small,
such as the subatomic particles known as neutrinos.
Again, watch this space.
There's exciting science going on.
Certain experiments could clarify some of this.
It's the sort of thing in which there could be
very important developments in the near future.
Okay, now what I want to do is look at the evidence.
Why should anyone believe this weird story?
And the answer is because, like all the strong claim science makes,
it rests on a colossal amount of carefully tested evidence.
And what I want to do is just briefly describe
some of the main pieces of evidence.
And I'm going to describe five main pieces of evidence.
Okay, first piece of evidence for the Big Bang,
the red shift.
And I've already described this.
As we saw, Hubble used the idea of the red shift
to show that the further away an object was,
or rather the most remote objects in the universe
seemed to be traveling away from us.
And the further away they were, the faster they were traveling away.
And the red shift, you'll remember,
is the fact that absorption lines on stellar spectra
sometimes seem to be shifted towards lower frequencies,
towards the red end of the spectrum.
And that's interpreted as a sign that they're moving away from us.
It's a Doppler effect.
Now, this evidence meant that the universe must be expanding.
If it's expanding at some time in the past, it was infinitely small.
That's the first and most powerful,
well, perhaps not the most powerful,
but one of the most powerful pieces of evidence for Big Bang cosmology.
I qualify that because it actually took 20 years or more
before cosmologists began to take this idea of a Big Bang seriously.
The second piece of evidence is the cosmic background radiation
or CBR.
And it's this piece of evidence that really clinched Big Bang cosmology
in the 1960s.
It's slightly technical, but I'm going to try and describe it in non-technical language.
Until 1965, Big Bang cosmology had a rival theory,
the steady state theory,
and this was supported amongst others by Fred Hoyle,
who we've met before,
and who was to become one of the great outspoken opponents of Big Bang cosmology
and opposed it throughout his life.
Hoyle and his colleagues argued that the expansion of the universe
was caused by the continuous creation of new matter.
This was a process that had been simply going on forever.
Matters always being created in the middle of the universe.
Now, you've got two rival theories of the origins of the universe.
The scientific question to ask is,
how can we discriminate between them?
And supporters of Big Bang cosmology had an idea
about how you can tell the difference between them.
You remember that about 380,000 years after the Big Bang,
I said that matter and energy finally separated
as matter became electrically neutral.
And theorists argued there must have been a sort of flash of energy at this point,
and it ought to pervade the entire universe.
And they argued it should still be detectable as a very, very weak energy source
coming from all parts of the universe.
If it could be detected, they argued it would prove their theory right.
But how could you detect it?
How can you discriminate between these two models of the universe?
Well, it turns out it was found more or less by accident in the middle of the 1960s.
In 1964, two engineers, radio engineers, Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson,
were trying to construct an extremely sensitive radio antenna
to detect signals from satellites.
They wanted to eliminate all background noise,
so they could hear signals, the signals they wanted very, very clearly.
And as they tried to eliminate background noise,
they found there was a persistent sort of hum in the background that they couldn't get rid of.
They tried everything.
At one point, someone said, I should say that the antenna was a horn-like apparatus.
Someone said, I think there may be pigeons roosting there.
And as any scientist knows, pigeon droppings are matter.
They are not at absolute zero, so they're emitting radiation.
So perhaps this was the sort.
So they clean out the pigeon droppings, and it's still there, that hum.
And then eventually, someone said to them,
this is actually what was predicted by Big Bang cosmology.
There ought to be energy coming equally from everywhere in the universe, everywhere you look.
And that clinched it, because no other theory could explain this astonishing fact
of energy coming at you not from a specific point in place.
So you can say it's coming from that galaxy or this star, but from everywhere.
And that's what really clinched Big Bang cosmology
and made it the central idea of modern cosmology.
Very briefly, I want to list some other pieces of evidence in support of the theory.
One is just the age of the universe.
So this is the third piece of evidence.
Big Bang theory predicts that we can estimate the age of the universe,
and the estimates now are about 13.7 billion years.
No object has ever been found that's older than 13 billion years.
If the universe was in fact infinite, this would be very bizarre indeed.
But of course, this fits very well with Big Bang cosmology.
If the theory is right, then the young universe ought to have looked rather different from today's universe.
Because above all, it ought to be more compact.
Things should be closer together.
And if you look over huge distances in space, say you look 12 billion light years into space,
in effect, you're looking 12 billion light years away.
So you can see what the early universe was like.
And when you look at it, you find that indeed it is rather different from today's universe.
With cosmology, unlike any other historical discipline, we actually have time machines.
We call them telescopes.
That's the fourth bit of evidence, and the fifth is the chemical makeup of the universe.
Big Bang cosmology predicts that in the Big Bang, huge amounts of hydrogen and helium were made,
but there was no time to make any elements more complicated than that.
It predicts that something like three-quarters of the early universe should consist of hydrogen and most of the rest of helium.
And that, in fact, is exactly what you see when you look out at the universe.
So for these reasons, despite this bizarre story, Big Bang cosmology offers a scientific, well-tested explanation of how the universe was created.
However, this early universe didn't yet contain anything of much interest.
How can you get something more interesting in such a universe?
That's the question we pursue in the next lecture.
Thank you.
The First Stars and Galaxies
The last lecture described how Big Bang cosmology explains the origins of our universe.
In fact, the origins of everything that we know of.
So, we've got ourselves a universe.
That's the good news.
Without a universe, we're going nowhere.
The bad news is that the universe is still not terribly interesting.
It's got a bit of structure.
For example, there's a difference between matter and energy.
There are atoms, and I suppose you could say that in a sense, atoms are complex things.
But there's not much structure here.
I mean, after all, what's in it?
We have lots and lots of hydrogen.
Very simple atom.
One proton at the center.
One electron whizzing around in a shell outside.
We've also got lots of helium.
The thing about helium is that helium is an inert gas.
It's by many standards very, very boring.
There's not much you can do with helium.
So, we've got hydrogen atoms.
We've got helium atoms.
We've got lots of energy.
We've got all that cosmic background radiation sort of pumping through.
And what else do we have?
We've got so much cold, empty vacuum.
That's our universe.
So, here's the problem.
How can you move from something this simple
to the vastly more varied and beautiful world that we inhabit today?
How can you generate complex things with such simple components?
How do you build a complex universe containing objects like stars and galaxies and you and me?
Remember our definition of complexity?
We saw that complex things have structure.
They organize components into a given structure.
They have a certain amount of stability.
They last for a certain amount of time.
They have emergent properties.
New qualities appear once you create them.
And they depend on energy flows.
So, how can we get more complex things in this very simple universe?
What I want to do in this lecture is to take us across the second major threshold of this course
by describing how in this simple early universe
the first significant complex things were created.
It tells us the story of how the universe by a sort of bootstrapping
generated greater complexity from extremely simple ingredients.
The first complex objects in this universe were stars.
So, we're really talking about stars.
So, how do you make a star?
What's the recipe for a star?
This is another nice cocktail party question.
Everyone has stared at stars.
Everyone has probably asked this question.
But only in the last century or so has a good scientific answer emerged.
And what I'm going to try and do is describe that answer as simply as possible
and also describe some of the evidence on which it was based.
Okay, let's go back to the early universe.
The early universe was always a simple place
with vast clouds of hydrogen and helium atoms energy pouring through them.
So, the question was how do you create complexity with these very simple ingredients?
You have just two types of atoms, one of which is extremely unreactive.
You also have four types of energy.
You have the four fundamental forces.
Let me just summarize them.
Gravity, the force that Newton identified that pulls everything together.
Secondly, the strong nuclear force.
That holds the nuclei of atoms together.
Anyway, we're not going to talk about it much in this course.
Thirdly, electromagnetism.
Electromagnetism is going to loom larger because it's crucial in chemical processes
which we'll look at later on.
And the fourth is the weak nuclear force.
That's responsible for radioactive breakdown among other things,
but it's something that's not going to loom large in this course.
So, with these elements and these forms of energy, how do you create complex things?
It turns out that it can be done, which is fortunate for us
because otherwise we wouldn't be here.
But how?
At this point, we're going to focus on one of our forces, gravity.
In a sense, gravity is going to turn out to be the real hero of this group of lectures.
Gravity is a force.
It's a form of energy.
So, what it can do is it can do work.
It can rearrange things in interesting ways.
And we'll see that gravity began the process of taking this simple universe
and sculpting more and more complex things.
We'll see that gravity also did something else.
It also created energy gradients.
It created differences between areas of high energy and low energy.
And we've seen before these energy gradients are crucial if work is to be done
and complex things are going to be created.
Now, what is gravity and how does it work?
Newton, you'll remember, described gravity as a universal force of attraction
acting between all forms of matter.
It operated throughout the universe in the divine realm as well as in the earthly realm.
Every form of matter exerts a gentle tug on every other form.
In the early 20th century, Einstein showed that gravity also acted on energy.
And there's a very good reason for this.
And the reason is, as Einstein also showed, energy and matter are different forms
of the same underlying stuff.
And one of the odd things about modern science is that it has no widely recognized name for that stuff.
But when we talked about the Big Bang, at the very earlier second,
the Big Bang consisted of that stuff.
There was no difference between energy and matter.
So both energy and matter exert a gravitational pull.
Einstein showed something else.
He showed that the cause of gravity is the geometry of space-time.
And Newton was always worried about the idea of gravity as a force
because it seemed somewhat arbitrary.
In fact, some of his rivals accused him of introducing
a sort of something magical into his science
because he had no idea how to explain it.
Einstein came up with a very elegant explanation
which suggested that space-time itself is shaped in different ways.
And it's that shaping that affects how things move through it.
So gravity is a function of space-time.
But I'm not a physicist.
Einstein's account of gravity is quite technical and quite complex,
and Newton's will take us a long way.
So I'm going to stick with the idea of gravity as a force of attraction.
It's easier to grasp, and frankly, it can explain all the phenomena
we need to understand in this course.
Newton showed that the strength of gravity depends on two things.
It increases with the mass of the objects involved.
It decreases as the distance between them increases.
Now, think what this means for the early universe.
Imagine a very early universe in which you have these clouds of matter,
hydrogen and helium atoms,
and imagine that they're distributed perfectly evenly throughout the entire universe.
Each atom and each bit of energy is exerting a tiny pull on everything else.
But if everything's distributed perfectly equally,
what's the result going to be?
It's going to be a sort of traffic jam, gridlock,
in which nothing can move, nothing can happen.
Everything is tugging on everything else with exactly the same force.
Gravity can't do anything in such a situation.
But imagine now that there are some tiny unevennesses in this universe.
Say there's an area where there are a few more hydrogen and helium atoms.
The density is slightly greater.
Now there, the gravitational pull is going to be slightly greater.
Gravity is going to have slightly greater power.
It can take that denser region and start smashing it in on itself
as all the atoms start pulling in on each other.
The result of this is that what gravity can do
is take tiny, tiny unevennesses in the density of the early universe,
or even in its temperature, and these often amount to the same thing,
and it can magnify them.
And it can rearrange matter and energy in more interesting ways.
What it does essentially is it makes the universe lumpier.
By doing that, it creates the sort of differentials we mentioned
in the lecture on complexity.
You start getting areas where there's a lot of stuff,
and areas where there's not much stuff.
So it's absolutely crucial for Big Bang cosmology
that the early universe not be perfectly uniform.
Now the question is, can we detect this?
Can we observe the early universe?
Can we find out whether it was or not?
And it turned out that there was a method of doing this.
In the 90s, astronomers realized
that they could study the cosmic background radiation,
and by doing so they could tell a lot about the early universe.
A satellite, the COBE satellite, the Cosmic Background Explorer,
has provided the crucial instrument for detecting tiny, tiny differences
in the energy of this cosmic background radiation.
Radiation is incredibly uniform,
but with delicate instrumentation you can in fact detect tiny differences.
So this is what astronomers started doing in the early 1990s.
And what they found was that there were indeed tiny differences in temperature.
And what these imply, of course, is tiny differences in pressure.
They imply exactly the sort of beginnings of lumpiness
that you need if gravity is to get to work,
to turn the early universe into something more interesting.
There's a very famous picture that many of you will have seen
that was published in 1992,
and it was associated with the work of astronomer George Smoot and his team.
And what they did was they constructed a very famous graphic of the early universe.
It looked like a cosmic egg, which was nice, and I'm sure not accidental.
But what it really did was it showed the results of meticulous studies
of tiny differences in the temperature of the cosmic background radiation.
You may remember that picture.
It showed areas that were slightly redder, slightly hotter,
areas that were slightly bluer, slightly colder than the rest.
So here are the differences, the differentials that gravity needed to get to work.
And now it gets to work, and what happens?
So gravity takes these denser areas.
Within them, gravity is greater.
So they pull together.
All the atoms within them start pulling together.
So the universe splits into vast clouds of matter, into billions of clouds,
each of which is beginning to contract under the power of its own gravity.
Let me quote George Smoot on the significance of the tiny variations he found.
He wrote,
These small variations are the imprints of tiny ripples in the fabric of space-time
put there by the primeval explosion process.
Over billions of years, gravity magnified these ripples into galaxies,
clusters of galaxies, and the great voids of space.
And Joseph Silk of Berkeley said, with perhaps pardonable exaggeration,
we are viewing the birth of the universe.
It was an astonishing graphic.
Okay, now let's take ourselves inside one of these contracting clouds.
As the cloud contracts under its own gravity, the pressure and temperature at its center rise.
Now this is a very familiar principle.
It explains why if you heat up a bicycle tire,
sorry, if you pump up a bicycle tire, the pressure increases and it heats up.
What's happening is you've got more atoms in a small space.
They bump into each other more, they bump into each other more frequently,
and they bump into each other more violently.
And we read that from outside as an increase in temperature.
So what's going on is more and more collisions are taking place within these atoms.
And eventually what we get is a phase change.
I've talked about phase changes before.
A point at which suddenly matter changes its form.
It takes on a new form.
The violence of these collisions initially just leads to atoms bouncing off each other.
Imagine two hydrogen atoms bouncing together.
The positive charges of the protons repel each other and the atoms bounce apart.
But once the temperature at the center of the cloud reaches 10 million degrees,
that's when you get the phase change.
At this point, the protons hit each other so violently,
or the atoms hit each other so violently that their nuclei overcome
the resistance of electromagnetism and fuse.
And two hydrogen atoms have become a helium atom.
This is fusion.
Hydrogen is fusing into helium at the center of the cloud.
Well, that's wonderful.
What we've got is more helium.
And I said before that helium is really rather boring.
So it may look as if the universe is getting less interesting,
but in fact something else is going on.
As these hydrogen atoms fuse,
a tiny amount of matter is transformed into huge amounts of energy.
And it does so in accordance with Einstein's formula E equals mc squared.
What that formula says is this.
The energy released when matter is converted into pure energy
is equivalent to the mass of the matter that's changed,
multiplied by the speed of light squared.
That's a colossal amount.
That's the c squared part of the equation.
And that's why when you convert a tiny bit of matter into energy,
you get huge release of energy.
A hydrogen bomb is doing exactly what happens at the center of a star.
And that's why hydrogen bombs are so...
release such colossal amounts of energy.
So in our cloud of stuff, we now have a sort of furnace at the center.
Fusion is going on.
The hydrogen atoms are fusing.
And something new has appeared, an emergent property,
this sort of furnace, this huge release of energy at the center of the star.
What this does is prevent the star collapsing any further.
Remember, gravity is still trying to smash it together,
but now it can't because of this furnace at the center.
And the balance between the energy from the center and gravity stabilizes the newborn star.
And the star lights up.
And now on, its stability will depend on a sort of constant negotiation
between the heat of its center, which prevents further contraction,
and the force of gravity, which causes it to contract.
The fusion that happens at the center explains why stars emit energy.
Heat and light from the center travel through each star
until eventually it's released into nearby space.
In our own sun, it may take a photon of energy one million years to reach the surface of the sun.
Then, of course, it rushes through the solar system taking just eight minutes to reach the Earth.
So suddenly what's happened is the universe has lit up.
We have light.
The universe is more interesting.
It's full of these hot spots that are pumping energy into cold space.
Now, how long can this go on?
Well, essentially, fusion can continue until a star has used up its stores of hydrogen.
This could take millions of years. Sometimes it takes billions of years.
But what happens when it runs out of fuel?
That we'll discuss in the next lecture, and that's a different topic.
Recent observations show that the first stars lit up about 200 million years after the Big Bang.
The earliest direct observations we know of at present go back to about 500 million years after the Big Bang.
But there were a lot of stars present then, so they must have started forming earlier.
So suddenly the universe has lit up.
Billions of stars have appeared, and now gravity starts working on the stars.
It herds them together into larger societies of stars, and we call these galaxies.
They may contain billions, hundreds of billions of stars, like our own Milky Way.
But gravity then works on galaxies.
It herds them into larger groups, which are known as clusters,
and herds clusters into even larger structures known as superclusters.
And these form huge membrane-like structures through the universe,
with vast areas of empty space in between.
However, beyond that scale, beyond the scale of superclusters,
gravity is too weak to overcome the expansion of the universe,
and it's at those scales that you can see what Hubble saw, which is the expansion of the universe.
You can see whole groups of galaxies moving away from each other.
Now, stars represent a new level of complexity.
In what sense?
They are structured.
They have stability.
They show emergent properties, and they're sustained by energy flows.
They have structure in the sense that they have a furnace at their core,
they have a reserve of fuel around it, and a surface from which they emit energy into space.
They are stable.
They have new emergent properties, such as that furnace at the center.
And of course, they're generating massive energy flows.
That, in brief, is the story of how stars are formed in a simple early universe.
Now, what I want to do is talk about the birth and death of stars.
And I want to talk about the evidence that we use to understand stars,
how they're born, and how they live.
As always, I don't want to rely solely on authority.
I want to try and give you some idea of the evidence.
Our understanding of star formation, the process I've just described,
depends largely on our theoretical understanding of processes such as fusion,
which is extremely well understood by nuclear physicists.
It's the basis of fusion weapons.
It's also the basis of attempts to create sustained fusion reactions as a way of generating energy.
That has proved a very tough challenge,
but it's something that physicists have been engaged on for 50 years already.
Scientists also understand the operations of gravity very well.
So these two things, understanding fusion and understanding gravity,
help explain the processes I've just described.
But observational astronomy also comes into it.
Observational astronomy can identify regions of our own galaxy, for example,
where we see huge clouds of matter that appear to be collapsing in on themselves
and forming new stars.
We can describe these, if you like, as sort of star nurseries.
It won't be hard to find a star nursery if you look on the internet, incidentally.
The Hubble space satellite has taken, as many of you will know,
absolutely gorgeous pictures of the universe in recent years.
And many of those show these star nurseries.
And you can see the new bright young stars often appearing in clusters like eggs in a nest inside them.
If you want, you can check out the Horsehead Nebula,
which is a very spectacular and beautiful example of such a region.
So to a certain degree, we can actually observe this process of star formation.
It's going on in the Milky Way all the time, and we know where it's happening.
Now, what about studying the life cycle of stars?
We've talked about their birth. What about their life cycle?
This is a tricky proposition, mainly because stars last so long
that we can never observe an individual star revolving.
This is one of those areas where our limitations,
the limitations of our capacity to deal with scales becomes very important.
So we have to find ways around this.
And what astronomers have done since the 19th century is to study millions of individual stars
and assume that each of them represents different parts of a star's life.
It's rather as if you took a sort of mass photograph of millions of humans at one moment in time
and then tried to figure out the lifetime of humans by comparing different individuals.
Now, how in practice do astronomers do this?
Lecture 5 mentioned the invention of the spectroscope by Joseph von Fraunhofer in 1814.
You remember the absorption lines. You break up the spectrum from starlight
and you see the different frequencies of light in it,
and you find that some of those frequencies are darker than others.
There are lines of darkness. These are the absorption lines.
And we saw that each of these frequencies represented a particular element
which was absorbing light at particular frequencies.
So, for example, you can identify lines that show the presence of hydrogen, helium, carbon, and other elements.
So spectroscopes can tell us a lot about what's inside stars.
They can also tell us about the relative amounts of different chemical elements within a star
because the absorption lines, you can measure the strength of the absorption lines.
In fact, how much of the light of a particular kind is absorbed.
So we can estimate roughly the proportion of different elements in a different star.
And what these studies show is that stars consist, as we've seen already,
overwhelmingly of hydrogen and helium.
And that's what we expect.
The early universe itself consists overwhelmingly of hydrogen and helium.
And, in fact, the universe today still does.
But if you measure them carefully, or if you measure the ratio of hydrogen and helium,
you see something else.
You see that the amount of helium within particular stars varies quite a lot.
In some stars you find there's a lot of helium and, in fact, more than hydrogen.
And this shows us that here we're dealing with a star that's been burning hydrogen for a long time,
fusing it into helium, so that what's happening is, at the center of the star,
a lot of helium is accumulating.
In fact, we know this is true of our own sun.
Originally, it probably contained about 27% of helium.
Now, 62% of our sun consists of helium.
And that's the sort of indication that our sun is perhaps about halfway through its stock of fuel,
and therefore about halfway through its life.
But it's been burning for four and a half billion years,
so we've probably still got another four and a half billion years before we need to start panicking.
We can also measure the apparent brightness of a star.
That is to say, the brightness it seems to have from Earth.
And we've seen already that if we know its distance, we can measure its real brightness.
Now, that's the reverse of the process we saw with seafheeds.
With seafheeds you knew the real brightness, and you could measure their distance.
But if we know their distance and their apparent brightness, we can also measure their brightness.
That's the amount of energy it emits.
Now, larger stars, think back to our collapsing cloud of matter.
Larger stars generate greater pressures at their center, higher temperatures, and more brightness.
So what this means is that by and large, the brightest stars tend to be the largest stars.
So if we can estimate the real brightness of a star, we can estimate its mass.
So here are quite a few things we can tell about stars.
We can tell about their chemical composition.
We can tell about their brightness.
We can tell, as we've seen, something about their distance, something about their movements.
And there's one more thing we can tell.
We can estimate the temperature at the surface of a star.
And we can do that quite simply from its color.
Basically, if a star is very blue, it's very, very hot indeed.
Rigel in the constellation Orion is such a star, very hot blue star.
If it's red, it's probably cooler.
Beetlejuice in Orion is such a star.
Okay, so astronomers from the 19th century and into the 20th century have built up a massive database of observations about stars, like a vast family portrait.
And the question is, how can you use this portrait to figure out how individual stars live and die?
Well, this is the first of several examples we'll see in this course of scientists suddenly finding a new way of arranging familiar data so that it reveals new regularities.
In 1910, a Danish astronomer, Enar Herzprong, and an American astronomer, Henry Russell,
distilled all this information into an extremely simple graph that helped astronomers identify the key factors in a star's life cycle.
This is what they did.
They took two features of a large number of stars and they plotted them on a scatter graph.
The first feature was the star's brightness.
Now, we've seen effectively that's a measure of its mass, the total amount of light and brightness that it's emitting, of energy that it's emitting.
The second thing is its surface temperature, which can be different than its total brightness.
And what they found is a simple correlation.
The most stars, the more massive they were, in other words, the brighter they were, the higher their surface temperature.
If you look at an example of the Herzprong-Russell diagram, you'll see that normally brightness is charted on the vertical axis and surface temperature on the horizontal axis.
So what this means is that you end up with a ribbon of stars, which is known as the main sequence, which moves from the top left down to the bottom right of the graph.
And most stars appear on the so-called main sequence.
At the top left, you have very big, very bright stars, stars that also have high surface temperature.
At the bottom right, you have smaller, less stars with less surface temperature.
That's the main sequence, this diagonal band.
But they also found a number of stars that didn't fit into this correlation.
These were stars, it turns out, at the end of their life cycle.
They're beginning to behave slightly differently from other stars.
Stars on the main sequence are all burning hydrogen and fusing it into helium according to the principles I described earlier in this lecture.
They're doing the normal thing that normal stars do during most of their life cycle.
The other stars that are off the main sequence are slightly different.
And we'll discuss them in the next lecture.
They're probably coming to the end of their life.
What the graph shows is that the key determinant of a star's life is the size of the initial cloud from which it's formed.
In fact, the size of the star itself.
This determines its overall brightness.
Normally it determines its surface temperature.
And it determines the speed at which fusion takes place and therefore the time it will take to run through its fuel and eventually die.
So this one parameter, how big the initial cloud was, is the key to understanding the evolution of stars.
Let me end this lecture by summarizing why stars play such an important role in big history.
First of all, they count as the first complex things created by our universe.
By merely existing, they make the universe more interesting, more complicated, and they generate flows of energy.
They represent the first new form of complexity since the creation of the universe.
Secondly, stars create the preconditions for new forms of complexity.
They provide a platform for building other forms of complexity and they do so in two main ways.
First, from the furnaces at their center, they pump energy out into the cold, empty spaces between them.
And this creates powerful energy flows.
And these will provide the energy needed to create even more complex things in the future, including ourselves.
Secondly, they also create new chemical elements.
And we'll talk about that in the next lecture.
With new chemical elements, we'll see it was possible to create a universe that at least in some corners was much more complex.
So this lecture has described how gravity sculpted stars from the simple raw materials of the early universe.
What happens next? How do you create even more complex entities?
That was the task of stars and we'll describe how they did it in the next lecture. Thank you.
Lecture 8. Threshold 3. Making Chemical Elements
In the previous lecture, we saw how the first stars were created.
Now with the appearance of stars, our universe is already much more interesting than it was.
We saw how, with remarkably limited ingredients, gravity managed to cook up these new complex things, stars.
And as we did so, as stars were created, we actually moved from cosmology, that's the discipline that studies the universe as a whole,
to physics and astronomy, disciplines that study some of the first complex objects that were made in the universe, such as stars and atoms.
In fact, you'll notice that when we cross in this course from one level of complexity to another, we're often going to be crossing also from one scholarly discipline to another.
So now, our universe is dotted with billions of tiny hotspots that pour energy into the cold of surrounding space.
But how far can you go with this? Could you make even more forms of complexity with just the existing elements, with hydrogen, helium, gravity, other forms of energy and stars?
It's hard to see how. We'll see in fact that all later forms of complexity, or at least all those that are significant to human beings,
depend on the existence of a larger palette of chemical elements.
These make it possible to create a greater variety of material elements, of stuff, of substances, if you like.
And using these, it's possible to combine them so as to create entities that have new emergent properties.
And one of these emergent properties will eventually turn out to be life itself.
So the creation of new stuff, new chemical elements, takes us from the physical level of complexity, from the level of atoms and stars, to a new level which we'll call the chemical level of complexity.
So as we cross from the disciplines of astronomy and physics to that of chemistry, we find ourselves ready for the new levels of complexity that eventually will form life and you and me.
So that's our central question for this lecture. How do you create new chemical elements?
Before we can really answer that question, we need a very clear idea of what we mean by chemical elements.
The chemical elements are the 92 most elementary forms of matter, ranging from hydrogen with just one proton in its nucleus to uranium with 92.
There are in fact other elements that have more protons than uranium in their nuclei.
They can be created artificially and some may have been created occasionally by natural processes, but they're so unstable that they soon break down.
They're known as the transuranic elements.
Modern understanding of chemical elements really goes back to the work of the Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev, whose dates are 1834 to 1907.
Mendeleev was born in 1834 in Tobolsk, in Siberia.
In 1869, now a young professor at St. Petersburg University, Mendeleev did something for chemistry and for chemical elements that was rather similar to what Herzsprung
and Russell had done for stars.
What he did was he arranged them in a new way that revealed new and hitherto unsuspected features.
He produced a list of the chemical elements that were known in his time, and he arranged them so as to reveal some striking and unexpected new regularities that no one had seen clearly before.
He arranged them first in rows. He arranged them by atomic weight, so they're getting heavier and heavier and heavier, row by row.
That we now know that it would have been slightly more precise to order them by atomic number, that is to say the number of protons in the nucleus.
For example, hydrogen has one proton in its nucleus, carbon has six, oxygen has eight, silver has 47, gold has 79 and uranium 92.
These are their atomic numbers, the numbers of protons in their nuclei.
In all but a few cases, however, these two rankings, ranking by atomic weight and by atomic number, coincide.
Which is why Mendeleev's version of the table worked as well as it did.
Now that was the first arrangement, horizontally by atomic weight and nowadays by atomic number.
But the really interesting information was found in the vertical columns of his table.
He found that the elements known in his time could be arranged in such a way that the vertical columns contained elements with similar features,
features such as differing degrees of chemical reactivity.
And he also showed something else.
These features recurred at surprisingly regular intervals.
At first they recurred every eight elements, then every 18 and finally every 32 elements.
So striking with these patterns that Mendeleev was eventually able to guess at the position and even some of the chemical qualities of elements that had not yet been discovered.
For example, he discovered that an undiscovered element ought to lie somewhere between calcium and titanium and he listed some of its properties.
That element, which came to be known as scandium, promptly turned up in about 1879 along with the appropriate chemical properties.
Now when a scientist manages to make predictions like this, this is one of the most powerful forms of proof that can exist.
So this prediction was a sign of the power of the arrangement of elements that Mendeleev had put together.
Today, with a much fuller understanding of the nature of chemical elements and how they work, these patterns can be seen even more clearly.
For example, the so-called noble or inert gases consist of helium, whose atomic number is 2, neon, whose atomic number is 10.
You notice the gap of 8 between them, argon 18, another 8, krypton 36.
Now we get a gap of 18, xenon 34, another gap of 18, then radon atomic number 86.
All of these appear in the last column of modern versions of Mendeleev's table.
And as we've seen, the intervals between them are 8, 8, 18, 18 and 32.
And you'll find similar intervals in other vertical columns.
For example, the so-called halogens are extremely reactive elements.
They include fluorine number 9, chlorine 17, bromine 35, iodine 53 and astatine 85.
Though he was struck by these intervals, Mendeleev himself couldn't explain them.
Partly because doing so required understanding of the role of the electron in atoms,
and the electron had not yet been discovered when he devised this table.
We now know that these periods depend on the way electrons were arranged in the outer shells of atoms.
In fact, the number of electrons in the outer shell of an atom determines many aspects of its chemical behavior,
including its liability to react and the way it reacts with different elements.
If, like the noble gases, you have a complete outer shell, then you're not likely to need to react much with other elements.
And that explains why the noble gases are inert.
Mendeleev's table is now known as the periodic table of the elements.
And it's been described as the most elegant organizational chart ever devised.
It gave shape to our modern understanding of chemical elements,
and the existence of chemical elements is crucial to the existence of planets, living organisms and ourselves.
So they're the key to the third threshold of complexity in our course.
So back to the question of how they were made.
How were they made in a universe that consisted entirely of hydrogen and helium?
Mendeleev himself had no clue, nor would anyone else until about the middle of the 20th century,
when astronomers finally managed to get a much better understanding of the life cycle of stars,
because stars turn out to be the key to this process.
So how were the elements created?
Now the first thing to note is that most elements were not formed in the Big Bang.
And there's a reason for this.
The reason is because in the initial split second of the Big Bang,
temperatures were just far too high for protons to lock together,
to form the multi-proton nuclei that you need for more complex elements.
Then, when temperatures had fallen low enough for protons to combine to form helium with two protons,
they were now too low to form other elements.
So it's as if things moved far too fast in the first second or two of the Big Bang
to form any other elements apart from hydrogen with one proton in its nucleus and helium with two,
and tiny amounts of lithium, atomic number three, and beryllium, atomic number four.
So within minutes of the Big Bang,
temperatures were too low to form elements heavier than hydrogen and helium.
And that explains why most of the universe today consists of hydrogen and helium.
And those were the two elements created in the Big Bang.
So if the universe was too cold to jam together atoms to form more complicated elements,
where could they form?
We need to look somewhere where remarkably high temperatures could be generated.
And of course, stars are the place to look.
Temperatures high enough for the creation of further elements would not be recreated in the universe
until the appearance of stars.
But to understand how stars created temperatures high enough to synthesize heavier elements,
we need to understand something about their life cycles.
So let's return to the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, the HR diagram.
We saw that this, a bit like Mendeleev's table,
summarizes a large amount of information about different types of stars.
The diagram is a scatograph.
It ranks stars according to two types of measurement.
The first parameter is their brightness, or the amount of light they emit.
And this is often given as a multiple of the sun's brightness.
In most forms of the HR diagram, this is measured on the vertical axis.
And this means that stars that are emitting more light appear higher up the graph than cooler stars.
In effect, a star's brightness tells us its real mass, the amount of matter it contains,
because a large star generates more density and higher temperatures.
The second parameter on the HR diagram is a star's surface temperature,
which can be different than its overall temperature.
This can often be estimated from the star's color.
By and large, the bluest stars are the hottest and red stars are cooler.
Surface temperature is normally plotted on the horizontal axis,
so that bluest stars with higher surface temperatures appear to the left of the graph
and redder stars to the right.
So just to recapitulate, the hottest stars appear higher up on the graph.
Those with the hotter surface temperatures appear on the left-hand side of the graph.
Now, when you look at an HR diagram, you'll see that there's a broad band of stars
that appear on a narrow diagonal band, which is called the main sequence.
And this runs from the top left, where we find stars that are large, bright, and very hot,
and they tend to be bluish.
To the bottom right, where we find stars that are smaller, less bright, less hot, and reddish.
All stars on the main sequence are normal, mature stars.
The temperatures in their core are hot enough to fuse hydrogen into helium,
at least 10 million degrees, but not high enough to create elements with higher atomic numbers.
So all the stars on the main sequence are doing what stars spend most of their time doing,
most of their lives.
Their job basically is turning hydrogen into helium,
and that's what they spend most of their lives doing.
So that's the main sequence.
What this band, the main sequence seems to be telling us,
is that for most of their lives, overall brightness, total mass,
and surface brightness are closely correlated.
That's why you get this neat line.
Now, why does a star appear on a particular part of the main sequence?
A particular star will appear at a particular place in the main sequence,
and it'll stay there for most of its life.
Its position depends on one factor, its mass.
And that essentially means the amount of stuff that went into making the star.
Why is this?
Small stars generate less pressure at the center,
and they burn at lower temperatures.
So they burn their nuclear fuel slowly, and they may live for billions of years.
These appear at the bottom right of the main sequence.
They're cooler, and they're smaller.
Our sun is in the middle of the main sequence.
It's quite large, and it's quite bright.
It's probably going to last for about nine billion years,
which will see means that it's about halfway through its life.
Stars that are more than about ten times larger than our own sun
create much, much more pressure at their centers, much higher temperatures,
and they burn through their fuel much faster.
The biggest stars, such as Rigel in Orion, shine with a bluish light,
and they appear at the top left of the main sequence.
They may live for just a million years or so
because they gobble up their fuel so voraciously.
But note once again that none of these stars on the main sequence
can generate temperatures high enough to create elements with atomic numbers higher than two.
That is to say helium.
All they can do is turn hydrogen into helium.
Things get really interesting when stars approach the end of their lives.
So now we need to undertake the slightly ghoulish task
of surveying what stars do in their death agonies.
The death of a star begins when it runs out of the hydrogen
that's kept it running for most of its life.
At this point, you'll see the star sort of wandering away
from the main sequence on the HR diagram.
It starts going a bit mad, frankly.
But where it goes depends once more on its mass.
Now let's begin with our sun and what is likely to happen to our sun.
When it's used up all the hydrogen in its core, the core will cool and collapse.
So suddenly the furnace that's held the sun up
for four and a half billion years so far will suddenly splutter out
and it'll stop propping the star up.
Remember star formation began with gravity collapsing a cloud of matter in on itself.
Now, without the furnace created by fusion, that collapse can continue.
But the collapse itself compresses the star center,
creates such pressures that its temperature starts to rise again
and it'll rise quite quickly to temperatures much higher
than those at which hydrogen fused into helium.
Eventually, at about 100 million degrees, about 10 times higher
than the minimum temperature needed to fuse hydrogen into helium,
helium atoms will start fusing to form carbon.
So now the star can burn helium.
Now for the first time, remember, stars are starting to build larger chemical elements
because now we've got the high temperatures we need.
At this point, you have a new furnace at the center of the sun.
The sun will start to expand again.
It'll reach beyond the orbit of Mercury and it'll turn into a red giant
like Aldebaran in the constellation of Taurus.
As it burns helium, it will move away from the main sequence
to the upper right of the HR diagram.
This is because it'll get brighter.
It'll get brighter because helium burns at higher temperatures than hydrogen.
So this moves it up the graph but it will also get redder
and this is because hydrogen continues to burn in its upper layers
lowering its surface temperature.
So this places it over to the right of the graph
towards the end where surface temperatures are cooler.
So now you'll find it in the upper right-hand corner of the HR diagram
along with other red giants such as Aldebaran.
Now, it's going to burn through its helium much more quickly
than it burns through its hydrogen.
It's burning at a much higher temperature, remember.
Once all the helium is burnt up, the process is going to repeat itself.
Our sun will collapse again,
temperatures will rise in the center and it will expand again
until this time it includes the orbits of Mars and Earth
and it'll vaporize both planets as it does so.
So any unfortunate descendants of ours that are still living on Earth
will be toast.
The sun itself will have become a red supergiant
like beetle juice in the constellation of Orion.
Incidentally, if you haven't seen it,
look for it at the northern corner of Orion.
Diagonally opposite Rigel, it really is red.
Now, our sun is too small to take these processes further.
It cannot create temperatures hot enough to start fusing carbon
and further elements.
Eventually, it'll shed its outer layer
and it'll collapse around its carbon core
and it'll turn into a white dwarf about the size of the Earth.
Now, though it's still quite hot, it has no internal furnace
and it'll gradually burn out.
Sirius B, the companion star to Sirius A,
which is the brightest star in the night sky, is a white dwarf.
Our sun at that point will move swiftly below the main sequence
of the HR diagram towards the bottom left of the diagram.
It'll become smaller and less bright,
but with a high surface temperature.
Then, over billions of years, it will cool
until eventually any surviving astronomers will start calling it a black dwarf.
And now it'll just sit there, a mere cinder,
completely invisible, doing nothing for countless billions of years,
side by side with an increasing number of other dead stars
until eventually the universe as a whole
will slowly turn into a vast ghostly cemetery of dead stars.
So that's the fate of our sun.
Now, what about smaller stars?
Stars that are smaller than our sun will burn much longer
because they burn more slowly.
When they run out of fuel, some will simply collapse into white dwarfs,
or they may briefly burn helium and then collapse into a white dwarf.
So this is not terribly exciting.
What is much more interesting is the death of really large stars.
Stars much larger than our sun.
Now, what happens when they run out of hydrogen?
At first, the story is a bit like our sun.
They start burning helium, and when that's gone,
temperatures will still be high enough for them to burn their way through carbon
and a number of other elements including oxygen and silicon
until eventually they start producing large amounts of iron in their cores.
And the temperature at their core reaches four billion degrees.
Now, these processes start speeding up as temperatures rise,
and these things start happening faster and faster,
and things get more and more dramatic.
Here's a wonderful description of what happens
from Cesare Emiliani's wonderful scientific companion.
This is how he describes this phase.
A star 25 times more massive than the sun
will exhaust the hydrogen in its core in a few million years.
And as the core continues to contract and the temperature continues to rise,
it will burn carbon for 600 years.
Oxygen for six months and silicon for just one day.
During all of this iron,
the final product of these processes is building up in the center,
but iron marks the end of the road.
No star can go further than iron.
So eventually you've got a core full of iron and the furnace shuts down.
The star will then collapse catastrophically in just a second or two before exploding.
Most of its mass will be hurled into space.
And this, of course, is a supernova.
At this point, the supernova may shine with the brilliance of an entire galaxy.
The Crab Nebula, incidentally, is the remnant of a supernova
that was observed by Chinese astronomers in 1054.
So it's thrown out most of its outer layers.
Its core will then collapse, possibly into a neutron star.
A neutron star is a ball of matter so dense that all atoms are crushed into their nucleus.
The electrons that normally orbit way away from the nucleus are crushed right into the center.
So it's like nuclei next to each other.
It's been estimated that a spoonful of matter from a neutron star
would weigh about 90 billion kilograms.
It might have the mass of the Earth,
but it would be in a ball just 30 to 40 miles wide,
rotating many times a second.
As they spin, pulsars emit regular flashes of energy,
which can sometimes be detected on Earth,
which is why such stars are known as pulsars.
If the supernova is even bigger,
if what's left of the star is even bigger,
the collapse will go further than a neutron star and create a black hole.
Now, a black hole, I wish we could spend more time,
and I wish I had the expertise to talk more about black holes,
but a black hole basically is an object so dense
that not even light can escape its gravitational pull.
A black hole as a result can have hardly any further communication with the rest of the universe.
It's as if it had got almost completely pinched off from the universe.
So as we'll see, and as Stephen Hawking showed,
not completely pinched off.
Now, it's in the extreme temperatures of a supernova,
much higher than those in the center,
even of the largest collapsing stars,
that finally the remaining elements of the periodic table can be manufactured,
and they can be manufactured in just a few seconds,
all the way through gold and lead to uranium.
So in summary, it's taken three steps to create the chemical elements
from which you and I are constructed.
Hydrogen and helium, the simplest atoms in the periodic table,
were created during the Big Bang,
and that's why they are, although it's only recently been realized that this was so,
that's why they are by far the most common elements in the universe.
In the early universe, hydrogen made up about 75% of the universe,
and helium about 24%.
That leaves just 1% for everything else.
In their death throes, medium to large stars create elements such as carbon
with six protons, nitrogen with seven,
oxygen with eight, and silicon with 14,
up to iron with 26 protons.
Now here's the second stage.
In the dying phases of large stars,
you cook these successive elements up to iron,
and that explains why these elements up to number 26
tend to be much more common than later elements in the periodic table.
So as these dying large stars throw off their outer layers,
these elements are scattered through space.
So they're not as common as hydrogen and helium,
these elements are much more common than later elements.
That's the second phase, and then the third phase.
All remaining elements are manufactured and scattered through the universe
in supernova explosions.
Now think what this means.
If, like me, you're wearing a gold ring,
or if you're wearing silver jewelry,
look at it.
The silver or gold was made in a supernova explosion.
It's probably been around for billions of years,
and it's on very, very temporary loan to you.
And the same goes for all the elements in your body,
at least all the elements above iron.
So I hope this makes it clear why the life and death of stars
is a topic that should be very dear to us.
Without dying stars, we could not possibly exist.
So let's summarize what we know about the third of our major thresholds.
The first stars represented a new level of complexity in the universe,
but they also provided the energy flows
and the chemical ingredients needed to make even more complex entities,
such as our Earth.
So without stars, it would have been impossible to create new levels of complexity,
such as planets, or you and me.
They prepared the way for new levels of complexity
with new emergent properties,
and those properties are sufficiently different
from those studied by astronomy and physics
that they are the domain of a new scholarly discipline, chemistry.
And this is what we'll see repeatedly.
New levels of complexity and new emergent properties
give rise to new scholarly disciplines,
from cosmology to chemistry to geology,
the next threshold, then to biology, and finally, human history.
I hope you're beginning to get a sense
of the capacity of big history to unify knowledge.
What we've seen here is one of the many virtues of big history,
which is that it can help us see better both the links and the differences
between these different domains of complexity.
In the next lecture, we'll start looking at some of the new things
that could be constructed using this vastly expanded palette of chemical elements
that was cooked up inside stars.
And the first objects we'll look at are planets,
including our own Earth.
Thank you.
It's often said that life, death, and taxes
are among the few things that never change.
We've seen that the life and death of stars
both play crucial roles in the story of big history.
We'll get to taxes later,
and we'll discover that they, like life and death,
have not always existed.
There's actually a rather important point here.
In our story, in the story of big history,
there seems to be very little that is genuinely eternal.
In fact, this is one of the great findings of modern science.
Most pre-modern traditional cosmologies assumed
that there were large realms of reality, including the Earth itself,
the heavens, much of the landscape,
and perhaps biological species as well,
that were in fact eternal.
They were fixed. They never changed.
The domain of change was very small indeed,
and by and large it tended to be assumed
that human beings dominated the realm of change.
And that's one of the reasons why the word history
is so often assumed to be about change
in the life and society of human beings.
Now, what we'll see in this course over and over again
is that modern science over the last few centuries
has found that realm after realm
that was thought of as fixed in fact changes,
and that means that it in fact has a history.
And this is why in this course we argue
that history can embrace all realms of reality.
History, change over time affects all areas of reality,
and that's why big history is possible.
So, the previous lecture described the appearance
of new chemical elements in Dying Stars.
We saw that the elements too have a history as do the stars.
That was our third threshold of complexity,
and the first you remember was the creation of the universe.
The second was the creation of stars.
The third threshold, the creation of chemical elements,
all the elements in Mendeleev's periodic table
made possible for the first time the creation of new things
that were chemically complex.
Now what we get to do is to see some of the things you can do
with a greatly expanded palette of elements.
Suddenly matter itself gets a lot more interesting
because it can be constructed in many more permutations.
Now, what I want to describe is the first real manifestation
of this possibility of chemical complexity,
and that is the creation of planets.
And in particular, of our own Earth.
This is our fourth threshold.
So, here's our cocktail party question.
How do you create a planet?
How do you create an Earth?
Chemically speaking, planets are more complex than stars,
primarily because they're made from many more elements.
They also provided the environment needed
to cross a fifth threshold in complexity,
which was the creation of life.
So they're crucial to our story in two ways.
They represent a new level of complexity,
but they also provide the foundation
for another level of complexity which we'll get to later on.
Life we'll see is too delicate to exist on stars,
which are extremely violent places.
Planets, though, provide a perfect environment.
They enjoy the benefits of the energy flows from stars,
but not the extreme violence of stars.
So that's where planets, in particular, our Earth,
that's why planets provide the ideal environment for life.
So, how were planets created,
and specifically how was our planet the Earth created?
To understand this, we need to shift scales.
From the cosmological scale that's dominated the lecture so far
to the scale of a single star.
This is a radical shift in scale,
and we need to remind ourselves that we're doing it.
Our temporal scale shrinks slightly.
We begin four and a half billion years ago now,
when the universe was about nine billion years old.
So we've moved forward nine billion years.
It was about two-thirds of its present age
and about two-thirds of its present size.
Our spatial scale is going to shrink much more drastically,
because what we're doing now
is we're focusing on one tiny part of the universe.
Now, just think for a moment
what a radical shift in scale this really is.
We saw in an earlier lecture
that there are as many stars in the universe
as there are grains of sand on all the beaches on Earth.
This is not, of course, a precise calculation,
it's suggesting the sort of orders of magnitude involved.
And what we're really doing now
is we're picking up one of those grains of sand,
our own Sun,
and we're going to study it for the rest of this course.
And in fact, what we're going to study is not the grain itself,
but the stuff around it.
Unfortunately, at present,
this is the only corner of the universe
that we know enough about
to be able to discuss planet formation.
Although we'll see we're beginning to learn a lot more
about neighboring regions.
And that's why for the rest of this course
we'll focus on the history of our solar system.
We can't yet give a general date
for the appearance of the first planets,
though it's probably a good guess
that planets of some kind appeared
within one or two billion years of the origins of the universe.
All we really know is when they appeared in our corner,
our tiny corner of the universe.
So our approach from now on has to be a bit parochial.
Perhaps in the future we'll be able to answer these questions
much better, questions such as
how come on the planets?
When did the first appear?
At present, though, we can guess at the answers,
but do little more.
Nevertheless, if we're looking at this one grain of sand
and the stuff around it,
let's remember also that from a human perspective
this is still a huge scale.
Remember, in an earlier lecture
when I tried to give you some sense of the scale,
the spatial scales of the universe,
I suggested a thought experiment
in which we take an airliner through space.
An airliner that takes five hours to cross the USA
would take about 18 days we saw to reach the moon,
20 years to reach the sun,
about 80 years, that's a whole human lifetime to reach Jupiter,
750 years to reach Pluto,
and about 5 million years to reach the next star.
So that's just a reminder that even this local scale
is very large indeed.
I should add, of course, that that's slightly deceptive
because already we know how to travel much faster
than a jetliner,
and some human-made objects,
such as one or two of the satellites
that have been created in recent decades
have actually reached as far as Pluto itself.
They're reaching beyond the solar system.
Okay.
This is actually a very exciting time
to be talking about planets.
In the 1990s, improved observational techniques,
depending on the use of computers
and improved telescopes,
let astronomers observe other planetary systems
for the first time.
Before the 90s,
we had no certainty
that there were any other planetary systems in the universe,
and so it was always possible that our solar system
was the only system like this that existed.
Now, we're beginning to learn
that we can observe directly other solar systems.
So one of the first things we've learned is that they exist.
Solar systems turn out to be fairly common in the universe.
How's this done?
Extremely precise observations of tiny changes
in the brightness of nearby stars
allows us to detect the presence of bodies orbiting them.
So if you have a star,
and the light suddenly drops for a moment,
and then brightens up again,
and this change is periodic,
there's a pretty good guess that something is orbiting around it
and cutting out some of the light periodically.
So this is one of the techniques
that allows us to detect the presence of planets.
And these techniques could even allow us
to say something about the size, the orbits,
and sometimes even the chemistry of those objects.
Now, so far, these techniques have allowed us
to identify only large planets,
planets about the size of Jupiter,
but the techniques are getting more and more refined,
and very soon we can expect them to identify Earth-sized planets
in orbit around nearby stars.
That will be very exciting indeed.
This is a space worth watching
because if we find lots of Earth-sized planets,
then the odds that there are living organisms
out there increase fairly dramatically.
So this is worth watching.
So far, about 10% of all stars surveyed
in the parts of the Milky Way close to us
turn out to have planetary systems,
and that suggests that planetary systems
are almost as common as stars.
At this time, several hundred planets have been identified.
Okay, now let's go back to our cocktail party question,
which is how do you make a planet?
The very general answer is that planetary systems
are created as byproducts of star formation.
But this can happen only in regions of space
that are chemically rich because of supernova explosions.
In other words, regions of space
in which large stars have lived out their lives and died,
and in their death they have ejected,
they've sprayed new chemicals into surrounding space.
One of the things we can be sure about,
given our knowledge of how elements were created,
is that interstellar space,
particularly in regions where there are lots of stars,
like galaxies, like the Milky Way,
interstellar space has been seeded
with more and more complex elements.
So the interstellar medium has itself
become chemically richer and richer.
And it's when stars are formed in such regions
that you can get galaxies.
So, if you form a star in a region
where there are lots of chemicals,
there seems now to be a good chance
that you're going to end up with planets.
So how's it done?
Our sun was created like all other stars.
We saw it's a normal star.
It was created by the collapse of a cloud of matter,
a solar nebula.
And planets formed from the solar nebula
because this particular cloud was chemically rich.
It's a good guess that hydrogen made up
about 70% of the matter in the solar nebula
and helium about another 27%.
These we've seen are close to the proportions
of hydrogen and helium in the early universe.
However, by now there are other elements,
carbon, oxygen and nitrogen,
all of which we'll see are vital ingredients
of living organisms,
probably accounted for about 1.5%
of the material in the solar nebula.
And the remaining 1.5%
included all the other elements of the periodic table.
There's a helpful acronym here
for chemicals that play an important role in life,
and it's CHON, C-H-O-N.
And it stands for carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
So you can think of that acronym
if you want to think of the chemicals that are crucial for life.
And you'll know by now why they're fairly common.
They could all be made in the dying stages of large stars.
They didn't have to wait for supernovae.
You'll also know, I think, why helium isn't there.
Helium just doesn't do much chemically.
Right. What followed should be familiar now.
We have a cloud of stuff,
and that cloud of stuff is full of matter,
but not just hydrogen and helium.
Now what happens?
Well, we'll go back to the story of star formation.
Gravity draws this cloud together.
As the cloud becomes denser, it heats up.
Pressure simply squashes it together.
You get more and more collisions between particles at the center.
They collide more violently.
They collide more frequently.
And the temperature heats up, particularly at the center.
When the temperature at the center reaches about 10 million degrees,
fusion begins.
Hydrogen atoms start to fuse together.
And according to Einstein's equation,
as they do so, a tiny bit of matter is converted into energy,
and there's a huge release of energy.
The sun lights up.
As a furnace appears, a fusion furnace at its center.
And it acquires the typical structure of all stars.
You have this furnace in the center where there are fusion reactions.
You have a middle layer which contains reserves of hydrogen.
And you have a surface from which energy radiates out into the space around it.
So now we get this nice flow of lots of energy from this hotspot in space
into the cold of surrounding space.
And as we've seen, we can see areas of star formation in our galaxy even today.
This is a process that in some sense we can observe fairly directly.
And I suggested earlier that you might try looking for the horse head nebula on the Internet.
You can find some wonderful pictures of it.
And you'll see there a large area where there are these very bright lights,
which are new stars that have just lit up.
Now this process of star formation, which we've seen before,
is one that can occur at several scales.
And in fact, it occurs even within the solar system.
For example, Jupiter is mainly gaseous, like a star.
And it's large enough so that the pressure created as Jupiter formed
made its center extremely hot, but not quite hot enough for fusion.
At least there's no certainty that anything like fusion is taking place at the center of Jupiter.
So we can say of Jupiter that it's almost a star, but not quite.
Now we shift our attention away from the sun and towards the outer parts of this collapsing cloud of matter
from which the planets and other bodies of the solar system would form.
When I first started teaching big history, the sections on cosmology and astronomy
were given by the late David Allen, who was an astronomer at the Anglo-Australian Observatory.
David Allen was a superb lecturer, and he came up with the thought experiment I've used already
of flying a plane through the solar system.
And another one in describing star formation or planet formation.
He said it's a bit like making a cake, and he remembers as a kid, and I'm sure most of us do.
A cake's being made and you hover around as the cake's being made.
The cake is poured into the bowl in which it's going to be baked, the baking bowl,
and then you get to lick the bowl.
And David Allen's point was that the planets are made from the stuff that's left in the bowl,
the edge of the baking bowl, the bit you lick.
And they're made through a process known as accretion.
The planets and other bodies of our solar system are created from just 0.1% of the solar nebula.
That's the bit of the solar nebula not incorporated in the Sun.
Something like 99.9% went into the Sun.
That's the bit that goes into the baking tin.
Now, let's go back to the solar nebula.
It's contracting at the center of the Sun's formed.
As it contracts, it starts spinning.
Now, why does it spin?
Well, here's just a naive way of describing that.
In fact, it would be very odd if it didn't spin.
You can imagine it's contracting if every particle in the solar nebula
were heading exactly for the gravitational center of that cloud.
Then it might stand still, but that's extremely unlikely.
What's going to happen? It's a bit like water going down a plug hole.
Some are going to be aiming slightly off the center,
but gradually you'll find the whole thing starts to spin.
Then as it gets smaller, it spins faster.
And this is exactly like an ice skater doing a pirouette
and then bringing her arms in on herself.
She'll start spinning faster and faster and faster.
Now, this is important because the spinning shapes the solar nebula.
It flattens the spinning nebula into a disk.
And what this means is the material not gobbled up by the sun
begins to orbit the sun in a single plane.
This is the same principle as taking a pizza dough,
a ball of pizza dough, and turning it into a pizza.
You spin it, centrifugal force spreads it out, and flattens it.
So you end up with a spinning disk.
We can see this principle at work very clearly if you look at Saturn's rings.
They give us a very good idea of what went on because Saturn's rings,
like the solar nebula, consist of orbiting debris that didn't go into the main star.
So they may give us a good idea of the shape and structure of the solar nebula.
Now, we have the spinning disk around the sun.
Because it's spinning, particles are orbiting in a series of different orbits.
So now let's move out to one of these orbits.
In each orbit, particles of matter are moving around very, very fast indeed.
And through the process of accretion, this is the crucial process that makes planets,
through accretion, these bits of material are slowly drawn together.
And they're drawn together in several different ways.
When they're very small, they may be drawn together simply by electrostatic forces.
I think most of us as children have taken a comb, rubbed it on something,
and then used it to pick up small pieces of paper.
What we're doing is we're using static electricity.
And the same principle can hold tiny bits of matter, tiny motes of dust together.
But as these motes of dust grow, other forces come in.
They start banging to each other.
Let's imagine we've got to the stage where we've got snowball-like objects
orbiting very, very fast in each of these orbits.
These objects can start colliding with each other.
And these collisions will get more and more violent.
Eventually, the objects are going to get larger and larger.
You're going to get very large snowballs.
Some of them are going to be rockier.
Some of them are going to be mushier.
And then eventually, particularly with the rockier planetissimals, as they're called,
when they collide, this is going to be a very violent process.
And they're going to stick together, but they're going to generate a lot of heat and energy as they do so.
So within each of these orbits, we must imagine larger and larger objects appearing
and a lot of violence going on, a lot of violent collisions.
Several stray bodies in the solar system, such as comets and asteroids,
may in some sense be remnants of this early stage of accretion.
As it went on, within a few million years, the large bodies in each orbit formed planetissimals.
The largest planetissimals become large enough to exert a gravitational pull on others,
and they slowly lure other objects in their orbit into themselves,
pulling them in until eventually, in each orbit, you have one single large body.
It swept up all the other objects in the orbit, and it's done so through the use of electrostatic forces,
violent collisions, and its own gravitational pull.
And this is how in each orbit you end up with one large body.
And that more or less explains the distribution of the planets around the Sun.
But there are differences in the materials in different orbits.
Let me just explain some of the crucial differences between the planets.
The heat of the young Sun we've seen prevented the Sun collapsing, but it did more than that.
It also drove more volatile elements away from the center, so that they collected further out,
towards the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn.
And that's one of the reasons why there was simply more stuff out there, particularly more gassy stuff.
As a result, the outer planets are dominated by gassy material.
Some of that's water vapor and other gases.
So from Jupiter onwards, we get this series of so-called gas giants.
The inner planets tend to be rockier.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars are much rockier,
and they're also smaller because there's just a bit less stuff in the inner parts of the solar system.
The asteroids raise an interesting problem.
They appear at the border between these two regions, between Mars and Jupiter.
And at the moment, the betting is that what they represent is a sort of failed planet
that was forming between Mars and Jupiter,
but that was broken up by the powerful gravitational force of Jupiter,
the largest planet in our solar system.
So what we find in the asteroid belt is something a bit like what you might have found
during the early stages of accretion,
a large number of small planetesimals orbiting and occasionally colliding quite violently.
How was the Earth's moon made?
Well, at the moment, the betting is that the Earth's moon was made
as a result of a collision between the Earth and a proto-planet,
a forming planet that was probably about the size of Mars.
Now, I've talked so far as if in each orbit, everything is orbiting in a perfect ellipse.
But of course, that's not true.
There are a lot of violent collisions going on,
and some of those collisions mean that some of these objects are sent out of orbit
and start traveling through space in very eccentric orbits.
And something like that could explain the sort of collision we're talking about.
So imagine the early Earth.
It's almost completely formed and an object the size of Mars hits it.
This would have been a very, very violent process.
It could have shattered both planets.
What probably happened is that the planet that hit Earth gouged
a huge chunk out of the Earth and then disintegrated,
leaving a sort of spray of vaporized material orbiting the Earth.
This would have been a bit like the solar nebula.
And so within that material orbiting the Earth,
you'd have had a process a bit like accretion.
And eventually that would have formed the moon.
That's the best bet at the moment.
Now, not everything is swept up inside the planets, of course.
The stuff that's left outside that just doesn't get caught up in this process
forms the other remnant bodies of the solar system.
It's comets, it's asteroids, it's meteorites, and many of its moons.
Okay, now, in this way, we can account for the creation
of most of the bodies we see in the solar system.
We can account for their distribution and the way they orbit the Sun.
Now, let me talk briefly about the evidence for this story.
How do we know this is the way it happened?
Why are astronomers really pretty confident that they've got this story right?
The idea that the Sun and solar system all condensed from a single solar nebula,
which collapsed under the pressure of gravity,
was actually proposed quite early by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant in 1755.
It fits very well with what we know of the workings of gravity
and what we know of the shape and structure of the solar system.
Even better, it fits very well with recent observations of other regions
where planetary systems seem to be forming.
So, recent observations and theory make this account of the origins of the solar system
seem extremely plausible.
What about the date of the solar system?
Now, we can't determine the age of the solar system by dating Earth rocks.
And this is because our Earth is so geologically active
that its original surface is now unrecognizable.
However, the surface of the Moon, like that of most meteorites and asteroids,
appears to have changed very little since the time of accretion.
So, if you use radiometric dating techniques to date meteorites or Moon rocks,
you find that you get very, very similar dates, about 4.5 billion years ago.
This is the date that Clare Patterson came up with in the early 1950s,
and it's the date that is still widely accepted as the date for the origin of our solar system.
Okay, let me summarize.
This lecture has described how planetary systems form,
and of course it's focused mainly on our own planetary system, the solar system.
As a result of this process of collapse of a solar nebula rich in chemical elements,
through accretion, we have a Sun and orbiting it a series of planets,
which in many ways are chemically more complex than the Sun at the center.
So now we have at least two different types of large astronomical objects.
Stars are relatively simple chemically, but they have these huge furnaces at their center.
They can generate lots of energy.
Planets are mostly smaller.
They have no furnace at their center, or at least not one large enough to fuse hydrogen,
but they are more chemically complex.
Partly this is because they exist at lower temperatures at which complex chemicals are not immediately broken up.
Greater chemical complexity and lower temperatures may explain why planets seem to be the ideal places
for the creation of new forms of complexity.
They hover around in the hinterland of these hot spots that we've described as stars,
and it's there on planets that we're going to find eventually later forms of complexity.
Thank you.
I hope it's clear that what's happening in this course is that we're slowly assembling the bits and pieces
that will make up the foundation for human history, the stage if you like, for human history.
We've seen how to make a universe.
That's the basic framework for all of this.
We've seen how to make stars.
We've seen that stars are going to be crucial because they provide energy.
They provide the key to later forms of complexity.
We've seen how to make chemical elements in the death of large stars.
And in the last lecture, we saw how you make planets.
And we saw that planets are going to turn out to be the best place for living organisms.
Now, of course, we say that on the basis of what we know of our own planet,
but nevertheless, it's a reasonable bet that this is true.
They are near the flows of energy provided by stars,
but they're not right in the stars, so the flows of energy are not too violent.
They're not too far away, so there is plenty of energy to use.
So we're assembling the bits and pieces for human history.
We have the recipes for most of the crucial elements now of a complex universe.
Now, for the very first time, we focus in on a particular object.
We've been looking so far at the whole universe at very, very large objects.
We've been, in fact, looking at the scale of astronomers and cosmologists.
Now, we look at our home planet.
But before we do that, I want to alert you to something else that's happening here.
And it might not be immediately obvious, which is why I want to draw your attention to it.
So far, in this course,
we've been exploring territory studied by cosmologists and astronomers.
They study the stuff that's out there beyond the Earth.
Now, what we do is we shift to topics that are right on the borderline
between astronomy and geology or Earth sciences,
as we begin to focus on our own Earth.
So what we're really doing is we're crossing disciplines.
But what I would really like you to notice is how natural the crossing can be.
There are no border patrols.
There are no geologists saying,
you've been travelling in astronomy, you need a visa to enter geology.
And there's a serious point here.
Though we tend to teach these disciplines and research them
as if they were entirely separate territories,
entirely separate countries with their own border controls and customs and so on,
the truth is, if we want to understand our universe,
we must see the ways that they overlap
and how these different disciplines illuminate each other.
So if you begin to get a sense that the crossing from astronomy to geology
is actually surprisingly easy from some perspectives, that's great.
And that's one of the main reasons for doing a course in big history.
As I said at the very beginning, I hope one of the things this course can do
is show very clearly the fundamental unity of modern scientific knowledge.
Now, back to Earth, our home planet,
this tiny little chunk of rock in an obscure bit of the universe that is our home.
As humans, of course, this is what we're really interested in.
The rest of the stuff is interesting in its way,
but this is much closer to us.
Inevitably, we want to ask why and how our Earth became our home,
how it was formed, how it managed to provide so hospitable an environment
for our ancestors and for ourselves.
Was it always like this? How did it become so?
How typical is it? How special is it?
The previous lecture described the origins of our sun and solar system
about four and a half billion years ago, and we saw that they're both formed together.
And the Earth is formed as part of that larger process.
In this and the next lecture, we zoom in on our home planet
and we look at the Earth in this lecture in its very early days,
the Earth in its infancy. What was it like?
How different was it from today's Earth?
Well, the short answer is it was very different from today's Earth.
To put yourself in the right frame of mind for thinking about the early Earth,
please don't think of a cute young baby.
Think instead of the violent process of accretion that I described in the last lecture.
If you were an alien astrobiologist and you came across the young Earth,
you might think at first this was an extremely unpromising place for life
unless you were a very sophisticated alien astrobiologist,
in which case you might see some interesting signs.
Our Earth, like all the planets, was formed by accretion.
What did it look like?
Let's start by looking at the earliest era of Earth history.
Now, strictly in geological terminology, this is known as the Hadean Eon.
It's not an era, it's an Eon, so let me explain this.
The Hadean Eon lasted from about 4.5 to about 3.8 billion years ago.
How do geologists divide up Earth history?
Let me just briefly describe what they do.
They use a whole hierarchy of labels.
This is a bit like the taxonomy of animals that we'll come to later.
And they use several different labels that refer to different scales.
The very largest of all these chunks of time is the Eon, E-O-N.
There were four main eons in the 4.5 billion years of the Earth's existence.
And I'll describe them in a moment.
The next level below the Eon is the era.
Each Eon is broken into several eras.
And below that comes the period.
That's the technical term for it.
And this is perhaps the most familiar category of all to most non-geologists.
It includes, for example, periods such as the Cambrian or the Carboniferous or the Devonian.
Now let's go back to the eons.
The four main eons of the Earth's history are, first, the Hadean.
Those of you who can remember any classical education at all will remember that Hades was hell in Greek thinking.
So this is the hellish era of Earth history.
It began about 4.5 billion years ago with the creation of the Earth during accretion.
And it ended about 3.8 billion years ago.
That 3.8, we'll see, is a slightly arbitrary date.
But there's some good reasons for partitioning or for ending the Hadean there.
Second, the Archaean, A-R-C-H-A-E-N, is the Eon of the earliest life forms.
It runs from about 3.8 billion years ago to about 2.5 billion years ago.
So that's the second Eon.
And by its end, 2.5 billion years ago, the Earth is almost halfway through its life.
The third Eon is the Proterozoic.
That's P-R-O-T-E-R-Z-O-I-C.
And it lasts from about 2.5 billion years ago to about 550 million years ago.
That's half a billion years ago.
The fourth Eon is the Phanerozoic, P-H-A-N-E-R-O-Z-O-I-C.
This is the Eon of multi-celled organisms.
And it lasts from about 550 million years ago to today.
And it's worth noting that the Eon of multi-celled organisms
only accounts for about the last eighth of the Earth's history.
Okay, now if you've got a clear sense of the Eons,
let's go back to the very earliest of the Eons, the Hadean.
Now, remember the process of accretion.
It's a very, very violent process that takes place in each of these orbits
around the spinning solar nebula that's flattened out
like a sort of spinning pizza around the Sun.
Within each orbit, there are all these violent collisions, remember,
and slowly, through this process of accretion,
a large object appears in each orbit.
As the young Earth formed,
and this is probably true of all the rocky planets, to some degree,
as the young Earth formed through accretion, it heated up and it melted.
It actually became molten or semi-molten.
Why? Why should it melt?
It was heated, in fact, by three quite distinct forces.
Let me just describe them.
The first is collisions.
We've seen that the process of accretion was extremely violent.
When two large chunks of stuff collide together,
if you want to get a sense of the sort of release of energy involved,
think hydrogen, think hydrogen weapons.
When a large asteroid hits another large asteroid,
this is the sort of energy release we're talking about.
So as bodies collided to form the early planets,
huge amounts of energy were released.
And that's the first source of heat that melted the early Earth.
Each of these tracks, the track in which the Earth was formed,
was a bit like a sort of cosmic demolition derby.
That's the way to think about accretion.
So collisions, that's the first source of energy.
The second is radioactivity.
Now, why should there be a lot of radioactivity in the early Earth?
Well, let's go back to the process of element formation.
Remember, the Sun is formed in an area where there are a lot of other chemical elements that have been formed.
And it's very likely that this area had been seeded by quite recent supernova explosions.
And those supernova explosions would have created the whole range of chemicals,
including many chemical elements that were highly radioactive.
So there's very good reason to think that the early Earth was significantly more radioactive than the Earth today.
The Earth today has had 4.5 billion years for radioactive materials to break down.
So that's the second main source of heat, radioactivity.
Within the early Earth, within the baby Earth, there's a lot of radioactive stuff, much more than there is today.
And then the third force, it's one we've seen before, and it's simply pressure.
As each of the planets built up, as more and more stuff is squashed together,
the pressure builds up inside each planet.
And we've seen before, in looking at star formation, how pressure itself, driven by gravity, can heat things up.
So gravity is ultimately the force that explains this source of heat.
So as each planet grew in size, through accretion, pressure and temperature built up at its center.
Very, very hot place.
Now, we've got our young Earth, and it's melting.
This is extremely important, it turns out, for the way the Earth is today.
Because what now took place was something that could only have taken place in a molten or semi-molten Earth.
And that's differentiation.
A sort of sorting out of the different elements of the Earth into layers.
And the Earth, in this way, acquired a layered structure that it still has today.
Heavy materials sank to the center, lighter materials rise to the surface in this process of differentiation.
And this gave the Earth its internal structure.
And we can think of this sorting process as creating four main layers.
A geologist would want to introduce many nuances to this picture.
But for our purposes, all we need to look at is these four crucial layers.
The heaviest stuff sinks through the Earth to the center.
Now, I've said the Earth is molten.
I probably need to qualify that.
Let's not think of water.
Let's just think of a sort of slow-moving liquid, a bit like lava perhaps.
Some liquids can move very, very slowly indeed.
So some of the Earth may be more sort of plastic than liquid.
Anyway, it's penetrable.
It's not rock solid.
So this is one of the first things that happens.
A lot of the metals in this early Earth, mainly iron and nickel,
sink to the center to form the core.
Now, we've seen already why iron is very common in the universe.
It's formed in the dying stages of very large stars.
And very large stars often end up with solid iron cores.
That is scattered into space when they break up.
So iron and nickel sink to the center to form the Earth's core.
Given the Earth a solid center and then probably a liquid,
metallic liquid around that solid center,
this core is going to be very important because it generates the Earth's magnetic field.
And for fragile chemicals like you and me,
this is important because the magnetic field can fend off
nasties such as extreme ultraviolet radiation.
So there's the core at the center.
The heavy stuff's gone to the center.
Secondly, the mantle.
Lighter materials.
And again, there's a whole range of materials that a geologist
would immediately have in mind.
But let's think of sort of rocks of various kinds, perhaps granites.
Form the semi-molten middle layers of the mantle.
The mantle includes most of the Earth from the core out to the edges.
And the crucial thing about this is that it's hot and it's hot enough
so that a lot of it is semi-molten.
That's the mantle.
And again, a geologist would break that up into many different layers.
The third level.
So we've got two levels, the core, the mantle, and now the third level.
The third level is the crust.
It's the shell around the edge of the young Earth.
The lightest materials tend simply through buoyancy,
through having less density to drift towards the upper levels,
the outer levels of this ball of semi-molten stuff.
And because this is the coldest layer,
this is the area exposed to the cold of outer space,
this chills early, this becomes solid.
And what it forms is a crust.
If you want to get a sense of the relationship of the crust to the rest of the body,
think of a sort of egg shell.
The relationship of an egg shell to the rest of the egg is probably about right.
It's incredibly thin and, as we'll see later,
somewhat fragile layer of stuff on the surface.
But for us, of course, it's crucial.
It's the crust that we live on and walk on as land-dwelling organisms.
The crust cools much more rapidly than the interior of the Earth.
And the interior of the Earth, we'll see, maintains its heat throughout the Earth's history.
And that will be an important part of a later story.
The fourth layer.
The fourth layer is the atmosphere.
In the young Earth, a lot of the elements are gaseous.
So gaseous and water vapor bubble up through volcanoes to form the Earth's earliest atmosphere.
Volcanoes are points in the early crust where stuff is just puncturing the surface and coming through.
And a lot of the stuff coming through is gaseous.
And the gases that bubble up, think of a sort of massive burping that goes on for several million years
if you want to get an idea of what's going on.
This stuff that bubbles up forms the Earth's earliest atmosphere.
It's possible that we're not sure that there had been an earlier atmosphere
dominated probably by hydrogen and helium.
But the young Earth, when it was smaller, didn't have enough gravitational pull to hold these light gases.
So this is probably the first atmosphere on Earth created by outgassing.
Now, it may also have been added to by incoming comets that brought a lot of water vapor and other stuff as well.
We're not absolutely sure.
The early atmosphere was probably dominated by water vapor, nitrogen and carbon dioxide
and also a range of other gases.
Finally, in its infancy, as we've seen, our Earth also acquired a satellite of its own, the Moon.
This is not strictly a layer, of course, but it's an important part of this system.
How?
Well, I described the process briefly in the last lecture.
The best current theory suggests that the Moon was the product of a sort of part of the process of accretion,
of a collision between the very young Earth and a large proto-planet, perhaps about the size of Mars.
And that collision would have gouged a huge chunk out of the young Earth,
would have vaporized the stuff because everything would have heated up violently.
It would have created a sort of nebula of vaporized stuff around the Earth
and eventually that nebula, through a process of accretion, would have formed into the Moon.
So all this molten stuff would have been ejected into space and eventually congealed into the Moon.
Now, when was the Moon formed? When did it take place?
We actually can more or less figure this out by indirect methods.
If you take the date of Moon rocks, they are very close to the same age as the solar system as a whole.
Now, what that tells us is that this process happened very early in the creation of the Earth.
We can probably regard it almost as part of the process of accretion.
But there's one other interesting thing about the Moon.
When Moon rocks were brought back from the first Moon expeditions and analyzed,
one of the surprises was that they contained very few metallic elements.
And this immediately suggested that this collision with another planet
must have taken place either during or just after the process of differentiation.
Because it looks as if what was gouged out was stuff gouged out from the mantle and the crust, not from the core.
There's so little metallic stuff in Moon rocks or such a low proportion of metallic stuff
that that suggests that a lot of the metals in the early Earth had already sunk to the core before the Moon was gouged out.
So that suggests that the Moon was created very early in the planet's history,
but just after the time of differentiation.
Okay, let's continue with our story.
We now have an Earth which has four main layers.
It's got structure and it's got a Moon.
What happened during the rest of the Hadian era?
Several quite important things.
First, the Earth kept cooling.
And one result of this was that eventually the water vapor that's probably orbiting in huge clouds around the young Earth
rained down to form the first seas.
We're not sure exactly what this involved, but you should probably imagine a storm that went on for millions of years
and was much more violent than any storm we're ever going to see.
Now the formation of seas is not just an academic matter.
It's not just that we expect our planet to have lots of seas.
Water, as we'll see clearly, water in liquid form is vital to the creation of life.
And we'll see that water is crucial because water provides a wonderful environment
for complex chemical reactions to take place.
It's a much better environment than either a gassy environment or a solid environment.
So water's crucial for the emergence of later forms of complexity, including life.
So with water, the Earth's beginning to look a bit more user-friendly.
And at the end of the Hadian era, the Earth is looking slightly more user-friendly,
but it's still a pretty unpleasant place.
Let me read a delightful description from Bill Bryson's short history of nearly everything.
This is Bill Bryson's description of the early Earth, the Hadian Earth.
If you were to step from a time machine, he says, into that ancient world,
he's actually talking about the very beginning of the Archaean era,
the next era, just after the end of the Hadian.
You would very swiftly scamper back inside,
but there was no more oxygen to breathe on the Earth back then than there is on Mars today.
It was also full of noxious vapours from hydrochloric and sulfuric acids,
powerful enough to cut through clothing and blister skin.
The chemical stew that was the atmosphere then would have allowed little sunlight to reach the Earth's surface.
What little you could see would be illuminated only briefly by bright and frequent lightning flashes.
So not a nice place.
Now let's look at the Archaean Eon.
It lasted from about 3.8 billion to 2.5 billion years ago.
And it's the era as we saw of the earliest life forms.
There were two important changes during this era.
Of course, there were many more, but for us two are crucial.
The first is that there were fewer asteroid impacts.
Why?
Well, the answer is really that the process of accretion itself was, as we've seen,
a process of sweeping up stray material.
So as accretion progressed, more and more of the debris of the early universe
was simply swept up into planets and various bodies,
so there was less stuff to collide with other stuff.
Asteroid impacts diminished, and the solar system as a whole, including the Earth,
became a slightly less violent place.
However, as we'll see in Lecture 17, occasional impacts could still play a critical
and even catastrophic role in the Earth's history.
And of course, it's still possible that they could play such a role in the future.
There are plenty of bad guys out there, all the asteroids,
lots of other things roaming around the solar system in eccentric orbits.
And as a number of recent Hollywood films have suggested, they're dangerous.
Some of you may have seen a 1998 film starring Bruce Willis called Armageddon.
And Bruce Willis, you may remember, is an engineer hired to take a team up to
an asteroid that seems to be heading for Earth and blow it up.
Frankly, his method of dealing with it is not terribly promising.
Blowing up an asteroid is probably not a good thing to do,
because all it's going to do is multiply the number of fragments
and increase the chances that at least one of them is going to strike the Earth.
Currently, it seems that the best way of dealing with a dangerous asteroid
might be to try and tow it away by sending a sort of heavy object to fly alongside it.
And that might be able to just drag it into a slightly different orbit
so that it passes the Earth.
However, the good news is that today, for the first time in the planet's history,
we can see asteroids coming, and that's brand new.
Indeed, a number of astronomers in different countries are mapping where they are
and keeping an eye out for the most dangerous one.
So is there coming to get us? We'll probably know it.
So that's the first thing. The number of impacts diminishes making the Earth
a slightly friendlier place for the evolution of chemical complexity, including life.
And the second thing that happens in the Archaean era
is that the Earth's atmosphere slowly changes.
And the crucial thing that happens is that increasing amounts of free oxygen begin to appear.
Now, we've seen already, oxygen is an extremely reactive element.
It eagerly combines with other elements.
And that's a fact we see whenever we light a fire.
Fire is simply oxygen doing its thing, combining quite violently with other elements
and releasing energy as it does so.
It's so reactive that it's actually quite strange to find traces of free oxygen in the atmosphere.
And what this must mean, James Lovelock pointed this out in his early work on Gaia,
it must mean that there was some process on the surface of the Earth
that was constantly pumping free oxygen into the atmosphere.
And that something, as we all see later, was life, early forms of life.
In particular, plant life.
And in particular, the process of photosynthesis, which releases free oxygen.
So plant-like organisms on the surface of the Earth are beginning to release more and more oxygen
and they're beginning to transform the atmosphere.
And this is the first hint of how living organisms can transform our planet.
Okay, that's a very brief general description of the early Earth for about the first half of its history.
Now, I want to talk briefly about the evidence.
How do we know about the early history of the Earth?
Once again, it's the same question.
How can we possibly know the history of events that happened so long ago?
The Earth itself has changed so much that we have little direct evidence from the Haiti and Eon.
The oldest Earth rocks date to about four billion years ago.
So our understanding of this Eon depends on a combination of theoretical inference
and the indirect evidence described in the previous lecture.
At present, understanding the structure of the Earth is also dependent on indirect evidence.
Again, there was a recent film that suggested we might be able to just dive through the Earth.
We can't do that. That's impossible.
At present, we cannot drill deeper than about seven miles into the Earth,
which is about 0.2% of the distance to the center, which is 4,000 miles away.
So to understand what's inside the Earth, we have to use indirect methods.
And one of the most important is seismology, or the study of earthquakes.
Seismic waves caused by earthquakes come in several different types, three main types,
and they travel in different ways and at different speeds through different types of rock.
So careful study of seismic waves using seismographs placed at many different parts of the Earth
can tell us much about what's inside the Earth.
There are three main types of waves, and I'm not going to go into details,
you can call them primary, secondary, and surface waves.
They vibrate in different ways, and their speeds differ.
Secondary waves, for example, travel about 40% slower than primary waves,
and what this means is that by comparing the times of arrival of the two types of waves,
you can calculate the distance of an earthquake from a particular seismograph.
They also travel in different ways through different media, different materials,
and slowly, slowly using all this information, geologists have built up their current picture
of the internal structure and composition of our Earth.
So seismographs have played a similar role in study of the Earth
to spectroscopes in studies of the stars.
How can we know what was in the ancient atmosphere billions of years ago?
Two simple techniques, one is capturing the gases released by volcanoes today.
That can tell us about the sort of gases that bubble up from the interior of the Earth,
and that gives us some clues about the early atmosphere.
But evidence for the buildup of free oxygen depends largely on the discovery of huge strata of red rocks.
If you see a red rock, the odds are what you're seeing is rust of some kind.
And the appearance of rust suggests that iron on the surface of the Earth is suddenly encountering free oxygen.
So this is the crucial clue to the buildup of oxygen in the atmosphere in summary.
So let me summarize what we've seen.
This lecture has described the early Earth and some of the more important changes it underwent
through accretion, differentiation, and some early changes in its atmosphere.
We saw that the Earth, the early Earth was very different from today's Earth.
How did it change to become the Earth we know today, with the sort of atmosphere we know today,
and the sort of geography we know today?
We'll tackle that question in the next lecture as we discuss the fundamental geological paradigm of plate tectonics.
Thank you.
Music
Lecture 11, Plate Tectonics and the Earth's Geography
Applause
How did the Earth get to be the way it is today?
How did it acquire the geography that would eventually shape the structure of human history?
Two crucial figures are going to dominate this lecture.
One is German and one's American.
One served in World War I, the other in World War II.
Alfred Wegener, W-E-G-E-N-E-R, was the German.
His dates are 1880 to 1930.
He was a meteorologist.
He was a Greenland explorer.
He served in the German Army in World War I, and he eventually died on an expedition in Greenland in 1930.
The American was Harry Hess.
His dates are 1906 to 1969.
He was a geologist and a professor at Princeton, who during World War II served as a naval officer.
Each of them would play a crucial role in our modern understanding of how the geography of today's Earth was constructed.
And as we'll see in geology as in other fields, what's happened as a modern scientific consensus has emerged,
is that we've realized that much more change took place than we once thought.
In fact, here again, we've realized there's a history to the Earth's geography.
It's not been fixed forever.
In the previous lecture, we saw that the early Earth was very different from today's Earth and distinctly less friendly.
So our main question is how did the Earth become as it is today?
And what we're going to focus on is one aspect of this.
How did the Earth's surface acquire its present form?
How did it acquire today's geography?
And as we'll see in later parts of the course, that geography would have a profound impact on the course of human history.
The timelines that are relevant to this are timelines two, which covers the history of the Earth,
and three, which covers the history of the last 600 million years.
Now the short answer to the question, how did the Earth come to be the way it is, is that the Earth moved.
The Earth, too, has a history like the universe and like human beings,
and this and the previous lecture are describing that history.
The Earth is not strictly speaking alive, though it is covered by a thin film of life that we call the biosphere.
But neither is it a completely inner lump of matter.
It moves and changes, and in its own way, it's quite creative.
It has changed profoundly since its early days, though only in the last 100 years,
through the work of figures such as Wagner and Hess, did geologists come to understand exactly how and in what ways the Earth moved.
Now to understand the modern understanding of the Earth,
it'll help, as with earlier stories, to contrast modern accounts of the history of the Earth with traditional accounts.
Traditionally, it was widely assumed that though mountains might rise through processes of volcanism or earthquakes,
and they might fall through erosion, the slow wearing away of mountains by rain, wind and snow,
the fundamental geography of the Earth's surface was fixed.
Now we've seen this story many times now.
The traditional assumption that human history is something that moves and changes,
but within a context that changes very little.
And once again, we're going to see that idea that the background to human history doesn't change is wrong.
In 1912, Alfred Wagner published a book called The Origin of Continence and Oceans.
Three years later, despite World War I, it was published in English, and of course I've given the title of the English translation.
Wagner had done quite a lot of research in Greenland.
He was an accomplished balloonist.
All in all, he fits in very well with a late 19th and early 20th century generation of great explorers.
And as I said, he would die eventually leading an expedition to the interior of Greenland.
The central idea of Wagner's book is often known as the theory of continental drift.
What Wagner argued, essentially, was that the Earth's continents were moving.
So from the very beginning, Wagner says very clearly, geography is not fixed.
Geography too has a history.
And he argued specifically that the continents had moved across the surface of the Earth
in such a way that once they'd been joined together in a single supercontinent called Pangaea or Pangaea.
There's a reference there that some of you may pick up immediately to the Greek goddess of the Earth, Gaia.
So this in a sense means all Gaia.
When he published his idea just before the First World War, the idea seemed completely beyond the pale to most professional geologists.
So Wagner, like Darwin, as we'll see when he published, had quite a struggle on his hands to persuade people that it was a serious idea.
So what evidence did he offer for this revolutionary claim that whole continents had sort of careered around the surface of the Earth?
Let me describe some of the crucial evidence.
And it has to be said that Wagner managed to produce some very, very powerful evidence indeed.
I'll just list some of the crucial examples of that.
The first comes from simply looking at world maps.
The first modern world maps were created early in the 16th century and they showed immediately, it was apparent to many people who looked at them,
that the continents seemed to fit together rather like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
This was particularly clear if you looked across the Atlantic Ocean and this was picked up by people including Francis Bacon.
If you look at a map of the world, you'll see that West Africa, the bulge of West Africa would seem to fit very neatly into the southern coast of North America.
Well, the bulge of Brazil would nuzzle quite nicely into the bend of West Africa as it bends south past the Congo.
So as early as the 16th and 17th centuries, some scholars had noticed these intriguing fits
and it crossed their mind that perhaps this was real, perhaps in some sense the continents had once fitted together.
In fact, if you look at a map of the world that draws the boundaries of continents, not where the sea is but at the continental shelves,
that's the point where the continental plate sort of drops away sharply, you'll see that the fit is even better.
Now that's the first crucial piece of evidence. You look at a map of the world and what you see is what looks like a jigsaw puzzle whose pieces have been slowly moved apart.
That's the first piece. The second piece is this.
Wagner listed a considerable number of geological formations that seemed to cut right across some of the world's seas.
For example, he identified geological formations that were of a similar date in composition
that you could find in West Norway, in East Greenland, in much of Britain, in Northwest Africa and along the eastern seaboard of the USA.
What could this possibly mean? Why would you get such similar strata in all of these regions?
It made sense only if you made the assumption that perhaps all these regions had once been joined together.
Then it fit very neatly.
The idea was not entirely original. An Austrian geologist, Edward Seuss, who lived from 1831 to 1914,
had already proposed that the southern continents of South America, Africa, Antarctica, Australia and India
had once been part of a single continent that he named Gondwana Land,
and his reasons for arguing this were very similar to those that Wagner used.
Wagner, in effect, expanded Seuss' idea to suggest that it was not just Gondwana Land that had once been joined in a supercontinent,
but all the Earth's major continents had once been joined together.
So that's the second piece of evidence.
You can find these very striking geological strata that seem to cut across the oceans
and suggest very powerfully that what is now separated by oceans had once been joined.
A similar argument concerns fossil species.
Wagner was able to accumulate a lot of data showing that fossil species, such as the ancient plant Glosopteris,
could be found on most of the continents of Gondwana Land.
And again, this hinted at the possibility that that was true,
because Glosopteris had once flourished on a large continent that brought all these masses together.
A similar question arises when you ask about the distribution of marsupials or marsupial fossils.
Why do you find them in South America and Australia?
Why are they so common there? And you can find fossils of them, for example, in Antarctica.
The idea of Gondwana Land explains that very, very neatly indeed.
So that's a third piece of evidence, fossils.
There's a fourth piece of evidence, and that concerns glaciation.
Or rather to be more precise, it concerns evidence that regions of the world
had once existed in very different climatic zones from the ones they existed in today.
For example, in tropical regions of Africa, you can find lots of geological evidence of glaciation.
Geologists can detect glaciation very easily.
It shows up as a sort of scouring of large areas of land by ice.
So there's plenty of evidence of glaciation in tropical regions of Africa.
This is obviously bizarre. It's been unexpected.
Equally surprising, you can find evidence of tropical forests in Antarctica.
And of course, what this suggests is that Antarctica had once been situated in a tropical region,
and Africa had at one time been situated in a region of glaciation.
So here we have four fairly powerful pieces of evidence.
The jigsaw fit of the continents, continuous geological strata, the fossil evidence,
and finally evidence that land masses had once existed in very different climatic zones from those they existed in today.
But here's the question, and this unfortunately is a question for which Wagner had no decent answers.
What in heaven's name can push entire continents back and forth across the surface of the earth?
That was a real problem about his theory. He couldn't explain it.
And his ideas cut across the fundamental commitments of geology.
Professional geologists deeply disliked the idea.
Their whole training prejudiced them against the idea that geography in this sense had a history.
And as a result, by the late 20s, most geologists had formally rejected Wagner's ideas.
And his ideas would remain at best marginal within geology for 40 years until the 1960s.
Now, it has to be said that there's some professional jealousy here.
The fact that he was a meteorologist didn't help at all in a community of geologists,
nor for American geologists who tended to dominate the profession did the fact that he was German.
Remember, this was in the 1920s, not that long after World War I.
That raises another problem. How did geologists then deal with the evidence that Wagner had come up with?
Well, the answer has to be that they came up with some remarkably ad hoc ideas,
which only made sense to geologists deeply committed to preserving the status quo.
One of them, for example, was that there must clearly have existed, though there was no apparent evidence for it,
land bridges linking the continents, very thin strips of land stretching right across massive bodies of water.
In retrospect, it sounds completely crazy. The remarkable thing is that the idea flourished for quite a time.
It was the only way of dealing with the sort of evidence that Seuss and Wagner had come up with.
Eventually, research after World War II would suggest a solution to Wagner's dilemma
and would revive interest in a modified version of his theories.
And in the 1960s, there emerged a new theory which is commonly known as plate tectonics
and will use that label to distinguish it from Wagner's slightly different theory, continental drift.
And plate tectonics would emerge very quickly during what for geologists is the revolutionary decade of the 1960s.
It would emerge as the new fundamental idea in the Earth's sciences.
Incidentally, it's worth reminding you that the 1960s were also a revolutionary era in cosmology.
And we'll see that to some extent that was true also of biology, a lot changed in the 1960s.
OK. What changed for geology?
The crucial figure now is Harry Hess.
His dates in 1906 to 1969. He was a geology professor at Princeton and a naval commander during World War II.
And as a naval commander, he used the recently developed technology of sonar, which had been developed to detect submarines.
But as a geologist, he realized he was a wonderful tool for surveying a branch of geology that very little was known about, and that was the sea floor.
So he started using sonar to survey the sea floor.
Now, to understand why he was so shocked by what he found, we have to be very clear about what most geologists assumed the sea floor was like.
Remarkably little was known about the deep sea floor.
Most geologists assumed that it was a sort of mud flat.
After all, erosion had been carrying Earth from the mountains of the Earth's continents for millions, perhaps billions of years into the sea.
So it was assumed that this would form a sort of flat goo at the bottoms of the ocean.
What in fact did Harry Hess find?
Well, he found something completely different, as opposite as you could imagine from this sort of flat goo.
What he found was a long, long chain of volcanoes, of mountains, quite high volcanoes.
And that chain, it eventually turned out, ran through the center of most of the Earth's oceans.
This was astonishing. This chain of volcanoes was really not what the doctor had ordered at all.
So the chain he found turned out to be one section of a chain that linked all the major oceans.
What sense could he make of this chain? What did this mean? What did this show?
Well, one of the clues came quite soon after his discovery.
In 1962, studies of these deep sea floor volcanic chains showed something again unexpected, but quite significant.
It turned out that if you study the magnetism of the land near these deep sea volcanoes,
you find that very close to the volcanoes, you get normal magnetism.
In other words, the rocks are magnetized in the normal way, with the north pointing north.
Now, I have to explain that as molten rock solidifies, it tends to take on the magnetism of the Earth at the time that it solidifies.
So this was to be expected. What was strange was that if you moved a bit further out on either side,
you'd find bands, strips, that had the opposite magnetism.
In other words, the north pole was off to the south.
If you went slightly further, you'd find a reversal again, and so on.
So you have this series of bands of opposite magnetism. What did this mean?
Well, by 1966, it was shown that the Earth's magnetic field periodically reverses.
Again, this had not been known before. Every few hundred thousand years, the Earth's magnetic field reverses.
So what this meant was that each band represented sea floor laid down in a different period.
And this began to suggest some clues as to what was going on at these huge mid-oceanic volcanic chains.
And eventually improved dating techniques confirmed the emerging picture of what was going on.
And it was this. It was that the bands closest to the volcanoes were oceanic crust that was very recent.
It had been laid down very recently. And as you move away from these mid-oceanic ridges,
you get sea floor crust that has been laid down further away. It's older and older.
And as you reach the edge of the continents, you reach the oldest oceanic crust.
This evidence confirmed an idea that Hess had proposed as early as 1962. And it was this.
It was that what was happening at the mid-oceanic ridges was that molten magma is rising from the Earth's interior
and it's creating new sea floor. And as it does so, it pushes existing sea floor aside.
Here, in other words, is the motor that Wagner had looked for.
Lava rising up from the mantle, pushing the crust apart, creating new sea floor.
Now that, of course, immediately raised a new problem.
If the sea floor is expanding, what's happening? Does this mean, as some geologists suggested,
they toyed with the idea that perhaps the whole Earth is slowly bloating.
It's getting bigger and bigger and bigger and more and more bloated.
Hess had a much better suggestion, which is accepted today.
And it was this. It was that the old sea floor doesn't hang around.
Eventually, it plunges back into the interior. It becomes magma again.
And eventually, of course, it could be recycled as new ocean crust.
This idea helped explain quite a few things. One was why oceanic crust seemed to consist mainly of volcanic basalts.
And why it was so much younger than most continental crust?
Most continental crust tends to be older than oceanic crust, sometimes much older.
You can find rocks that are several billion years old on the continents.
You don't find any rocks older than a few hundred million years old on the sea floor.
OK, let's sum up where these discoveries are leading.
They laid the foundations for the modern theory of plate tectonics.
And as I say, I'm using the term plate tectonics now to distinguish the modern version of the theory from Wagner's version,
which had no mechanism to explain how continents might move.
So this is what plate tectonics says.
According to plate tectonics, the Earth's crust consists of a dozen or so large plates and many, many much smaller plates,
like sections of a cracked eggshell.
And there are gaps between these plates.
And what it argues is that convection currents in the semi-molten regions beneath them move the plates.
Now, we've already seen that the mantle is semi-molten.
So that means, as in a boiling saucepan of water, you get convection currents.
This stuff is moving around very powerfully, it's driven by very powerful forces,
and that stuff carries the plates around.
Not surprisingly, most of the geologically interesting events occur at the plate's edges.
That's where you find volcanoes, that's where you find earthquakes.
Now, to understand this in more detail, we have to look at what happens at the edge of these plates.
So let me just describe several types of edges.
I'm going to describe divergent margins where crust is pushed apart,
convergent margins where it's pushed together,
and then transform margins where plates slide past each other.
So let's begin with divergent margins.
Divergent margins were what Hess himself had been studying,
and these you find at sub-oceanic ridges.
We've seen that magma rising from the interior comes up,
forms new seafloor, and pushes adjacent plates apart.
This is the motor of plate tectonics,
and this is why the Atlantic Ocean, for example, is widening by about two centimetres each year.
If you want to get a sense of what that means,
it's probably about the rate at which your fingernails are growing.
Now the second type of margin, convergent margins.
These are margins where plates are being pushed together by the fact that somewhere else
there are divergent margins that are sort of jostling them all together.
What happens when two plates are pushed together?
Well, there are two main types of convergent margins.
Now let's imagine that our two plates are continental,
because we can distinguish between continental plates
consisting mainly of continental crust and oceanic plates.
If they're both continental, what's most likely to happen
is that they'll be pushed together and they'll simply buckle up
at what are often called collision margins.
And what do they form? They form huge mountain chains.
The Himalayas is the best known example of this,
and it's formed by the fact that India, the Indian plate,
has been travelling north over the last 100 million years very rapidly
since it broke away from Gondwana land,
and eventually it collided with the Asian plate,
and that collision drove up the Himalayas.
Geologically speaking, this is a fairly recent event,
which is why the Himalayas are so high.
There's not been time enough for them to be worn down.
So that's a collision margin, but there's a second type of margin
which is in its way equally interesting and important.
Now let's imagine an oceanic plate.
Oceanic plates consist of...
they're dominated by basalts of various kinds.
Basalts tend to be heavier than granites,
the granites that you find in continental crusts,
and this is precisely why continental crust is so old.
It tends to float higher.
Continental crust has been around for a long, long time.
Oceanic crust is heavier,
and that's why it tends to burrow back into the earth.
So let's imagine we have a continental plate
meeting an oceanic plate.
What happens?
Well, very often you get what are known as subduction margins.
Because the basalt's heavier,
it dives beneath the continental plate.
Now this is a violent, violent process.
You can imagine the two plates are going to grind together
as the oceanic plate dives beneath the continental plate,
and that grinding can generate a lot of heat and a lot of energy,
and it can drive up whole mountain chains.
And in fact, the Andes are a perfect example
of what can happen at a subduction margin,
because the Andes were formed
as the Pacific plate dove under the west coast of South America.
So that's a subduction margin.
So we've seen there are two types of convergent margin,
one where you get two continental plates
and they buckle into mountains,
and the second is a subduction margin
where oceanic plate dives beneath continental plate.
And there, too, you may get mountain chains forming.
The third type of plate is easier to imagine.
It's a transform margin,
and the classic example of this is the San Andreas Fault in California.
Here you have two plates that are sort of pushing in opposite directions.
One is pushing north, the other is pushing south.
They're stuck together,
so friction stops them from moving a lot of the time,
but the force slowly builds up,
and eventually the force will become so violent
that there'll be a sudden release
that the two plates will quite suddenly move
and you get an earthquake,
and LA suffers.
This energy is suddenly released in a huge earthquake.
So that's a transform margin.
So just to summarize,
we've seen these three types of margins,
convergent margins where plates come together,
divergent margins where they dive apart,
and transform margins.
How do we know this?
Well, we have all the evidence that Wagner offered,
but now we have a lot more.
We have the evidence that Hess offered,
and we can go even further.
For example, satellite images can now enable us
to measure tectonic movements with great precision.
This is not guesswork.
We can actually measure precisely the speed
and direction of the movement of each plate.
And now in summary,
we know what the machine was that Wagner was looking for.
How can we describe it?
What's driving this whole process?
Well, what's driving it is something we saw in an earlier lecture.
It's heat from the center of the Earth,
and we saw that that heat was generated when our Earth was formed.
And it's still there, slowly, slowly dissipating.
But there's a lot of heat in the center of the Earth,
and it's that heat that drives this massive process.
So it's now clear that the continents are indeed moving,
and they're moving on these plates.
Now, in the final part of the lecture,
I want to very briefly give you some feeling
of how this process created the geography of the modern world.
It now seems clear that as plates move around,
periodically all the plates, all the continental plates,
have formed supercontinents such as Pangea.
Wagner was dead right about that.
And here I want to just summarize some of the crucial changes
over the last two of these cycles.
Now, we begin about 540 million years ago,
we're in the fourth of the great geological eons,
the Phanerozoic Eon.
That is divided into a number of geological periods,
whose names will be fairly familiar.
This is not a course in geology,
so though I'm going to use some of those names,
I'm not going to use them in great detail.
So what I'd like to do is just very quickly,
in about a minute, describe the movements of the plates
over 540 million years.
540 million years ago was when the first multi-celled organisms
formed in the Cambrian period.
It's the oldest period of the Phanerozoic Eon,
and the first in which multi-cellular fossils are abundant.
The ancient supercontinent of Radinia was breaking up.
Now we zoom forward, 120 million years.
420 million years ago, we're in the Silurian period.
Most continental plates are gathered together in the south.
They're beginning to sort of re-gather.
The first bony fishes appearing are appearing in this era,
and the earliest land-based trees.
We move forward another 120 million years.
300 million years ago in the Carboniferous period,
continental plates are reassembling.
This is the period of the first reptiles,
the first winged insects and amphibians,
and the first vertebrates on land.
And it's when fossilized trees begin laying down huge beds of coal.
180 million years ago, in the Jurassic period,
most continental plates joined together
to form vagueness supercontinent of Pangaea.
This is when dinosaurs flourish,
ferns and conifers, and the earliest forms of mammals.
Then 60 million years ago,
Pangaea begins splitting into two supercontinents,
Laurasia and Gondwana land.
This is just after the dinosaurs have been wiped out
by an asteroid impact.
And today, we're in an era where continents are breaking up.
The Earth is as fragmented as it's ever been,
and that's a geographical reality
that would have a profound impact on modern history.
We've described the theory of plate tectonics
and the creation of today's world geography.
Now, we must turn to discuss life itself,
one of the most amazing of all these thresholds.
Thank you.
I very much hope you're enjoying this rapid journey
through the history of everything.
And I hope also that you're beginning to see
some of the many intriguing connections there are
between knowledge that's accumulated within different disciplines,
from cosmology to chemistry and geology.
And I hope you're beginning to see that when you put them together,
it's only when you put them together in a single story
that you can begin to see these connections.
So I hope you're beginning to get a feeling
for what I described in an earlier lecture
as the underlying unity of modern, scientific,
evidence-based accounts of the past.
But it's been a very fast journey.
We've covered the best part of 13 billion years
in the lecture so far.
So at this point, I'd like to pause briefly,
take a breath, and check where we are.
Most of the universe, and when I say most,
I mean overwhelmingly most of the universe,
is still extremely simple.
It consists of cold, empty vacuum.
But in tiny pockets, it's getting really interesting,
and those pockets appeared quite early in the history of the universe
with the appearance of stars.
We've seen that complexity builds on complexity.
Stars themselves created the preconditions
for new forms of complexity in their hinterland,
in the area around them,
the area that was warmed by their energy.
And so we saw that new forms of complexity
began to appear in their hinterland,
with the creation of planets in particular.
We've seen how we can explain each of these steps
towards increasing complexity,
from the universe to stars to chemical elements,
and now to planets.
But I'm sure you'll agree that something pretty fundamental
is still missing.
And that thing, of course, is life.
Most of the universe, as I've described it so far,
is still technically dead.
It's not alive.
It can do lots of interesting things, we've seen.
But it's not, strictly speaking, alive.
It's not alive in the sense that you and I are alive.
So what we start doing now in the course
is exploring the next, the fifth threshold of complexity.
And that threshold is creation of life.
Here, perhaps more than with any of the other thresholds,
we can feel the apparently magical nature
of new emergent properties.
Remember Nagasena's explanation of the self
as an emergent property of various components,
assembled in certain ways.
You assemble them in a certain way and suddenly, poof,
something brand new, something quite magical.
In this case, the sense of self appears.
And something like that seems to happen with life.
So, let's cross that threshold into life.
Now, I'm going to do it slightly backwards.
I'm going to discuss what life is
and how it changes before we actually come
to the question of its origins.
And I hope you'll see there are very good reasons
for doing it this way.
Okay, let's begin with, again,
one of these great cocktail party questions,
which is, what is life?
What is life?
Life is one of those things that seems extremely obvious
until you try to sit down and define it rigorously.
As soon as you try to define it rigorously or scientifically,
it starts wriggling and threatens to get away from you.
It proves surprisingly tricky.
Traditional answers to this question
have often seen life as a sort of divine gift.
Now, this is something we've seen over and over again by now.
Trying to explain fundamental aspects of our reality,
you resort to the idea of a deity of some kind.
So, life too has often been explained as a divine gift.
But as we've seen, this leads us back to the familiar,
infinite regress of who made the creator
and to the other problem of evidence for the creator.
It's proved impossible to demonstrate the existence of a creator.
It's even proved impossible to demonstrate
the existence of a sort of generalized life force.
So, what modern science does
is to assume that living organisms
are made from the same materials and forces as non-living entities.
This incidentally is rather like what Newton did
when he showed that the heavenly realm and the earthly realm
can be explained using the same laws.
In other words, there wasn't an impassable gulf between them.
Something like this happened in chemistry in the early 19th century.
And the proof that different realms of chemistry were linked
came from the work of a German chemist Friedrich Verla,
whose dates are 1800 to 1882.
Before Verla's time, chemists widely believed
that there were two fundamental types of chemicals.
There were organic chemicals,
which were the sort of stuff that created life.
And there were inorganic chemicals, which created non-living things.
And it was widely assumed that organic chemicals
might contain some sort of special ingredient that explained life.
That was the situation before Verla.
What Verla did was to synthesize in a lab
one of the chemical ingredients of life, an organic chemical.
It happened to be urea. It doesn't matter.
It's been done, the experiment has been repeated many, many times.
It's now known that many of the basic chemicals of life can be synthesized.
And what this proved was that the chemistry of living things
is essentially the same as that of non-living things.
There is, in other words, a continuum between life and non-life.
And that may be why we find it so hard to distinguish scientifically
between life and non-life.
So there's a continuum between the two.
These are not utterly different realms with some sort of huge chasm between them.
Nevertheless, having said that, living organisms are different.
And I'm going to use the idea of emergence to explain that difference once again.
Here are some of the crucial differences, I think.
First, living organisms count as a higher level of complexity.
Now, there are several reasons for saying this,
but first, let me remind you of the four features I've focused on as keys to understanding complexity.
First, a special arrangement of elements in a new form.
Secondly, some stability.
So we have structure, a degree of stability.
Third, the appearance with these structures of new emergent properties of some kind.
And fourth, significant energy flows that sustain these complex structures.
So living things are complex.
Their existence depends on very specific ways of organizing matter, that structure.
Get the plan wrong, and the organism simply dies.
The structure's crucial.
They have a degree of stability, but eventually they die.
They're not eternal.
They display new emergent properties,
and they depend on flows of energy to maintain their complexity.
You and I need to breathe, and we need to eat in order to survive.
Indeed, Eric Chason has suggested, as we've seen, that these flows are denser than in other complex things that we've looked at.
And this justifies in his mind the argument that living things represent a higher level of complexity.
Let me remind you of the figures Eric Chason comes up with in his back of the envelope calculations.
He suggests that while about two ergs per second per gram of energy flow through a star,
some 75 flow through planetary surfaces, and about 900 through simple plants, simple living organisms.
And that's a sort of first suggestion that we really are dealing with a higher level of complexity.
We shouldn't rely on these rough calculations too much, but they're very suggestive,
and they fit in well with our intuitive sense that living things are more complex than dead things.
The complex structures of living things are designed exquisitely to maintain and handle these dense energy flows,
and the energy flows in turn help living organisms maintain a high level of complexity.
So complexity builds on energy flows which builds complexity.
Now I said one of the properties of complex things is emergent properties.
What are the emergent properties that make living organisms so different?
This may be one way into defining what we mean by life.
I'm going to suggest here, I have to say immediately there's no perfect consensus on this.
So any conclusions we reach are going to be slightly arbitrary.
Nevertheless, I think what I argue here represents a broad consensus.
Three distinctive emergent properties distinguish living organisms from non-life
and contribute to the complexity of living organisms.
Some of these properties you can find to some degree in non-living things.
It's really the combination of the three I'll argue that is most powerful.
These properties are, first, metabolism.
That is the ability to generate and use energy flows.
Secondly, reproduction, the ability to make multiple copies of an organism.
And third, adaptation.
The ability over time to slowly change in ways that enable you to fit your environment better and better.
So here are the three qualities, metabolism, reproduction and adaptation.
Let me talk about each of them in slightly more detail.
First, metabolism.
Metabolism means the ability to use and process energy from the environment.
All living things, like all complex things, require a flow of energy to maintain themselves.
And their metabolism consists of multiple chemical reactions through which they extract energy from their surroundings.
Humans extract energy by eating and breathing.
Plants extract energy directly from sunlight through the very complex chemical reaction known as photosynthesis.
In a sense, of course, both stars and planets also depend on energy flows.
The difference is the astonishing variety of ways in which living organisms extract energy from their environments.
Each species seems to have its own subtly different way of extracting energy from its own particular niche in the environment.
Its own particular place in the environment.
So that's metabolism, the ability to extract energy from the environment.
And we've seen it takes a huge variety of forms in living organisms.
The second emergent property is reproduction.
Reproduction is the ability of living organisms to make multiple copies of themselves.
Now, you might say that in a sense crystals reproduce.
Yes, to some degree.
But they reproduce so mechanically that their copying goes nowhere.
Reproduction is vital in organisms because it helps preserve new ways of extracting energy and resources.
And to do that, as we'll see, the reproduction has to be not mechanical.
It has to be subtler than that. It has to be slightly more flexible than that.
So that's the second quality, reproduction.
The third is adaptation.
By adaptation, I mean the ability that living species show to change over time.
So as to find new ways of extracting energy from their environment.
It's as if living organisms are constantly exploring their environment and looking for new ways of relating to it.
Adaptation can occur both at the level of the species and the level of the individual.
Individuals adapt in the sense that they learn. You and I adapt to our environments.
But for understanding the longer history of biological species, it's adaptation at the level of the species that's crucial.
And here what goes on is that the average features of an entire population of an organism slowly change.
Not the individuals.
For species change, it's average change in the qualities of the species that's crucial.
Now what's remarkable is that adaptation allows organisms to keep extracting energy from their environments even if their environments change.
So adaptation is wonderful if you happen to be in a somewhat unstable environment.
And that, of course, is true of all living organisms.
So adaptation is the ability, and it's really unique to living organisms, to slowly change over time in ways that enable you to fit better into your surroundings.
Adaptation, in other words, is the key to the ability of living organisms to explore their environments and find new ways of extracting the energy they need.
And that means adaptation explains why living organisms exist in such a huge diversity of forms.
Okay, metabolism, reproduction, adaptation.
Do these three emergent properties provide a rigorous definition of life?
Probably not quite.
Viruses are a sort of counter example.
They sit right at the borderline between life and non-life.
Let me explain what I mean.
Viruses are really little more than bundles of genetic material with no metabolism of their own.
The genetic material tells them how to reproduce so they can reproduce, but they have no metabolism.
What they can do, though, is hijack the metabolism of other organisms in order to reproduce.
They can baton on to other organisms and extract energy from them.
Next time you get a flu, you'll know that this is exactly what's happening.
Viruses are doing their things.
They're doing their thing.
They're using your metabolism in order to survive and reproduce.
And because they can reproduce, they can also adapt.
So they do two of these things very well, and they can get around the absence of a metabolism.
And it's because viruses can adapt that a virus such as the AIDS virus
can survive even in the extremely hostile environment that humans create for them by designing antiviral drugs.
So viruses test the rigidity of our definition.
Nevertheless, I think it'll take us a long way.
It'll cover most cases in which we're trying to distinguish between living and non-living things.
Now what I want to do is to focus on one of life's most striking features.
Let's call it life's astonishing creativity.
It's flexibility and adaptability.
It's ability to keep changing, making tiny changes in response to a changing environment.
It's this quality, this third property, adaptation, that allows life itself to flourish
and also to create new and potentially more complex forms.
Life is creative in a sense that non-living things are not.
But how and why?
How does adaptation work?
This we'll see is one of the most fundamental questions of modern biology.
And the answer comes from the way that the three emergent properties work together.
Now here what I'm going to do is summarise the answer in very general forms.
Later I'm going to come back and describe it much more carefully.
So at the moment let's simply ask why and how does this process of adaptation, the creativity of life,
tend to generate new levels of complexity?
Because this itself is characteristic of life.
Over time life emerges, it becomes so varied that emerges in more and more complex forms.
Now the key is the way that metabolism, reproduction and adaptation work together.
Metabolism supplies the energy needed to maintain their complex structures.
Reproduction makes it possible to copy these structures, particularly if they work.
So if you get a good metabolism you can copy it through reproduction.
And adaptation enables living organisms to keep tweaking their structures
so as to explore new ways of extracting energy from the environment.
So through adaptation we've seen living organisms effectively explore their environment
in a way that dead organisms don't do.
But how does this lead to greater complexity?
Why should life generate new levels of complexity all the time?
Now the first crucial thing to say here is that there seems to be no intrinsic drive to greater complexity.
This contradicts what some 19th century biologists assumed.
There's no intrinsic drive to greater complexity.
No particular reason why life should prefer complexity to simplicity.
Indeed, many species have evolved in the direction of greater simplicity.
From mole rats, which have lost their eyes, they've gone blind because they live under the ground and don't need them.
To snakes, which have lost their legs, it turns out they don't need them.
And to viruses, which we've seen have dispensed even with having a metabolism.
So evolution can take you towards greater simplicity.
Nevertheless over time the upper level of complexity is increased. Why?
Well this I think is the reason and it's fundamentally statistical.
If you have a large number of species and they're all sort of exploring their environment by adaptation,
they're all tweaking the way they relate to the environment.
Some of these experiments that go on are bound to be more complex than others for purely statistical reasons.
Now this itself may be why the upper level of complexity has slowly increased.
Of course, more complex organisms will need more energy.
So they'll have to develop a more powerful metabolism.
For example, the first organisms that learned to extract energy from oxygen about two and a half billion years ago
suddenly had access to new forms of chemical energy not available to other life forms.
This was a bit like striking oil for those organisms.
So we expect that over time at least some of these species are going to be more complex.
And that may simply be the crucial reason why over time living organisms have indeed become more complex.
So adaptation's the key to explain how more complex life forms have appeared over almost four billion years.
And that, of course, is something we need to explain in order to explain ourselves.
We must explain exactly how adaptation works.
Now explaining adaptation proved surprisingly difficult.
In fact, this was probably the greatest challenge of 19th century biology.
And we'll see in the next lecture that its solution was one of the great scientific triumphs of the modern era.
I think many scientists would be inclined to say that this was really one of the two or three greatest of all scientific discoveries.
But before we get to that, let's once again go back to traditional answers to explaining adaptation.
Probably the most common traditional answer to the question about adaptation was, as strange as it may seem today,
that living organisms don't change. There is no adaptation.
Living organisms appear adapted to their environments. They fit into their environments well,
because that was how a benevolent creator made them.
This explanation is present in the sacred texts of the Judeo-Christian Muslim tradition.
You can also find it in the work of Carl Linnaeus, the founder of modern taxonomy.
The system by which living organisms are classified.
Let me talk briefly about Linnaeus. We'll come back to him later on.
Before Linnaeus, classifying living organisms was in a state of complete chaos.
Think about the problem. I mean, think if you were to sit down and try to come up with a neat way of describing all the living organisms around you.
You don't need to think long to realize what a complex problem that was.
What Linnaeus did was to introduce a system that was simple enough that it's still in use today.
Every living organism can be described with a simple two-word description, such as Homo sapiens, the description for our own species.
In a sense, Linnaeus did for biology, what Mendoleev did for chemistry, and Headsprung and Russell for stars.
They found a way of classifying or arranging a huge amount of data that turned out to be extremely illuminating.
So even Linnaeus accepted that species were fixed. In other words, what he meant was there are clearly borders, there are strict borders between them.
He knew that individual, there was a bit of wriggle room in species, but basically species were fixed.
However, even in Linnaeus' time, many biologists had very good reasons for thinking that living organisms were actually a lot more flexible than that,
and perhaps the borders between them were illusory. Here are some of the reasons for thinking this.
By the 18th century, many fossils had been found of creatures that no longer existed, such as trilobites or dinosaurs.
We have drawings of these from the 17th century, and this raised the question for those who believed that God had created species as they were today.
Why should God have destroyed his own creations? If God was a benevolent designer and a perfect designer, presumably God should have been able to create perfect organisms.
Now, there was a sort of way around this, Noah's flood. Perhaps God had actually got so irritated with some of his organisms that he decided to wipe them out.
It's perfectly possible, but it's not entirely satisfactory, as it seems to imply that the first creations were not that perfect.
So there was a way around the finding of fossils, but it was not ideal. But there's another reason for thinking that species were a bit more flexible than was normally assumed.
And this was that animal breeders knew perfectly well that animals do change, and in fact there's a lot of wiggle room for changing them.
Indeed, what animal breeders do is to deliberately change species, and they can do it.
Darwin's origin of the species spends a lot of time talking about breeding. He was fascinated by the amount of flexibility that breeders could find in different species.
He quotes a famous breeder of pigeons, Sir John Subbrite, who used to boast that you could more or less order the sort of pigeon you want.
And he used to say he would produce any given feather in three years. So if you say, I'd like a feather that's this shape and this color, he could do it in three years.
But he said it would take him six years to obtain head and beak. In other words, if you want a particular type of head and beak, it might take him six years to do it.
We're talking, of course, about designer pigeons. But the point is that pigeons turn out to be very flexible.
You can look at pictures of 19th century pigeon breeders' products, and you see a huge variety.
Look today at dogs. They're very closely related. But look at the amount of variety that exists within what we normally think of as a single species.
So by the 19th century, there was growing evidence that species really are very flexible. They really do change, and maybe the borders between them were permeable.
But how do you explain that? How do species change? And why when they change are the changes adaptive?
Why do those changes enable them to fit well into their environments?
Well, one of the most serious 19th century attempts to explain adaptation is associated with the work of the French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Le Marc.
In 1809, remember, we're in the time of the Napoleonic Empire. Le Marc proposed that species change in effect because they want to.
The famous example he gave is that of giraffes. So you imagine an environment, a savannah environment, where you have a sort of horse-like animal with a longish neck.
And maybe the tasty leaves are quite higher. So this animal has an advantage. It can get to the leaves on top of shrubs and trees.
And what Le Marc did was to imagine that this creature over time stretches its neck higher and higher.
And he argued that over time, over many generations, you're going to find the necks are slowly going to get longer.
And eventually they might even turn into giraffes.
What's wrong with this? I suspect that most of you can pick straight away what the problem is with this argument.
And the trouble is that any animal breeder could have pointed out to Le Marc what was wrong with this argument.
And this is what it is.
Qualities acquired during one's lifetime are acquired characteristics. They are not passed on to one's offspring.
Imagine, ghastly thought, but imagine that I were to spend a lot of time in the gym and develop a body like my governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Now, imagine also, God forbid, that I were to have some more kids.
Would they all be born with bodies like Arnold Schwarzenegger? And the answer, of course, is no, thank God.
And the reason is because acquired characteristics, characteristics you acquire during your lifetime, are not passed on to your children.
What you pass on are inherited characteristics, characteristics that you received from earlier generations.
A fattened pig, a pig that you have fed a lot of food to so as to make it fat, will not necessarily produce fat piglets,
but a pig that had very fat parents may produce fat piglets.
So Le Marc's theory didn't work.
Now, we've seen that life represents a new level of complexity based on control of energy, the capacity to reproduce,
and the ability to adapt to changing environments.
We've also seen that in the middle of the 19th century, the riddle of adaptation, this task of explaining how the living organisms adapt.
Why is life so creative?
This was the key to understanding what made life different from non-life.
It remained unsolved, this riddle.
Charles Darwin would solve the riddle in a book that he published in 1859.
Thank you.
These lectures are titled Big History, The Big Bang, Life on Earth, and the Rise of Humanity Part Two.
We've already seen in previous lectures that one of the major changes introduced by scientific accounts of the universe
is that they have historicized science.
This is a really profound revolution in our thinking about the universe as a whole, the universe that we inhabit.
And a lot of it happened in the 60s.
Modern scientific theories, several of which were clinched in the 1960s,
have shown that it's not just human societies that have long histories of change that we can study and date.
The same is true of the universe as a whole, as we've seen.
It's also true of stars.
It'll be true of our sun.
It's true of the Earth.
And, as Alfred Wegener showed, it's true also of the Earth's surface.
So many aspects of our reality, of our universe, that were once thought to be fixed, static, unchanging, in fact, are changing and they have a history.
This change, in fact, is one of the best reasons for attempting to construct a course such as this course of lectures in big history.
We've learned in the last 50 or 100 years that change is characteristic of most of the universe, not just of human society.
Today we look at the work of Charles Darwin.
And what we'll see is that one of Darwin's fundamental achievements was to show that change was also characteristic of life and of living species.
In other words, life too has a history.
It's not fixed and unchangeable.
It has a history of long-term change.
Living species also change and that means that life has a history and therefore it's crucial, as Darwin understood, to figure out how that history works.
How do species change over time?
Why does life change?
And this is his great achievement, as I said in the last lecture.
What he did was to solve what I've called the riddle of adaptation, explaining how and why life slowly, slowly changes over time.
And that in turn explained life's astonishing variety and complexity.
So here's the question.
How do living species adapt?
I argued that adaptation is one of the most distinctive features of life in general.
So explaining adaptation was the great riddle of biology and that's what Darwin solved.
So what I want to do in this lecture is essentially to describe Darwin's very elegant solution to the riddle of adaptation.
It's a solution which has been added to, nuance has been added, but basically it still stands today and it remains at the center of modern biology and life sciences.
Charles Darwin is going to be at the center of this entire lecture.
So let's talk a bit about Charles Darwin.
His dates are 1809 to 1882.
He was born into a wealthy family and a family with a long tradition of scientific research.
He was lucky, in fact.
Any scholar, any researcher has to envy him.
The result of being born into a family that had money and a commitment to research was that he was able to spend most of his life studying the one thing he most wanted to study, which was the natural world.
You really do have to envy him.
How many of us would love to be so privileged?
I recently visited his house, Down House, which is in the village of Down, D-O-W-N-E, in Kent in England.
Down's a lovely old village.
It's probably still much the way it was in Darwin's day.
You can go, you have a choice of two or three very nice pubs, and at one end of the village is his house.
It's not that spectacular architecturally.
It's quite big.
It's probably a fairly conventional Victorian manor house.
And Darwin was certainly the leading figure in the village.
But as you look through the house, you get a wonderful impression of a large Victorian household.
And you certainly come away with the impression of a very benevolent environment, but also one that was designed to support Darwin.
His wife, Emma, the marriage seems to have been an immensely happy one.
His wife, Emma, clearly regarded it as her main function to keep the house running well so that Darwin could follow the very rigid routines that he followed for many years.
You knew exactly when he'd get up, exactly when he'd take his first walk, exactly when he'd take breakfast, exactly when he'd play cards, exactly when he'd go into his study.
So the house was run to support this scholarly life.
He had a butler called wonderfully, Parslow.
Every British butler, I think, should be called Parslow.
And in the evenings, when he needed to relax his brain, what Darwin did was play billiards with Parslow.
Apparently the games were fairly competitive.
So he lived in this wonderful, benign environment.
He himself also seems to have been, in many ways, a very kind, unlikable man.
I think it's symptomatic that he called his children the blesseds.
A famous scholar who calls his children the blesseds has to have a certain sweetness in him.
So he was lucky to.
This was the environment in which he was able to study life, to study natural organisms.
Let's talk about his family.
One of his grandfathers, Erasmus Darwin, had been a doctor who was fascinated by how living organisms seemed to change over time.
He, like an increasing number of 18th or early 19th century naturalists,
was increasingly convinced that species do indeed change over time.
And he understood that this was the great puzzle for biology.
The solutions he came up with were pretty close to those of Lamarck.
And we saw in the last lecture what was wrong with Lamarck's solution.
He confused, acquired, and inherited characteristics.
Erasmus Darwin also had a penchant for writing about the natural world in verse.
Now, that's clearly an art we've lost.
I dread to think what would happen if I tried to present an academic paper in verse,
and I promise you the rest of these lectures are not going to be in verse.
We seem to have lost these sort of skills.
His other grandfather, Josiah Wedgwood, was an extremely well-known scientist.
He was a friend of James Watt, the inventor of the steam engine,
and of Joseph Priestley, one of the fundamental figures in the history of chemistry.
But he was also an entrepreneur, and he was founder of the Wedgwood pottery works.
So Josiah Wedgwood himself combines the entrepreneurial and the scientific traditions of this family.
As a child, Darwin was fascinated by the natural world.
He was a kid who loved nothing better than to go out and find bugs.
His father, who wanted him to go into one of the respectable professions,
such as being a clergyman or a doctor, at one point dispaired of him entirely.
He wrote to him, you care for nothing but shooting, dogs, and rat-catching.
And you will be a disgrace to yourself and all your family.
I guess every family has a record of bad predictions about the future of one member of the family or other.
Well, that has to count as one of the great wrong predictions about the future of a young boy.
Darwin resisted pressure to become a surgeon.
His father sent him to Edinburgh.
He started training.
He was so appalled by the screams of patients undergoing operations without anesthesia
that he swore he'd never be a surgeon.
In fact, in Edinburgh he spent much of his time collecting beetles.
He also resisted attempts by his father to turn him into a clergyman,
as someone who almost certainly was an atheist for much of his life.
This was probably a wise move.
His father placed him at Cambridge after the failure of the Edinburgh experiment.
At Cambridge too, he spent most of his time collecting beetles.
In fact, he wrote in his autobiography, and I quote,
No pursuit at Cambridge was followed with nearly so much eagerness
or gave me so much pleasure as collecting beetles.
He also realized that his father too was not too harsh a man
and would never force him to take up a career he hated.
He wrote later on,
I became convinced, and again you have to envy him,
I became convinced from various small circumstances
that my father would leave me property enough to subsist on with some comfort.
So he understood he could pursue the things that really interested him.
Darwin later described as the most important event of my life,
an invitation he received in 1831 when he was about 23
to travel around the world as the naturalist on board a ship called the Beagle.
The Beagle's main mission was to chart the coast of South America
and the invitation was issued by the Beagle's captain, Robert Fitzroy,
and Robert Fitzroy offered to give up part of his captain's cabin to an,
and I quote,
any young man who would volunteer to go with him as naturalist to the voyage of the Beagle.
Darwin's father once again, opposing clearly the direction of history,
didn't like the idea but was persuaded by Josiah Wedgewood, not the potter,
but Darwin's uncle and eventual father-in-law to let Darwin go, and he did.
And the voyage lasted from 1831 to 1836.
It was really a pivotal moment in Darwin's life, or pivotal five years in Darwin's life.
The Beagle travelled first to South America, to Brazil,
then south around Cape Horn, up the western coast of South America,
across the Pacific via the Galapagos Islands, which would play a huge role in Darwin's career,
to Tahiti, to New Zealand, to Australia, to Mauritius, around South Africa,
around the Cape of Good Hope, to the Cape Verde Islands, and then back to Britain.
Darwin collected specimens and fossils and stored them with meticulous neatness
in the tiny space available in the captain's cabin,
and he also took detailed biological and geological notes.
If you go to Darwin's house, you'll find that he stored stuff there
with the same kind of care that was needed to live in a tiny cabin on a ship.
When Darwin left on the Beagle, he shared what was at the time the dominant belief,
and that was that living species had been made by the creator more or less in their existing form.
It was understood that there was some degree of flexibility, a bit of change, a bit of wriggle room,
but essentially species remained fixed as made by the creator.
They were borders to how much they could change.
What he saw on his travels shook this conviction and forced him to rethink what a species really was.
Let me try and convey some of the impressions that shook this conviction.
First, he was astonished by the staggering variety of living organisms he saw,
and the many subtle variations between species.
This was not just the kind of list of species you might find in a textbook,
or the list of species you might collect two by two and put on Noah's Ark.
The range of species was vastly greater than he had imagined or that any textbook had imagined,
and so were the subtle variations between them.
That was the first thing, the sheer range of species.
For a young naturalist, think what a wonderful opportunity this was.
You can travel the whole world, you get to see a fantastic range of different species,
plants, animals, even fossils and rocks.
Second, he was struck over and over again
seeing many examples of species which were extremely similar but clearly not identical.
They were separate species, but they also lived very close to each other.
Now he could see this particularly clearly in the Galapagos Islands,
where he noted species of finches, of tortoises and iguanas that seem to vary just slightly from island to island.
And we'll come back to that.
But he saw it also elsewhere.
For example, in South America, he not only noted similarities between species that live close together,
he also noted that there were similarities between existing species and fossils,
such as those of armadillo-like creatures.
The fossils were clearly very similar to existing species, but slightly different.
They were not exactly the same.
This, just by sheer repetition, this evidence, seeing it over and over again,
eventually made him think more and more seriously about the possibility that in fact
what he was looking at was species that were related, that were linked in some way,
that were relatives on some sort of large family tree.
And he eventually concluded that all species, probably including humans,
must be the products of slow, continuous change.
In other words, life had a history.
It was as if there was no clear borderline between species.
On the contrary, over time, species could change radically.
The mix of species on Earth could change radically.
Let me quote what he wrote in a letter to a friend, Hooker, in 1844.
This is ten years after he got back.
He writes,
I was so struck with the distribution of the Galapagos organisms
and with the character of the American fossil mammifers, mammals in modern terminology,
that I determined to collect blindly every sort of fact which could bear on any way
on what are species.
At last, he writes,
gleams of light have come,
and I am almost convinced, quite contrary to the opinion I started with,
that species are not.
And now he puts something in brackets.
It is like confessing a murder, he says.
That species are not immutable.
He's accepted that species change.
The third thing that happened was that Darwin understood
that very few would accept this conclusion
unless he could explain how species change.
It was no good simply accumulating evidence that they did.
He had to be able to explain how.
You remember the parallel with Wagner.
Wagner could show that continents drifted,
but he never managed to show how they drifted.
Darwin was determined to show how species changed as well.
In other words, he had to solve the riddle of adaptation.
And this is what he wrote in his autobiography.
Until adaptation could be explained,
it seemed to me almost useless to endeavor to prove by indirect evidence
that species have been modified.
In other words, what Darwin was saying
was it was vital to determine the mechanism of adaptation.
Darwin stumbled on the beginnings of a solution to this riddle
two years after returning home.
He'd been reading the Reverend Thomas Malthus essay
on the principle of population, which was published in 1798.
Now we're going to meet Malthus again.
He was one of the pioneers of demography
or the study of population movements.
What are the factors that govern whether populations rise or decline
across many species, not just amongst humans?
He pioneered the study and he pointed out a curious fact.
This was that across many, many species,
in every generation the vast majority of individuals die
before they can reproduce.
In other words, the next generation is going to be descended
not from a majority of the previous generation
but just from a tiny sample of that previous generation.
Most individuals don't live long enough to reproduce.
If you think about it, this is a terrifying image of life.
And it may have pushed Darwin in the direction of atheism.
It means that the vast majority of living organisms die young.
They die often in infancy, in the womb, or in the egg.
Only a small number reach maturity and reproduce.
And of course, this is a conclusion that many found hard to square
with the idea of a benevolent God.
But Darwin saw something else in it.
He immediately saw an analogy with pigeon breeding.
He was fascinated by pigeon breeders and knew a lot about it.
And in fact, if you end up reading the origin of species,
which is something I recommend very strongly,
you'll find yourself reading quite a lot about Victorian pigeon breeding.
In pigeon breeding, as in the breeding of any other species,
it was breeders who decided which individuals would mature and reproduce
and which would not.
The breeders would pick particular individuals
because they liked the color of their feathers, the shape of their beak.
And they would say, you can reproduce.
The others, they would say, you can't.
And the idea of this was to slowly change the nature of the bird over several generations.
Darwin himself was fascinated by this process of how through artificial selection,
as it was known, breeders shape individual species.
In the expectation that those features that they favor
are going to become more common in subsequent generations.
And he eventually concluded that nature selected individuals to breed in a similar way.
Something similar is going on in nature. What?
What are the criteria by which nature might select which individuals breed and which don't?
His answer was fitness, how well they fitted their environment.
Of any particular brood, any particular group,
there's going to be a lot of tiny variations.
And those variations are going to mean that a few individuals are slightly better fitted
to their natural environment than the others.
Statistically speaking, what this means is that those have a better chance of surviving.
Now, in individual cases, it may work out differently,
but over many, many generations, statistically,
it's the ones that are best fitted to their environment that are going to survive best.
Just as in the pigeon world,
those best fitted to the specifications of the breeder were likely to survive best.
So all of these ideas were triggered by reading Malthus.
So let me quote Darwin on Malthus.
In October, 1838,
I happened to read for amusement Malthus on Population,
and being well prepared to appreciate the struggle for existence which everywhere goes on
from long-continued observation of the habits of animals and plants,
it at once struck me that under these circumstances,
favorable variations would tend to be preserved and unfavorable ones to be destroyed.
The result would be the formation of new species.
Here, then, I had at last a theory by which to work,
but I was so anxious, he writes, to avoid prejudice
that I determined not for some time to write even the briefest sketch of it.
So his idea is that repeated over many generations,
this sort of mechanism making tiny changes each generation
so that each generation is affected by the characters of those who survive, not by the rest,
and each generation is slightly different from its predecessors,
you could explain eventually why over thousands and thousands of generations
entirely new species appeared.
And you could also explain why the changes that occurred were adaptive.
They helped species fit at least well enough and sometimes better into their environment.
This could explain why the only changes that were preserved by reproduction were adaptive.
Darwin had solved the riddle of adaptation.
This is a great moment in the history of science.
Now, we've seen that his ideas had sort of crystallized by 1838, but he didn't publish.
He feared that many would find them offensive.
As he said in the passage I just quoted,
I determined not for some time to write even the briefest sketch of it.
He feared there would be outrage.
He eventually published only after another naturalist, Alfred Russell Wallace,
whose dates are 1823 to 1913, sent him a letter from Indonesia from the island of Ternate
in 1858, which made it clear that he had stumbled on the same explanation.
Now, Wallace wasn't quite as fortunate as Darwin.
He'd had to make his way, but he'd long been convinced of the reality of evolution
and had been looking for explanations on a series of expeditions that took him to Brazil
and what is now Indonesia.
What exactly he said we don't know, because his letter hasn't survived,
but it clearly shocked Darwin.
Now, Darwin was by many standards a very nice man, but he was ambitious.
He didn't want someone else to beat him to primacy with this idea.
But it's a sign of how civilized his circle of friends was
that the geologist Charles Lyle arranged for a sort of compromise solution.
Now, Charles Lyle is himself an important figure.
He is a pioneer of modern geology and one of the founders of the principle of uniformitarianism.
That's the basic idea that all geological change is based on existing processes.
It's very slow. It takes long periods of time.
And Darwin carried a copy of Charles Lyle's Principles of Geology with him on the Beagle,
because what that suggested was the earth had been around a long time,
and that suggested that natural selection might have enough time to work.
Lyle suggested that Darwin and Wallace's ideas be presented together
at a meeting of the Linnaean Society in London on July 1st, 1858.
The society published the two presentations in August,
and Darwin set to work furiously to turn his ideas into a book.
He'd been thinking for 20 years, so it went well,
and he was able to produce the book by 1859,
when he published On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
The first edition sold at 15 shillings,
and it's 1,200 copies sold out within a day.
Now, I want to go back to the idea of natural selection,
and the reason is because, though it's actually quite simple,
it's a very simple idea, but it's also slippery.
It's easy to get hold of it and then miss nuances and misunderstand it,
and it's slippery mainly because it's statistical,
and most of us, unless we're trained statisticians,
find it difficult to think statistically.
For example, I've had students who've told me that they don't believe in evolution,
and when questioned more closely,
it turns out that they've been taught a very confusing version of the theory.
I remember one student saying to me,
you're not seriously asking me to believe that a dog can turn into a cat, are you?
And, of course, I wasn't.
I was not talking about changes in individuals.
What I was talking about, and what Darwin was talking about,
was changes in the statistical features of large numbers of individuals,
changes in the average features of whole populations of whole species.
So, this is what we need to capture.
What I want to do now is summarize the argument step by step,
emphasizing that natural selection is about change, not in individuals,
but in the average qualities of entire species.
So, here are six steps.
First, species.
Let's begin with species.
Species for Darwin, and for modern biology today,
are groups of organisms that can breed with each other.
This has nothing about whether there's a limit to how changeable they are.
It simply says a group of organisms that can, in principle, breed together constitute a species.
That's the first point.
Secondly, variation.
Though members of the same species are similar, there are always tiny differences.
Now, next time you're in a crowded room, just look around you.
You'll see big noses, small noses.
You'll see people with hair.
You'll see some very nice people without any hair at all.
You'll see tall people.
You'll see little people.
You'll see a lot of variety.
So, this is what he meant by variety.
Species are not clones of each other.
They don't consist of clones.
Third, heredity.
Individuals inherit features from their parents.
We all know this.
So, features, these individual variations can be passed on.
Fourth, fitness.
Some of these variations may increase slightly or reduce slightly
an individual's chances of surviving and reproducing.
If you're an eagle chick and you happen to be born with poor eyesight,
you may survive, you may reproduce,
but the odds are certainly against you in comparison with your brothers and sisters.
Next, differential reproduction.
Because of variations in fitness,
some individuals have less chance of surviving and reproducing.
So, in each generation,
the odds are that only some of those variations are going to be passed on.
And the odds are that it's going to be the variations
that most helped to make individual organisms fit to survive in their environment.
Finally, gradual change.
Take this process, generation by generation,
over thousands of generations, over thousands of years,
and the changes accumulate.
The qualities of individuals with a lesser chance of reproducing
will vanish in subsequent generations.
Well, the qualities of those with greater chances will tend to increase.
And in this way, the entire species will slowly change.
Now, let me say right away, there's no absolute standard of perfection here,
though many 19th century Brits clearly believed that there was and they represented it.
The environment constantly changes.
So, what's going on here is that change generation by generation is in effect
tracking the environment.
Individuals are being made fit for rapidly changing environments.
There's no absolute standard of perfection.
Now, Darwin understood how shocking these ideas would be in Victorian England.
First, they implied that all species are related.
Perhaps, God forbid, humans were related to apes.
Now, in a highly class-conscious society, this mattered.
For many, it still matters.
The biologist Yves Copin remembers his grandmother saying
when he confessed that he was studying biology
and accepted the theory of natural selection,
she said to him, you may have descended from a monkey,
but I certainly did not.
And I think the attitude is still quite widespread today.
Perhaps, we descended also from plants and bacteria.
Perhaps we're relatives of plants and bacteria.
How closely are we related to bananas?
If Darwin's right, this is a serious question.
And the truth is, we probably share about 50% of our genes with them.
Second, the idea of natural selection implied that complex organisms
such as human beings could be created by blind, statistical,
algorithmic processes like a computer program acting over huge periods of time.
Natural selection has been described as Darwin's dangerous idea
by the philosopher Daniel Dennett.
It seemed to leave no room for a divine creator.
And this terrified Darwin's wife Emma,
who thought that when they died, they were going to be separated.
He was going to fry in hell, she was going to a much better place.
A third consequence was that biological change was endless.
As I've said, there's no absolute standard of perfection.
It's not going towards perfection
because environmental change ensured that adaptation would continue forever.
There were no perfect organisms.
I've tried to summarize Darwin's idea of natural selection.
And we've seen it's got immense elegance, immense simplicity,
but we've also seen that it's really rather slippery.
And we've seen it generated a lot of resistance.
That made it peculiarly important for Darwin to study the evidence for it.
So how good was the evidence for Darwin's idea?
Thank you.
Lecture 14
The Evidence for Natural Selection
In the previous lecture, I described Darwin's very elegant solution
to what I described as the fundamental riddle of adaptation
and his solution took the form of his theory of natural selection.
Now what I want to do is look at the evidence for that theory.
I've already mentioned Daniel Dennett's book, Darwin's Dangerous Idea.
Dennett captures very well what it was that made Darwin's ideas seem so outrageous to so many,
including his beloved wife, Emma.
Because what it seemed to imply was that random, blind forces with no intention or purpose
repeated over and over again like a computer algorithm, millions and millions of times,
could over time create all the miraculous beauty and variety of the biological realm.
They could create the colors of a peacock, they could create the cobwebs of the spider,
they could create the majesty of a blue whale.
What was worrying about this was that it seemed to imply that you didn't need a creator god,
no creator god was needed.
All of this happened as a sort of natural process simply because that's how the world works.
Now we've spent quite a lot of time in previous lectures looking at the nature of modern science
and I hope by now you've seen enough to see that Darwin's idea is fully in the spirit of modern science.
For even the most religious of scientists, and I don't know what proportion of professional scientists today
do count themselves as religious believers, but it's a significant proportion.
Even the most religious of scientists attempt as much as possible to explain reality
without resorting to the hypothesis of a creator god.
And we've seen the two main reasons for this.
The first is that by supposing the existence of a creator god, you create a new problem
because you raise the problem of how the creator god was created.
And the second is we don't know of any way of finding scientific evidence to prove the existence of such a creator god.
So scientists prefer to try and explain the world around them including things such as the variety of biological species
without resorting to the deistic hypothesis.
And that's what Darwin was trying to do and that's the sort of theory he offered.
It's a scientific theory that means it had to live or die on the evidence and Darwin was prepared to do that.
So how good is the evidence for Darwin's theory?
That's the main thing I want to look at in this lecture.
This lecture will look at the evidence in two parts.
In the first part I'll look at the evidence that existed in Darwin's time and that Darwin himself was aware of.
In the second part I want to look at the evidence that's become available since his death.
Darwin was well aware as we'll see that there were holes in his theory.
There were pieces of evidence he'd love to have had but he didn't have.
A lot of the gaps have been filled in since his death and that's why the idea of natural selection with modifications lies at the centre of modern biology, of modern life sciences.
Darwin himself understood perfectly well how much resistance his theory would provoke
and that's why he defended it with scrupulous care.
He also did so in language very accessible to a general readership.
It's been said that Darwin's On the Origin of Species is one of the few great scientific classics that's also very readable and that's absolutely true.
If you haven't read it I strongly recommend that you try reading it.
It's very clear, very lucid, the arguments are spelt out very very clearly.
There's very little jargon where the jargon does appear, it's always explained.
When we try to come to terms with the evidence that Darwin offered for his theory,
we'll find it's generally easier to understand that evidence and the arguments he presents.
If we're very clear what Darwin was arguing against,
he was writing in a context where there was a powerful indeed dominant alternative theory about how species were created
and that was what I've described as the deistic theory, the theory that God had made all living things in their existing form
and had made them already adapted to their environments.
Darwin's offering an alternative theory, so what he has to do is over and over again show that if you look at the evidence,
his theory fits the evidence better or his theory makes better sense of the available evidence.
So we'll see this type of argument over and over again when we look at how Darwin tried to defend his own theory.
Now let's look at the evidence he presented.
Let's begin with the evidence he saw that persuaded Darwin himself
and I'll separate that out from the arguments that he mobilized to try and persuade others.
And this will take me back to some of the things I said in the previous lecture.
For Darwin, the first argument for his theory was that it made so much sense of what he'd seen on his five-year trip on the Beagle.
It made sense of a lot of the oddities he'd seen.
Darwin we've seen was puzzled by finding many neighboring species that were clearly very, very similar
and yet they were also clearly separate species, yet they lived very close together.
And over and over again it looked, it really looked as if they had to be related
until eventually he concluded maybe they really were related.
They were on the same family tree.
He'd been particularly struck by the species he encountered on the Galapagos Islands.
So let's go back to the Galapagos Islands and look more closely at them.
The Galapagos Islands are a group of volcanic islands.
They belong today to Ecuador and they lie about 600 miles west of Ecuador in the eastern Pacific.
There are 13 main islands, six smaller islands and numerous tinier islets or rocks.
They are named from the Spanish word for saddle because of the saddle shape of the shells of Galapagos tortoises.
On the Galapagos Islands Darwin observed many types of finches, tortoises and iguanas
but I'm going to focus on the finches. It's the easiest example to understand.
He found that the birds on the Galapagos Islands, they were clearly finches
and yet they varied from island to island. In fact you had quite distinct species
and the main variations or at least the most obvious ones were in their beaks.
On each island you seem to have a different species making for at least 14 distinct species.
Now the puzzle was this. Let's go back to our two hypotheses about life.
If God had made these various species it made sense to assume that a god would have adapted each species of bird
to the particular types of vegetation on the island and Darwin also knew that the vegetation did change slightly.
There were slightly different types of nuts on the trees which required slightly different beaks and so on.
So it made sense to assume that a god had adapted them in this way
but what didn't make so much sense with the deistic theory was why bother to make them related?
Why not just design from scratch a specific animal for each island?
The fact that they looked related suggested to Darwin an alternative possibility.
In 1846 this is almost ten years after he returned from the islands
when he'd been mulling over what he saw for almost ten years. This is what he wrote.
Seeing this gradation and diversity of structure in one small, intimately related group of birds
one might really fancy that from an original paucity of birds in this archipelago
one species had been taken and modified for different ends.
This argument, this idea that you'd begun with one species and that they'd slowly changed
to become more adapted to the different islands seemed to explain both things,
both why they were adaptive and why they were closely related.
This was something that he felt deistic arguments couldn't explain as elegantly.
Only on his return did Darwin actually really see the implications of what he'd seen on the islands clearly.
Only then did he realize how similar the different species of finch were
and this is what suggested that they had all once belonged to a single species
despite the tiny variations from island to island.
And it was then that he slowly thought through what was going on
and came to understand that you have different beaks
because you have slightly different trees, slightly different fruit
so the beaks were perfectly designed to get at the nuts in particular types of trees on particular islands.
And this suggested to him that over many generations those individuals
that happened through natural variation to have beaks that were slightly better
at getting at the nuts or fruit on this particular island would feed and breed more successfully.
They would have more offspring.
Their offspring and their features would eventually come to dominate the species on that island
and in this way entire species would slowly change.
Voila, you've got your 14 species.
So the Galapagos finch is offered for Darwin a wonderful paradigm of the working of natural selection.
It could explain both why they were adapted and why they were related.
Now this was all very well.
But were there more direct forms of evidence for his theory?
This is the sort of stuff that persuaded Darwin but what direct evidence could he offer for his theory?
Well now I want to list some of the other forms of evidence he described on the origin of species.
And let's begin with fossils.
Darwin is supposing that living species have changed over long periods of time.
So the fossil record was a natural place to look.
It was already clear enough fossils had been collected by the time Darwin was doing his work.
It was already clear from the fossil record that species seemed to have changed over time.
The mix of species was different at different periods in the Earth's history.
Remember that at this time the capacity to date fossils was not very precise.
So the fossil record was understood in a rather confused way.
It gave a rather murky picture of the past but what was clear is that species had once existed that no longer existed.
Now it has to be said immediately that the fossil record could never on its own prove Darwin's idea definitively.
And there's a very good reason for this.
The fossil record consists of those individual organisms that happen to die in a place where they could be preserved.
Now if we imagine, and I don't know the exact figures, but one in a million, one in a billion individuals is fossilized
and of those only a small number are found.
So the fossil record can only ever give us a very fragmentary record of the past of living species.
So it can never prove the argument but it can be very powerfully suggestive.
So in the fossil record you find things like trilobites for example.
Now trilobites are strange. They don't exist today but it's easy to think that they might be related to modern organisms.
So intuitively it fits quite well with Darwin's argument but as we've seen the record is extremely spotty.
Now the ideal thing for Darwin was to look not for a continuous sequence.
He's never going to get it.
He's never going to find all the individuals that show you change from one species to another.
That's never going to happen.
Next best to this was to find transitional species.
These are species that seem to fit very well between two types of existing species.
So this is what Darwin was keen to find.
At the time he wrote the first edition he didn't have any really spectacular examples but a spectacular one turned up just two years after the book was published.
Now again let's compare his argument with the deistic argument.
A creator god of course would not need transitional species.
A creator god would just make species as they were needed and make them adapted to their particular environment.
Why would you have species that seem a sort of mixture of features of species today?
Darwin's theory required transitional species because it argued that species had changed very slowly over time.
So he ought to see all stages of those changes.
Now the species that turned up in 1861 was called Archaeopteryx.
It belonged to a bird-like species that had lived about 150 million years ago.
Archaeopteryx was about the size of a magpie and it had feathered wings and it had a wishbone.
So it had clearly bird-like features.
It looked like the ancestor of modern birds.
But if you look closely you'd see some anomalies.
For example it had teeth. Birds don't have teeth.
And it had a bony tail.
That made it very similar to several species of small dinosaurs that existed at the same time.
These were clearly reptilian features.
So in Archaeopteryx you had a wonderful example of a transitional species.
A species that seemed to exemplify the slow transition from one type of species to another.
Now that's the fossil record.
And it's highly suggestive particularly when transitional species,
missing links as they're often called, begin to turn up.
Now here's a second type of argument.
And it concerns homologies.
There's a highly technical definition of homologies.
I'm going to simply use the term to mean unexpected similarities between species.
If you look at a lot of species, one of the strange things you find
is you can often find very similar features across a wide range of different species.
Now the question is if you find very similar features, how can you explain them?
If you're adopting the deistic thesis, there might be a very good answer to this.
If you've come up with a design principle that works such as a wing, why not use it?
Wings work well, why not stick them on bats as well as birds for example?
Now that works fine in cases like that.
But there are some situations where we find that the same design seems to be used for very different purposes.
And that Darwin felt doesn't work as well for the deistic hypothesis
and is much more supportive of his hypothesis of natural selection.
If the same design is being used for many different purposes,
that may suggest that the species were once related but slowly, slowly changed
and they put existing organs and structures to different uses.
Fingers and hands are a very good example.
Now let me quote Darwin on this.
This is Darwin describing homology as a form of evidence for natural selection.
What can be more curious, he writes,
than that the hand of man which is formed for grasping,
that of a mole for digging, the leg of a horse, the paddle of a porpoise and the wing of a bat
should all be constructed on the same pattern and should include similar bones
and in the same relative positions.
And he gives a similar example from the world of marsupials.
How curious it is that the hind feet of the kangaroo,
which are so well fitted for bounding over the open plains,
those of the climbing, leaf-eating koala,
equally well fitted for grasping the branches of trees,
those of the ground-dwelling insect or root-eating bandicoots.
I've seen bandicoots, I have to say, that the most beautiful, gorgeous creatures.
And those of some other Australian marsupials should all be constructed on the same extraordinary type,
namely, with the bones of the second and third digits extremely slender
and enveloped within the same skin,
so that they appear like a single toe furnished with two claws.
Why would you do this?
Why not design different limbs for different purposes?
Particularly striking example of this is the fact that even whales have fingers
and no one can figure out what use they are.
Now, this is a phenomenon that doesn't work very well under a deistic hypothesis.
It doesn't make much sense to try and figure out why a god
should use these different types of mechanisms,
but design them on exactly the same principle.
Why have the same number of bones, for example?
Whales don't use their fingers.
Why should a rational creator have given whales fingers?
In fact, to some, it seemed that doing this looked like a sort of cruel joke.
But natural selection is going to explain this very, very easily
because it works by constantly tweaking or tinkering with existing species.
It provided a natural explanation for such survivals.
And we now know, in fact, that whales are descended from mammal species
that lived on land and could make very good use of finger bones.
So natural selection tinkers.
It doesn't get rid of existing stuff unless it's actually harmful.
The results are often surprisingly effective, but not necessarily perfect.
So in natural selection, you expect to find things that work.
They're a bit gerry-built. They work. They're not necessarily perfect.
So that's the second type of evidence that Darwin talked about.
The evidence from homology.
These strange similarities that make a lot of sense
if you assume that the species were all descended from a common ancestor.
Now, I want to talk about a third type of evidence,
and that's from the geographical distribution of species.
We all know that you find different types of species in different parts of the world.
But one of the oddities of this distribution
is that you'll find in different parts of the world very similar niches,
or niches, forgive my British pronunciation on that,
you'll find very similar niches that are occupied not by identical species
that have clearly been designed for that niche,
but by species that are biologically very different,
even though they may seem to be working in similar ways.
So, for example, why do most marsupials live in Australia?
And why do some marsupials look remarkably like species
that are filling similar niches, niches in other parts of the world?
Now, Darwin argued that such oddities made sense on the simple assumption
that all marsupials happened to be descended from marsupial ancestors.
So, as they adapted, they adapted to particular niches,
but they remained marsupials.
Now, this works for natural selection.
It doesn't work so well for the idea of a deistic God.
Why shouldn't a deistic creator have designed particular organisms
and put them down everywhere?
Why not design camels and put camels everywhere where you have deserts?
Well, for example, let's take the example of wolves.
There are wolf-type niches in Australian landscapes.
And we know the animals that fill them, that are adapted to them.
They're known as marsupial wolves, thylacines.
Why not put wolves there?
Once again, Darwin's argument is that this curious feature
of the distribution of biological species
makes lots of sense if we assume that marsupials exist in Australia
because their ancestors were marsupials.
It makes less sense on the deistic hypothesis.
Now, as I've said, Darwin was scrupulous about the evidence.
He was really determined to argue his case as powerfully as possible.
And that means he always plays fair with his opponent.
He presents the opposing arguments as powerfully as possible.
He was aware that there were gaps in his argument, in his arguments,
and many of these gaps have been filled since his time.
So let's look at some of the problems he was aware of
that have since been at least partially remedied.
Here's the first.
The fossil record in his time, as we've seen,
presented at least suggestive evidence for natural selection.
But it was so spotty that that evidence was limited.
The fossil record now is much, much richer.
And furthermore, we can date fossils
with much more precision because of radiometric dating techniques.
Now, even today, the record is spotty, it always will be.
So it's impossible to produce a perfect sequence of fossils
showing all the links between one species and another.
However, many, many more transitional fossils have been found.
And as we see, we can now date them
so we can put them in a very precise sequence.
One of the most powerful examples is the evolution of the horse.
The evolution of the horse has now been very, very well studied indeed.
And we can fill in many of the stages.
And what you see is exactly what Darwin predicts.
A slow progression from early forms to modern forms.
From a small, fox-sized animal called Hierachotherium,
which lived about 60 million years ago,
through many intermediate species,
to their only modern survivor, the horse.
This is one of the clearest sequences of fossils
to demonstrate the evolutionary history of a modern organism.
So that's the first thing.
The fossil record is now much, much better.
We understand it much more precisely than in Darwin's time.
Here's a second issue.
This was a real problem for Darwin.
Was there enough time for evolution?
He knew evolution was a gradual slow process.
It depended on tiny changes, generation after generation.
So the question for him was, could this mechanism explain
imagining that all living things were descended
from a single primeval ancestor?
Could it explain all the variety he saw around him?
At the time he wrote,
the best estimate for the age of the Earth,
and this is something we've discussed in earlier lectures,
was somewhere between about 20 and 200 million years.
But that was the estimate of Lord Kelvin,
who assumed that the Earth had once been a molten ball,
which was slowly cooling.
And Darwin was always worried by this.
He felt that even 200 million years
was not really enough time for natural selection
to do all the work that he required it to do
to create the species present in the modern world.
Now this problem has been solved today.
As we've seen, modern estimates,
since the time of Claire Patterson in the 1950s,
give an age of more than four billion years for the Earth.
And we now know that living things have been on Earth
for at least 3.8 billion years.
So the timescale is about 40 times longer
than it was in Darwin's time.
So that problem, we can say, has essentially been solved.
There's plenty enough time for natural selection to do its work.
And here's a third problem.
And that's heredity, the nature of reproduction and heredity.
No one in Darwin's time really understood how heredity works.
He and many of his contemporaries assumed
that qualities inherited from parents were blended in their offspring.
Now this makes sense, because a lot of features are indeed blended.
But it had a very unfortunate consequence for his theory,
because it seemed to suggest that, let's say, an advantageous variation appears.
Is it going to be preserved into future generations?
Well, if in fact from generation to generation what happens
is the qualities of the parents are blended,
what's going to happen is it's slowly going to get diluted.
And over time it's just going to vanish.
And this ought to mean that species are fairly stable.
That from generation to generation any outliers,
any strange things slowly get diluted away,
and species remain fairly stable.
There's no room here for natural selection,
no room for the preservation of mutations that work really well.
I mean, it implies, for example,
if one of your parents had blue eyes and the other had brown eyes,
what would you end up with?
You'd end up with eyes that were sort of muddy blue-brown.
Now we all know this is not, in fact, the way things worked.
But the fundamental assumption was that most heredity
takes the form of blending.
Now we understand much better how heredity works.
Modern genetic studies began with the work of the monk Gregor Mendel.
He worked with peas and other garden vegetables,
and he bred them,
kept scrupulous observations about the parentage,
the features of the offspring.
He bred peas, for example, and he counted the number of peas in the pod,
in the parents and the children, from generation to generation.
And what Mendel showed very, very clearly is that many features,
such as the color of human eyes, were not blended.
What the children got was not a blending of their parents' qualities,
but one or the other.
They get either the one parent's features or the parents of the other.
This is good for natural selection
because it means that advantageous features could be preserved.
The discovery of DNA in 1953 and subsequent work,
which has teased out how the whole elaborate mechanism of reproduction works,
has clarified how genes work,
and essentially it's demonstrated that heredity works in just the ways
required by Darwin's theory.
While some parental features are blended, many are not.
Furthermore, though the copying is almost perfect,
there are always occasional errors,
and what these do is create tiny variations
that provide the raw material on which natural selection works.
And one final point.
Darwin always argued that one of the difficulties of his theory
is that you could never observe it in action.
It would always be so slow that the evidence would have to be indirect.
So he feared that you'd always have to give indirect evidence.
You could never actually watch evolution happening.
Well, we can say that in the 20th century
we've learned how to study evolution as it happens.
And the reason for this is that if you're studying rapidly breeding species
such as fruit flies, drosophila,
which has been studied immensely throughout the 20th century,
you can watch many, many generations of them
and you can actually start evolution happening.
We now know evolution can sometimes happen extremely fast.
Here's a recent example.
In 2001, it was found that bacteria were killing off males
of the blue moon butterfly of Samoa.
I love the name.
It was killing the males before they could reproduce.
Males counted for only 1% of the species.
And there were fears that the species would go extinct.
In 2007, it was found that the butterfly had evolved a gene
that could control the activities of these harmful bacteria
that were causing the problem.
And the males now accounted for 40% of the population.
And one of the researchers involved in this work,
Sylvain Charla of University College London,
writes, to my knowledge, this is the fastest evolutionary change
that has ever been observed.
Here we have a significant evolutionary change,
crucial to the future of a species,
occurring and spreading through the population in just six years.
Now, the rapid evolution of the AIDS virus
is another much more worrying example of this,
as is the declining effectiveness of antibiotics
as bacteria evolve to acquire resistance to antibiotics.
Okay, let me summarize.
We've seen that Darwin himself used the evidence
of the fossil record of homologies
and the distribution of species to support his theory.
Since he died, the fossil record has improved.
We've learned that the Earth is old enough
for natural selection to have done its work.
We've learned that heredity works in exactly the way needed
to support his theory.
And we've learned to observe natural selection at work directly.
These are some of the reasons why Darwin's idea of natural selection
is now the central organizing principle of modern life sciences.
It's involved in pharmaceutical research, in biological research.
It's the key idea, if you want to understand life,
in the 21st century.
Thank you.
You may have noticed that we've talked about how life changes,
but we haven't yet talked about the origins of life.
And that's what I'm going to do now.
But the reason why with this threshold
we didn't begin with the origins
is that it's vital to understand how life changes.
In fact, it's vital to understand the mechanism of natural selection
before we get a sense of how life originated.
Because in modern understanding of the origins of life,
natural selection itself plays a crucial role.
Now, I'm going to come at this subject from a slightly different angle.
Let's talk about Fred Hoyle,
who was one of the greatest of modern British astronomers.
His dates are 1915 to 2001.
Fred Hoyle is a very important figure
in several modern scientific disciplines.
He pioneered our modern understanding
of how chemicals are formed in stars and supernovae.
So he could play a starring role
in the lecture on the formation of elements.
But Fred Hoyle was also famous for being,
what should we say, a contrarian.
That is to say, he was someone who seemed to enjoy
taking positions that most scientists opposed.
For example, he never accepted
the Big Bang Theory,
despite being one of the best-known,
most influential physicists of his generation.
And he defended modified versions of his steady-state theory.
That's the theory that the expansion of the universe
was caused by the continual creation of matter in space.
He defended his steady-state theory throughout his life.
He also refused to accept
that life had evolved on Earth,
that life had originated on Earth.
And he claimed it must have evolved elsewhere
and arrived in the form of a reign
of living material from space.
This was the theory known as Panspermia.
Fred Hoyle in connection with this
wrote a wonderful science fiction novel,
which I remember seeing in televised form as a teenager
in the early 1960s.
It was called Apha Andromeda.
In Apha Andromeda,
British astronomers, of course British,
receive a signal from space,
and they realize that it's got a pattern to it,
and eventually they decide it's a sort of code.
And they look at the code,
and after time they crack it,
and they realize it looks like instructions
for building a computer.
So they build a computer,
and then they press the start button,
only to find out that the goal of the computer
is to construct a new race of alien beings.
This is a very elegant way of moving life
from one part of the universe to another.
I should confess at this point
that my very happy memories of this series
probably colored by the fact
that the first alien created by the machine
was played by a young Julie Christie.
Now, Hoyle described his primary objection
to the idea that life had evolved on Earth
as follows in a very famous metaphor.
This is what he said.
A junkyard contains all the bits and pieces
of a Boeing 747, dismembered and in disarray.
A whirlwind happens to blow through the yard.
What is the chance that after its passage,
a fully assembled 747, ready to fly,
will be found standing there?
Now, Hoyle is supposed to have made
the comparison with a 747
because yeast cells and Boeing 747s
both contain about six million parts.
In some sense, we could say
they represent similar levels of complexity.
Fred Hoyle's objection to the idea
that life could have evolved on Earth
through blind processes such as some form of natural selection
expressed a widely held view
that life is simply too complex
to have been the product of blind, random processes
such as those that drive natural selection.
His own answer, we've seen,
was that life must have evolved somewhere else.
Quite frankly, I think I hope you'll agree
that this is really, in its own way,
very unsatisfactory.
And it's a bit like announcing the existence of a creator God.
It simply postpones the question
by forcing us to try and figure out
how it could have formed somewhere else in the universe.
So this is the question.
Can we do better in explaining the origins of life?
Most biologists today think we can do a lot better.
And in this lecture, I'm going to try to describe
their efforts to do so,
to explain the origins of life on Earth
in modern scientific terms.
Now, the last lecture described why most biologists
accept that natural selection explains the variety
and adaptability of life today.
But the question is, can natural selection
also help us explain the initial appearance of life?
Can it overcome the objections of critics like Hoyle?
I'm going to try and show that it can.
So how were the first life forms created?
That's a question that Darwin himself
seems to have had no answers to.
A little speculation, but no serious answers.
I've deliberately held off with these questions,
as we've seen, because we do need a good grasp
of the mechanism of natural selection
before we can understand the modern answer.
It has to be said, though, that the modern answer
is not yet quite as good as many biologists
would like it to be.
We have a very good answer.
We have lots of pieces of the puzzle.
But I suspect many biologists would agree
we don't have quite as complete a scientific theory
of the origins of life as they would like.
But nevertheless, we can offer a very good attempt at this.
And we can offer a very good answer to Hoyle.
OK.
As with the earlier levels of complexity,
it'll help if I put in modern explanations
in context by comparing them with the answers
adopted in traditional societies
or pre-scientific traditions.
How have traditional societies
explained the appearance of life?
We can define traditional explanations
into two broad categories, the divine and the naturalistic.
Divine models, by now, we're familiar with.
They assume they're deistic.
They assume that life was created by divine being.
And we've seen the problems with such theories
over and over again.
And we've seen why they're not really admissible
within modern science.
Modern science does not assert that these theories are wrong,
merely that they are untestable
and therefore do not count as science.
What are naturalistic models?
Well, naturalistic models have a long history.
And they are, in fact, attempts to argue that life,
the appearance of life, can be explained
without necessarily assuming
that they were created directly by a god of some kind.
That life can be generated spontaneously
from existing materials and forces.
And this implies, of course, that life is not so utterly different
from the rest of the world.
There's a sort of continuum between life and non-life.
Just as Newton implied that there's actually a continuum
between the heavenly realm and the earthly realm.
This is how Aristotle put it.
Aristotle was a committed believer
in the possibility of the spontaneous generation of life.
He wrote,
the transition by which nature passes from lifeless things
to animal life is so insensible
that one can determine no exact line of demarcation,
nor say for certain on which side any intermediate form should be.
Thus, nature passes from lifeless things to animals
in an unbroken sequence.
For traditional scientists like Aristotle,
the evidence for spontaneous generation
was things like the appearance of maggots in rotting meat.
If you feel like it, you can try this as an experiment.
It's very, very cheap and it's very easy to conduct.
And this is the recipe as told to me by my colleague, David Briscoe,
who lectured on life in the early versions of my big history course.
And his lectures were wonderful.
This is his recipe.
He says, take a soup.
There must be something meaty in it.
Preferably don't take a very good soup.
And David used to conventionally recommend one of his own.
You stick it outside.
You leave it in a warm, exposed place for a few days.
Voila, maggots and all sorts of other creepy crawlies.
So there's the evidence for spontaneous generation.
It's a nice idea.
It's sort of commonsensical, a bit like saying that the earth is obviously not moving
because we don't feel the wind rushing past.
But unfortunately, of course, it's not quite that simple.
From the time of the scientific revolution,
scientists began to try to test such ideas much more carefully
as scientists became more and more committed to ensuring that their theories were based on hard evidence.
And the attempt to test the idea of spontaneous generation
led to some interesting toing and froing on the issue.
This is a long story and I'm just going to pick out some highlights.
In 1765, Lazzaro Spallanzani, an Italian biologist who lived from 1729 to 1799,
tried to test Aristotle's idea and he did it by showing that if you took a meat broth
and you boiled it to kill off all the bugs that were already in it
and then you placed it in an airtight container so that no bugs could get into it from outside,
nothing appeared, no maggots, no creepy crawlies.
Now, this is to us very familiar indeed.
We all know about sterilization.
We expect jars in supermarkets to be sterilized, so this is all very, very familiar.
But what did he actually show? What did Spallanzani actually show?
He showed that the maggots must have come from something outside the broth itself,
probably from eggs planted by their parents.
So this seemed to suggest that maybe spontaneous generation was not possible,
maybe every living thing has a parent.
All living things come from other living things.
Spallanzani didn't have it all his own way.
He had opponents who suggested an alternative and this was that what he'd actually done
by insulating his container was to exclude the life force that was necessary for the generation of life.
What they had in mind seems to have been something like this.
It was the idea that there was some special force in the air that got into things and made them alive.
Now, we've already seen a similar theory which was refuted as early as 1828
and that was the idea that there were some chemicals, organic chemicals,
that contained the sort of principle of life and that they were necessary for the creation of life.
And we saw that in 1828 Friedrich Wörler had disproved that idea
by synthesizing simple organic chemicals in the lab.
But here's the second version of that theory.
It is that maybe there's a life force floating around us in the air
and it needs to get in to a broth to create life.
Now, how can you test such an idea?
It's an interesting idea.
How can you prove it's right or wrong?
Testing this idea quite decisively was one of the great achievements of the French chemist Louis Pasteur
and his experiment is one of the most elegant of all scientific experiments.
Very, very simple, but he provided a wonderful test for this idea.
This is what he did in 1862.
Louis Pasteur's dates, by the way, are 1822 to 1895
and he's an immensely important figure in modern chemistry.
What he did was he created an apparatus which began with a glass flask.
At the top there was a long glass tube.
Now, it came out the top, then he bent it back down to the ground in a sort of u-bend and then bent it up again.
And he left the opening open.
He didn't plug it, he didn't close it at all.
So it's open to the air.
He put a sort of broth inside the flask
and then he heated it to sterilize it.
He boiled it to sterilize it and then he just left it.
That's the experiment.
Now, this is the idea.
If life actually came from pre-existing life, from pollen or from spores or from tiny organisms floating in the air,
then his argument was that such organisms could drop into the spout but they'd get caught in the u-bend.
They wouldn't be able to get into the broth, so no life would appear.
If, on the contrary, life came from a life force,
now surely the life force would be able to travel down the tube, up the u-bend and get into the broth.
So he boiled his flasks and waited.
And what happened?
I'm told, though I've not been there myself, that you can still see his flasks in the Pasteur Institute in Paris
and that they're still a sterile as the day when he first boiled them.
That seemed to be the end of the story.
That was more or less the end of the theory of a free-floating life force of some kind.
And it also seemed to have put paid the whole notion of spontaneous generation.
That, of course, created a new problem.
Pasteur seemed to have proved that life could only come from previous life, from eggs or spores.
Spontaneous generation was impossible.
If so, how were the first living organisms created?
In the early 20th century, biologists faced a real dilemma
because he seemed to have proved that spontaneous generation was not possible.
How can you explain the origins of life?
Well, now I want to move towards modern explanations of this.
Biologists began to get some purchase on this knotty problem in the first half of the 20th century.
And I'm going to describe their explanations in three stages.
And let me say immediately there are a lot of technicalities here.
So this is an extremely simple description of some very, very complex and elaborate arguments.
But nevertheless, I think we can capture the essence of the arguments.
The first stage, let me summarize the stages here.
The first stage is the creation of the simple chemicals,
each with only a few atoms that were necessary for the creation of life.
These are the chemicals such as amino acids that form proteins and nucleic acids
that are the basis of the genetic material of all living organisms.
That's the first stage.
The second stage is the creation from these simple components of huge, complex molecules,
mostly taking the form of long, long chains that form the molecules that we find in living cells.
That's the second stage.
The third stage, and at present the thorniest, is to explain the creation of the modern mechanism of reproduction,
which is based on the extraordinarily complex molecule DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid.
Let's take each of these steps in turn.
So first, the creation of the simple chemicals of life.
These are chemicals that consist of just a few atoms that are present in all living organisms,
such as the amino acids that make proteins, the nucleic acids that are the basis of DNA, our genetic material,
carbohydrates that make sugars and starches and act as sort of stores of energy,
and the lipids that make fats and hormones and membranes.
How can you make these simple chemicals?
So we need to explain the creation of the chemicals vital for life.
These are the structural basis for most living organisms.
Today, atmospheric oxygen destroys such molecules.
We've seen that oxygen is fantastically reactive, and that's why, as Pasteur claimed, life can no longer be generated spontaneously.
With an oxygen-rich atmosphere, it seems as if life cannot even get off the ground,
because you cannot make even the simplest chemicals of life.
That was the real problem scientists faced in the early 20th century.
However, in the 1920s, Alexander Oparin in Russia and J.B.S. Haldane in Britain pointed out a solution,
and this was that maybe these chemicals could have appeared, could have been formed spontaneously,
in an atmosphere that didn't have free oxygen in it.
So where would you find such an atmosphere?
Now, I hope by now you already know the answer to this.
The answer was in the atmosphere of the early Earth.
We saw that free oxygen didn't start building up in the Earth's atmosphere until about two and a half billion years ago.
So this means that though we wouldn't have liked the early Earth,
it turns out that in fact it might have been a more benign environment than today's Earth for the very simplest and earliest stages of life.
Now, once again, let's ask the question, how would you test such an idea?
And again, we can describe a beautiful, simple experiment that tested it very well indeed.
And it's associated with the work of Stanley Miller, a graduate student,
who worked under the supervision of a very well-known biologist, Harold Urie.
In 1952, Stanley Miller organized a very famous experiment to test the idea
that in an oxygen-free environment it might be easy to generate these simple molecules.
Let me describe the apparatus for you.
So he gets, once again, we've got a glass flask.
Coming out of it is a tube which loops around in a square and comes back into the flask.
He fills the glass tube with gases that might have been present in the early atmosphere
and there's no free oxygen amongst them.
He used methane, ammonia and hydrogen but later versions have used many other mixtures.
He then added water and supplied energy in the form of heat from below and electric charges.
Now, why water? Why was water so crucial?
Well, why do biologists assume that any planet with life must have water in liquid form?
Here's the naive non-chemists answer and we've briefly seen this before.
Water provides an ideal environment for complex chemical reactions.
In gases, molecules are charging around at huge distances from each other.
They encounter each other actually quite rarely and when they do it's very violent and they often bounce apart.
In solids, atoms are locked in and they barely move.
So there's not much possibility for rearranging themselves there.
Not much possibility for interesting chemical things to happen.
In liquids, atoms and molecules can move close to each other but they also have a lot of freedom to move around.
A bit like dancers on a dance floor and water itself provides a chemically benign atmosphere for such movements
as it's not itself terribly reactive.
So this is why water was so crucial and this is why water is probably always crucial in the creation of life.
Okay, now what happened inside Miller's apparatus?
He leaves it humming there for a few days and then after a few days a dark red sludge appears
and when you take the sludge out and you analyze it you find it contains amino acids, nucleotides and phospholipids
the chemicals you need to form membranes.
This experiment has been repeated many, many times and it's now very, very clear.
It's been repeated using different gases that creating these simple chemicals is really not a huge problem
in an environment without free oxygen.
So that's the first stage and it seems that that was fairly simple.
We can explain the creation of these very simple molecules consisting of just a few atoms or a few tens of atoms
from which living things are made.
Now there's the second step.
How do you take those and build from them huge elaborate molecules of the kind that you find in living cells?
The URI Miller experiment produced just these very simple molecules.
How do you take the next stage?
Even the simplest viruses contain billions of atoms in very complex configurations
and many of these molecules take the form of huge chains of atoms arranged in very specific ways
and along those chains you'll find tiny electric charges
so that the chains tend to sort of wrap up on themselves forming complex balls with very specific shapes
and very often the specific shapes they form determine the precise chemical or physical role they play within them.
So the exact sequence of chemicals along them is vital.
Now how can you create such huge and complex molecules?
Well not by chance and that was the point that Fred Hoyle was trying to make in the example I've given already
about whirlwinds and bowings.
Hoyle made the comparisons as we've seen because yeast cells and bowings both existed about the same level of complexity.
So how can we get past the riddle that Hoyle posed?
Fortunately there is an answer and this takes us back to natural selection.
Though random changes, imagine all these chemicals sloshing around within a liquid environment,
random changes are unlikely to create perfect long molecules.
But let's imagine something else, we had a new rule which is that if each successful step towards life can be locked into place
then the odds improve drastically.
Now this is precisely how natural selection works by locking into place random variations that create something viable and stable.
So here's the idea and it's a central idea in modern biology.
It is that some complex chemicals or chemicals that are becoming more complex can actually evolve through a chemical version of natural selection.
This is the idea of chemical evolution.
If you get chemicals that have a certain stability, well they're going to survive.
And they're going to be on the dance floor and they're going to mix with other chemicals so that slowly you can build up complexity.
In the 1950s and 1960s Sydney Fox showed how chemical evolution might work.
He showed some of the specific pathways that might be taken.
For example under certain conditions long chains form spontaneously similar to those in living organisms.
Some of these long long molecules naturally curl up to form spheres that are beginning to look a bit like simple cells.
And some of them have semi permeable membranes through which they can take in chemicals from the outside and they can get rid of stuff they don't need that they reject.
So we already have things that are beginning to look a bit like very simple cells.
They have a metabolism, they can take in energy and food from outside.
They have the ability to reproduce because some of these when they get big enough simply split.
They simply break apart and they can also adapt over time.
This gives them all of the emergent properties of life in a sort of simple and rough and ready form.
So here we have a sort of chemical proto-life.
Now while we're on the subject where did the earliest organisms appear?
Where did this sort of chemistry probably take place?
Where was the dance floor for all of this?
Darwin assumed that life first appeared in what he called some warm pond.
He knew it had to be liquid. He knew that have to be some warmth, some energy.
He understood all of that perfectly well.
But now it's generally thought that the surface of the earth would have been a dangerous and hostile place for early life.
So a more likely environment may be these deep sea volcanic vents that we described in describing modern plate tectonics.
Ideal conditions for chemical evolution probably existed near these mid-oceanic vents.
There was lots of energy as magma poured up from the interior of the earth.
There was a rich mixture of organic chemicals again coming up from the inside of the earth.
And there was protection from ultraviolet radiation because you're deep inside the oceans, you're way below the surface.
And it's been discovered that there are very rich colonies of chemical eating bacteria around mid-oceanic vents.
So at the moment this looks like our chemical dance floor.
That's stage two.
We've explained the creation of large elaborate chemicals and some of them are beginning to look a bit like simple cells.
Now, stage three, it's actually the trickiest part of all.
How do we explain the creation of the most complex molecules of all, those involved in reproduction?
DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid.
DNA is the software that controls reproduction and explaining how DNA evolved is really the trickiest part of the puzzle.
Without DNA, reproduction is bound to be inaccurate.
And that means that chemical evolution would have been slow and unreliable.
It wouldn't have been very good at preserving valuable variations, adaptive changes or mutations.
What's DNA like? Let me try very quickly to try and describe it.
You'll all be familiar with pictures.
DNA consists of two linked chains of nucleotides, millions of these nucleotides.
These are little groups of clusters of atoms.
And each DNA molecule consists of two of these chains.
They're linked with bonds like rungs on a ladder.
Now it's the bonds that are the really interesting part of DNA.
Each bond consists of two bases.
These are small clusters of atoms.
That's all we need to know.
The bases come in four main types and they can only fit together in certain ways.
The four types are A, T, C and G which stand for adenine, thymine, cytosine and guanine.
And this is the rule.
A links only with T and C only with G.
So along each of these rungs you have sticking out from one chain maybe an A
and it's linking with a T which is sticking out from the other chain.
Now imagine we separate the two.
We run along one of the chains.
What we find is a long list of bases A, T, C, G.
That is the code.
That's the genetic code.
The exact sequence of those bases contains the code for creating a living organism.
How does DNA reproduce?
It splits down the middle.
All the rungs split.
Each chain goes off in search of its pairs.
So if you have a rung with A it looks for T and so on all the way down.
And eventually it reassembles its complement.
So you now have two identical chains each forming a helix.
This is the key to accurate reproduction.
The trouble is that DNA cannot exist on its own.
It's like software.
Yet cells can't survive without DNA.
So which evolved first?
The software of DNA or the hardware of the cell?
It's a puzzle and at present all we can say is that the best bet is that RNA,
ribonucleic acid which is closely related to DNA,
may have acted at one time as both hardware and software.
RNA comes in single chains so it can do the work of software
but it can also do the work of proteins within cells.
It can do both.
So there are three stages forming the basic chemicals,
turning them into large complex molecules and creating DNA,
the basic genetic structure.
Now I hope I've conveyed a sense that we know a lot of the story.
I shouldn't say we, the biologists know a lot of the story.
They know a lot of the details but it's still not quite perfect.
Nevertheless, there's enough here for biologists to be very confident
that they can essentially explain how living things were assembled
from non-living ingredients.
About 3.5 billion years ago or slightly more.
And that's something we'll look at in the next lecture.
Thank you.
Lecture 16
Life on Earth, Single Celled Organisms
Think of a tropical jungle.
Think of the trees, think of the insects, the reptiles,
think of the fish in the river,
think of the birds, think of the monkeys.
This is one of the richest natural environments we can imagine.
Then think of the countless numbers of single celled organisms
in the soil, on the skin of animals, on the leaves of trees.
The sheer variety of life is staggering,
the number of different species is staggering.
Biologists really still don't know how many species there really are.
In his book, Diversity of Life, E. O. Wilson writes,
we don't know, not even to the nearest order of magnitude,
the number of species could be close to 10 million
or it could be as high as 100 million.
Of all these species, a little over one million
have been listed and described.
Of those incidentally about 750,000 are insects.
So we haven't seriously begun to list the staggering variety
of microorganisms in amongst all of this.
Yet all of these organisms, despite their variety,
their differences in color, shape, function, scale,
share the DNA molecule.
They share the same basic mechanisms of DNA
and many of the same basic chemical processes.
They, in fact, why not say it frankly,
we are all relatives.
We're all members of a single family.
We're all part of the same family tree.
And this is one of the fundamental payoffs to Darwin's idea.
So how did we get from the biological simplicity
of the early Archaean Eon about 3.8 billion years ago
when life first appeared to the staggering variety of species
that we find in later eons and later periods of history?
That's the story I want to tell in this and the next lecture.
In the last lecture, we described how we think life originated on Earth.
Now what I want to do is try to describe how life evolved
to create the astonishing variety of forms present today.
We've seen that this capacity to evolve, this capacity to adapt
and create an astonishing number of different forms
is itself one of the distinctive properties of life,
one of the things that distinguishes life from non-life.
So the variety of living organisms reflects, in a sense,
a slow exploration by life as a whole,
all the possible ways of getting energy from the environment,
all the possible niches that there are on Earth.
We, of course, represent merely one of these many millions of species
generated by this process over almost four billion years.
But to understand how we were created,
we need to understand the history of this long process of change.
So we need to see how we fit in to the larger story of the evolution
and proliferation of life on Earth.
We're looking at the history of life on Earth.
Okay, we've seen that one of the things that Darwin did
was to show that life is not static.
It, too, has a history, like the universe, the stars and the Earth,
and now we begin surveying that history.
We'll see that the history of life begins with very, very simple life forms.
We began to talk about them in the last lecture,
but then, over almost four billion years,
more and more new life forms appear,
until today, life looks very different from the life of the early Earth.
I want to survey this history.
It's a fantastically complex history.
You could devise an entire course about this history.
So this is just a very, very brief tour of this history.
And I'm going to break it up into eight stages.
Four I'll deal with today in this lecture and four in the next lecture.
Each of these stages I have picked
because they create one of the elements
that would eventually define our own species.
So this is a survey of the history of life on Earth
very much from a human perspective.
If you want to get a sense of the chronology,
you might find timelines two and three
in the printed materials with this course are helpful.
So in this lecture, I described the first four of these stages
in the evolution of life.
This entire lecture is concerned with a period in the history of life on Earth
when the only living organisms on Earth were single-celled.
And that period covers the first three billion years of the Earth's history.
It covers most of the history of life on Earth.
Okay, the first stage.
The first stage consists of the first organisms.
We described in the last lecture roughly speaking how we think they were created.
Almost certainly, if we'd been able to see them,
we would describe them as prokaryotes.
Prokaryotes are the simplest single-celled organisms we know on Earth today.
Now, it's important to remind ourselves how important bacteria,
single-celled organisms are in the history of life on Earth.
Life for the best part of three billion years of the Earth's history
consisted of single-celled organisms.
Not until about 600 million years ago would the first multi-celled organisms appear.
Multi-celled organisms, therefore, have existed for only 15% of the time
that life has flourished on Earth.
They are an extremely recent development,
and their representatives will see a significant new level of complexity.
One of the things this means is that if we're looking for life elsewhere in the universe,
we should expect that most of the life we're going to find
will take the form of something a bit like bacteria.
It's going to be extremely simple.
Prokaryotes. What are prokaryotes?
They're very, very simple cells.
Prokaryotes are, for the most part, invisible to the naked eye.
Indeed, countless billions live in or on our bodies.
They're so small that you could fit 100,000 prokaryotes into a single dot on a printed page.
So they're absolutely minute.
However, let me add, they are probably not quite the simplest of all organisms we know.
We've seen that viruses seem to have evolved in the direction of greater simplicity,
and as they did so, they shed their capacity to generate energy on their own.
They just abandoned their metabolism and they let other organisms do the work of metabolism,
knowing that they could hijack that metabolic machinery whenever they wanted
in order to maintain themselves.
And of course, we experienced this hijacking
and this sort of siphoning off of energy from our bodies,
as well as the battle between the viruses and our own cells every time we go down with flu.
It's possible that viruses evolved from bacteria rather than the other way around,
and if so, they represent an example of how evolution can lead not to greater complexity,
but sometimes to greater simplicity as well.
Back to prokaryotes.
Like all cells, prokaryotes have a fatty membrane, a surface which is semi-permeable.
It can keep most of the important stuff inside,
but it does allow chemicals to flow inwards for nutrition,
and it allows waste products to flow outwards for excretion.
So it's a sort of chemical bag that's not totally insulated from the outside world.
Within the cell, there are free-floating molecules of DNA.
They just drift around in the center of the cell.
Now, inside the cells, what happens is RNA molecules.
Now, I mentioned them in the last lecture.
Remember, they are single-stranded equivalents of DNA, very closely related to DNA.
Single-stranded molecules, these single-stranded molecules of RNA,
approach DNA, they peer inside it, prizing apart the double helix,
to get instructions for their next job inside the cell.
So that's how the reproductive apparatus works.
Prokaryotes, I've said, are extremely simple, and in a sense, that's true.
By comparison, with later organisms, it's going to be certainly very true.
But by comparison with some of the earlier things we've seen in this course,
even prokaryotes are immensely complex entities.
To give you some sense of this, I'd like to quote, once again,
from Bill Bryson's short history of almost everything.
He offers a very entertaining description of what it might be like to be inside a cell.
So here's Bill Bryson.
Blown up to a scale at which atoms are about the size of peas,
a cell itself, he writes, would be a sphere roughly half a mile across
and supported by a complex framework of girders called the cytoskeleton.
So you can imagine a sort of vast football stadium.
Within it, millions upon millions of objects, some the size of basketballs,
others the size of cars, would whizz about like bullets.
There wouldn't be a place you could stand without being pummeled and ripped
thousands of times every second from every direction.
Even for its full-time occupants, the inside of a cell is a hazardous place.
Each strand of DNA, he points out, is on average attacked or damaged
once every 8.4 seconds, 10,000 times in a day, by chemicals and other agents
that whack into or carelessly slice through it.
And each of these wounds must be swiftly stitched up if the cell is not to perish.
So I hope you're getting a sense of a cell as a very, very violent and active and complex place.
The proteins are especially lively, spinning, pulsating and flying into each other
up to a billion times a second.
The enzymes, themselves a type of protein, dash everywhere, performing up to a thousand tasks a second.
Like greatly speeded up worker ants, they busily build and rebuild molecules,
hauling a piece off this one, adding a piece to that one.
Some monitor passing proteins and mark with a chemical, those that are irreparably damaged or flawed,
these chemicals are marked for execution.
Once so selected, the doomed proteins proceed to a structure called a proteasome
where they are stripped down and their components used to build new proteins.
Sometimes a protein exists for less than half an hour, others survive for weeks,
but all lead existences that are inconceivably frenzied.
The earliest prokaryotes we know of probably got most of their food from chemicals near the seafloor.
We've seen that life itself probably originated near ocean floor volcanoes.
And many in fact still survive by eating chemicals such as methane.
We've seen that mid-oceanic vents would have provided an ideal environment
for the very earliest living organisms.
They would have supplied energy, they would have been watery,
they would have provided plenty of chemicals that bubbled up from the earth
for the chemical reactions needed to create these early simple prokaryotes.
And they also would have been protected from ultraviolet rays because they're deep beneath the sea.
So, that's the first stage.
Our earliest ancestors were almost certainly simple prokaryotes, probably living deep in the sea.
Stage two, photosynthesis.
The second transition is the evolution of the complex chemical reaction known as photosynthesis.
It's extremely complicated and it's now found in all plant or plant-like organisms.
What photosynthesis does, you can think of it as a sort of chemical trick
or a piece of technology if you like.
It enables organisms to tap into an entirely new source of energy.
And we saw that the very first living organisms are probably acquiring a lot of their energy
or depending directly or indirectly on energy from the centre of the earth.
So, the energy that fuels them is the heat at the centre of the earth.
What photosynthesis allows them to do is to tap into a much, much larger
and more durable source of energy, the sun.
So, this means that by the time photosynthesis appeared,
at least some prokaryotes had learned to live near the surface of the oceans
where they could feel the sun's energy and ingest its light.
The ingredients needed for photosynthesis are carbon dioxide and water.
Those are the chemical ingredients.
And the energy for the reaction comes from sunlight.
The products of photosynthesis are first sugary molecules such as glucosees
which can act as stores of energy or batteries of energy.
In effect, what they're doing is they're storing the energy of sunlight.
But there's another byproduct and that is oxygen.
The manager of this entire process is the complex molecule we know as chlorophyll.
When did the first photosynthesizing prokaryotes appear?
They appeared almost certainly about 3.5 billion years ago.
Now, photosynthesis marks a fundamental threshold in the history of life on earth
because it enabled living organisms to tap into an entirely new energy source.
It was the sort of energy bonanza.
It's allowing them to tap into the energy flows generated in the core of the sun by hydrogen fusion.
Today, all plants practice photosynthesis.
They capture energy from the sun using green molecules of chlorophyll.
And as plants are consumed by other organisms,
this captured energy diffuses through the biosphere via the food chain.
Look once again how powerfully the different stories of this course are linked.
Through photosynthesis, the energy created in the center of a star, our sun,
eventually flows to you and me.
Now, how do we know about the date of photosynthesis?
Some of the oldest microfossils, these are microscopic fossils,
they were only observed for the first time in the 20th century,
about 3.5 billion years old.
And they seem to be fossils of photosynthesizing algae like modern cyanobacteria.
Indeed, it's their discovery that provides the best evidence for the early appearance of photosynthesis
and indeed of life itself.
These are the first clear fossils of life that we know.
But their appearance suggests that something had existed even earlier.
And that's why we assume that the very first prokaryotes appeared about 3.8 billion years ago.
Now, these cyanobacteria-like bacteria, simple organisms,
created coral-like structures called stromatolites.
Stromatolites are huge crowds of organisms,
and eventually as they die, these structures build and become larger and larger and larger.
Some of them still exist today.
They live and flourish, for example, off the western coast of Australia.
But we have very ancient examples of them so that we know that stromatolites are very, very old indeed.
And if you want to imagine an Archean landscape,
if you want to imagine a sort of shallow seashore,
you should probably imagine it's strewn with stromatolites.
Photosynthesis produces oxygen we've seen as a byproduct.
And that is exactly why free oxygen begins to build up in the Earth's atmosphere.
By 2.5 billion years ago, free oxygen starts building up,
and we've seen the evidence for this in rusted bands of iron.
So here's a second crucial piece of evidence for the appearance of photosynthesis,
the appearance of these rusted bands.
But the appearance of oxygen itself marks a very important stage in the history of life on Earth.
For most prokaryotes, oxygen was poisonous.
We've seen, essentially, why we've seen that oxygen is a violently reactive chemical.
It likes nothing better than to get at simpler, fragile chemicals and break them up violently.
And that's why Lin Margulis and Dorian Sagan have described this change as the oxygen holocaust.
As oxygen is building up, it's toxic for huge numbers of prokaryotes,
and it probably killed off large numbers of them.
This revolutionary change in the atmosphere provides one marker for the beginning of a new ion,
the protozoic ion, from about 2.5 billion years ago.
So that's our second stage.
We've got the appearance of prokaryotes, which indirect evidence suggests occurred perhaps 3.8 billion years ago.
And then we've got the appearance of this complex reaction of photosynthesis,
which allowed living organisms to tap into the energy of the sun.
And that seems to have appeared quite early, perhaps 3.5 billion years ago.
And all in all, what this shows is that life appeared surprisingly rapidly on the Earth,
almost as soon as it was possible.
And that may mean that wherever the conditions for life are good,
there's a reasonably good chance that life will appear.
Stage three, eukaryotes.
I've talked about prokaryotes, now we're talking about eukaryotes.
E-U-K-A-R-Y-O-T-E-S.
This is the third crucial transition in the era of single-celled organisms.
We don't know exactly when eukaryotes appeared.
It was probably sometime during the protozoic eon more than about 1 billion years ago.
Most biologists would probably tell you today that this was one of the most revolutionary changes in the entire history of life.
To a non-biologist, it doesn't necessarily appear terribly exciting,
but most biologists regard the distinction between eukaryotes and prokaryotes
as one of the most fundamental divisions of all between different types of living organisms.
So this is important.
And let me add immediately that we are constructed entirely of eukaryotes.
So without this revolution, we would not have existed.
Lynn Margulis, one of the most important biologists of the 20th century,
she has really pioneered work on study of what she called the microcosmos, the world of bacteria.
And she's been very important in demonstrating how dangerous it is to neglect to underestimate this world.
She showed that eukaryotes evolved through the merging of once independent species of prokaryotes.
Evidence for this is the presence, the fact that you can find in all eukaryotes, internal organelles, as they're called.
In our bodies, we have organs.
Eukaryotes are more complex than prokaryotes in the sense that they have various different organelles inside.
And some of those organelles have their own DNA.
And that suggests that they had once existed quite independently.
Two organisms have sort of merged to form eukaryotes.
Now eukaryotes, like prokaryotes, are single-celled organisms, but somehow other single cells have got inside them.
How?
It's not entirely clear.
Perhaps they were eaten, but continued to survive and began to find it rather cosy inside their new hosts.
This we'll see is an example of a much more widespread phenomenon in the history of life, and that's symbiosis.
Two species that don't compete to the death, but rather find advantageous ways of cooperating that help them both.
These organelles include mitochondria.
Mitochondria can extract energy from oxygen, and they have their own DNA.
And chloroplasts, which can extract energy from sunlight through photosynthesis.
So all plant-like organisms have chloroplasts.
Now, so it's these organelles that make it possible to claim that eukaryotes represent a significant increase in complexity.
Here we have a structure that simply has more components, more bits and pieces than that of a prokaryote.
But so does the fact that eukaryotes, in turn, will make possible the creation of new types of organisms that are even more complex than them.
Because eventually we'll see that eukaryotes could assemble into larger organisms, but we'll come to that later.
Now, the merging of these various organisms within eukaryotes through symbiosis anticipates the later creation of multicellular organisms.
Eukaryotes are not quite multicellular, but they're pointing in that direction.
Most eukaryotes are much bigger than prokaryotes.
They're about ten to a thousand times as large as prokaryotes, and some can just be seen with a naked eye.
They're not only bigger, they have a more elaborate reproductive apparatus in the sense that their DNA doesn't just float free inside the cell
to be bombarded, as Bill Bryson described, by all the various things moving around inside the cell.
The DNA of eukaryotes is protected within a special container, the nucleus.
So this is one of the organelles. The cell has a nucleus in its center which protects DNA.
And that's important because it means the DNA can preserve its genetic code much more faithfully, and reproduction can become more accurate.
And we've seen that many eukaryotic cells contain mitochondria.
Special organelles that once lived as independent organisms.
What these can do is generate energy from oxygen.
And oxygen provides a much more powerful source of energy than the types of metabolism used by most prokaryotes, such as fermentation.
So eukaryotes flourished in an oxygen-rich atmosphere, and indeed it's possible that their evolution was a response to the appearance of oxygen.
So the appearance of eukaryotes marks a significant increase in the complexity of life.
Lynn Margulis and Dorian Sagan write,
The difference between the new cells and the old prokaryotes in the fossil record looks as drastic as if the Wright Brothers Kitty Hawk flying machine had been followed a week later by the Concord jet.
So that's stage three, the appearance sometime in the protozoic eon of eukaryotes.
Stage four, sexual reproduction.
This is the fourth crucial transition, the appearance of sexual reproduction, probably about one billion years ago.
And it seems to be associated in some sense with the appearance of eukaryotes.
Prokaryotes regularly exchange genetic material. This is a bit like the internet.
It's as if they grab passing bits of genetic material that float in the environment, they use it and then pass it on.
So prokaryotes live in a very different sort of reproductive world from us.
But they normally reproduce simply by splitting into two identical individuals or clones.
In most eukaryotes, reproduction takes a slightly different form.
What happens is that two organisms, two eukaryotic cells, swaps some genetic material before reproducing,
and the offspring shares genetic material from both parents.
It'll inherit a mixture of genetic material from the two parent individuals.
I have to say this, don't think this was necessarily fun sex.
This wasn't necessarily very sexy at all.
The genetic aspects of sexuality emerged much earlier than the fun bits.
Okay, why is this so important? Why is this swapping of genetic material before reproduction?
It's important because it meant that the offspring of eukaryotic cells were no longer simply clones of their parents.
Sexual reproduction introduces greater variation between individuals.
The offspring are never exactly the same as their parents,
so you find that individuals start to vary from each other much more than in the prokaryotic world.
And we've seen already that natural selection sort of seizes on variations between individuals,
and that's what it builds on to eventually lead to change and to new species.
So if you have a mechanism like sexual reproduction that generates more variety between individuals,
you shouldn't be surprised if evolution speeds up,
and that seems to be exactly what happened during the last billion years.
In effect, the emergence of sexual reproduction increased the efficiency of the mechanism of natural selection.
As natural selection helps organisms sort of search constantly for new ways of exploiting the natural environment,
so evolution speeds up.
Let me summarize.
In this lecture, I've surveyed the first three billion years of the history of life on Earth,
beginning perhaps 3.8 billion years ago, ending about 600 million years ago.
During that entire time, all organisms were single-celled.
Now we go to the last 600 or so million years of the history of life on Earth.
What happened then?
We're seeing the build-up of new structures that eventually would contribute to the emergence of our own species, human beings.
Thank you.
Here we are.
We're at the very beginning of the Cambrian era, slightly less than 600 million years ago.
On a timescale in which the 13 billion years since the Big Bang are shrunk to a mere 13 years,
and that's a timescale we've already seen, the Cambrian begins about seven months ago.
That's almost contemporary history, in fact, on the scales of this course.
If you look around, the first thing you'll notice is that you can see no large living organisms.
In fact, you can't see any living organisms at all.
And in fact, as we saw in the previous lecture, that has been the norm for most of the Earth's history.
And the reason, of course, is that there were plenty of living organisms.
We thought they're all around you, but they're all single-celled, and you can't see any of them with a naked eye.
We just happen to be designed, because of the way we are, we're multicellular organisms, to notice larger organisms.
They're the ones that are worth noticing, they're worth thinking about.
Small organisms, our bodies will deal with, our minds can't deal with them.
So, we won't see the tiny organisms.
And we often forget how much of life is still dominated by single-celled organisms.
If someone from Earth finds themselves on an Earth-sized planet, sometime in the next few centuries,
the odds are they're going to find an environment like the very, very early Cambrian, if they're lucky.
They may not see life, even if it's there.
But single-celled organisms still shape our world in many, many ways,
and it's worth reminding ourselves of that before we move on to look at larger organisms.
Many aspects of the working of our world, including, for example, the breakdown and disposal of waste products,
or the spread of disease, are dominated by the ceaseless work of this vast realm of single-celled organisms.
But their importance is also more intimate to us.
In fact, single-celled organisms make up a substantial part of our own bodies.
They're crawling all over us, and they're crawling all through us.
And because they're smaller than eukaryotic cells, there are probably far more bacteria on and in our bodies
than there are actual body cells.
In a sense, most of us is single-celled prokaryotic organisms.
Most of them, by the way, are in your gut.
There's another reason why single-celled organisms are important.
There's a sense in which we have to remind ourselves that we, too, from a certain point of view,
are merely vast crowds of billions of single-celled eukaryotic cells, organisms.
However, there is an important difference, and that leads us to the subject of large multi-celled organisms like ourselves.
Each individual cell in the crowd of eukaryotic cells that make up our bodies is identical genetically to all the others.
DNA is identical to that of every other cell in your body.
They're like lots of identical twins, or identical billions, if you like.
And this, it turns out, is really rather important.
The biologist Richard Dawkins has argued in many works, such as his classic book, The Selfish Gene,
that the real competition in the biological realm is not between organisms as such, but between genes.
Genes are large sections of DNA code that are designed to produce certain mechanisms or certain functions.
Genes are strips of our genetic code.
It's genes, he says, that really compete.
And our bodies can be described merely as, in his phrase, throw away survival machines for genes.
Genes ride our bodies and look for ways of moving from body to body so they can make themselves more or less eternal.
They want the body they occupy to survive and reproduce them so they can be replicated in another body.
So, this is the question.
How can a hundred billion cells, roughly the number in our body, possibly cooperate in a single organism?
And the answer is, they can if they are genetically identical.
If they preserve the same genetic material, then they will have a common purpose.
They're trying to preserve the same genes and so they can work together.
They don't need to compete with each other and they can collaborate in ensuring the functioning of a large single organism.
Okay, so because genetically identical cells don't compete, they create the illusion, or is it an illusion of a single organism
that just happens to look like a crowd of billions of distinct organisms.
That's us.
And that's true also of all other large organisms on Earth.
Now, the previous lecture described how life evolved during the first three and a half billion years of the Earth's history
when all organisms were single-celled and most were prokaryotic.
And we saw that perhaps 85% of the history of life on Earth has been a history of single-celled organisms.
Now, we discussed the last 15% of the history of life on Earth, the history of multi-celled organisms,
or rather the era in which multi-celled organisms appear.
And we, of course, are one of the most recent examples, so this story is pointing towards the eventual appearance of human beings.
We will get to them.
Okay.
How did single-cells combine to form multi-celled organisms?
And how did multi-celled organisms first evolve to create our ancestors?
We'll trace the evolution of multi-celled organisms during the last 600 million years.
And what we'll do is describe four more transitions on the evolutionary pathway that leads to our own species, homo sapiens.
These are the last four of eight stages in the history of life.
Let me remind you briefly of the first four stages we discussed in the last lecture.
The first was the creation of the first prokaryotes, the first living organisms about 3.8 billion years ago.
The second was the appearance of the chemical reaction photosynthesis mediated by chlorophyll,
which allowed life on Earth to tap into the energy generated by the sun,
but also began to generate new oxygen, free oxygen, in the atmosphere.
The third transition was the appearance of more complex eukaryotic cells,
and the fourth was the appearance of sexual reproduction.
It goes without saying that much more went on.
This is simply a series of what we could call sub-thresholds, important transitional points in the history of life on Earth,
but I think none are quite as important as the major thresholds of this course.
These are some of the crucial stages within the larger story of the evolution of more complex life forms.
Now what we're going to do is just follow one branch of evolution.
It's not the most numerous one, but it's the one that leads towards us,
and it's also the one that leads in the direction of greater complexity.
Okay.
Stage one of these last four stages, the creation of multicellular organisms.
The first transition we discuss is how single cells manage to form single organisms,
consisting of large numbers of cells.
As late as the 1950s, most biologists were convinced that life first appeared on Earth only in the Cambrian era,
about 570 million years ago, and there was a very good reason for that.
That was when the first fossils seemed to appear, at least the first fossils visible to the naked eye.
We now know, as we saw in the last lecture, that single-celled organisms had already existed for almost 3 billion years.
But until quite recently, this was not known.
And so it was believed that life itself appeared only about 570 million years ago.
The Cambrian was thought of as the period in which life itself first appeared.
We now know life appeared very soon after the Earth itself was created.
So what the Cambrian era really marks is the appearance of the first multicellular organisms.
Now, this was a complex process, as you can imagine.
How do you get millions, billions of prokaryotes to cooperate?
For large organisms to work, billions of cells had to work together.
They had to be able to communicate with great precision.
How is this possible?
Now, evolution is often thought of as dominated by competition.
In fact, as we'll see over and over again, there are many forms of cooperation in the natural world.
Natural selection can often work through cooperation.
Two organisms find they work very well together.
Those that work best together have more offspring,
and over time, the relationship gets closer and closer and closer
through what's often known as co-evolution.
And the general word to describe cooperation between living organisms is symbiosis.
It's an extremely important idea, and we'll come back to it.
But think how complex the symbiosis, the cooperation, had to be to create large organisms.
Billions of cells had to be able to work together.
Each cell had to know its role in the overall plan.
It had to be able to get its share of the energy available to the entire organism.
So you need systems for moving energy around, systems for moving information around.
Each cell has to know its precise function in the overall thing.
In short, making sure that these huge, lumbering beasts could exist in function
is a staggering organizational feat.
But it isn't, of course, the first example of cooperation in the natural world.
Let's look at some other forms of symbiosis,
so we get a clear idea of what makes multicellularity different.
We've already seen that the formation of eukaryotes
involves the emergence of an intimate symbiosis between prokaryotic organizations.
Somehow, the first eukaryotes seem to have absorbed prokaryotes
without destroying them, and these became the internal organelles of eukaryotes.
So eukaryotic cells are already pointing us in the direction of multicellularity.
Now, here's another looser example of symbiosis or cooperation,
stromatolites.
We've already seen that stromatolites form like coral reefs.
They're formed from huge colonies of individual prokaryotes
that live together, and their dead bodies slowly build up
and form these reef-like structures,
some of which appeared very early in the history of the planet.
Now, there's clearly cooperation going on.
The sheer size of the colony can provide some protection for the individual organisms.
But there's not much organization here.
Each organism basically does its own thing.
This is a very loose form of cooperation.
A second type is illustrated by some sponges.
This is a fascinating experiment.
There are sponges that look clearly like single organisms.
They certainly fool you and me.
You can take these sponges, though, and you can pass them through a sieve.
You can press them through a sieve,
so you're breaking them up into their individual components.
Does that kill them? No.
The other side of the sieve, all the bits and pieces simply reassemble,
and the sponge goes its merry way.
So these are still really crowds of individual organisms,
but they clearly, they gain something from being together.
So they prefer to work together, but they can exist as individuals.
Here's another example that's taking us closer and closer to multicellularity.
Slime moles.
Slime moles would look to you and me like types of fungus, probably.
They consist mainly of a type of amoeba,
and they're right at the borderline between crowds
and genuine single multicellular organisms.
Let me describe a biologist's account of how a slime mold works.
Slime moles are made up of lots of amoeba-like organisms,
and here's a description by Joel de Rosny.
If you deprive one of these organisms of food and water,
it emits a distress hormone.
Other amoebas rush to the rescue,
and they gather into a colony about a thousand strong,
a thousand individuals, as it were,
but they move like a sort of slug in search of nourishment.
If they don't find it, they stop moving,
they put up a spore-producing stalk,
a bit like a sort of submarine's periscope,
and they remain there indefinitely, just like that, as long as it's dry.
But if you add water, the spores germinate
and give rise to independent mix amoebas,
which head off in different directions.
So that's the slime mold.
So I hope you can see that there are several stages
between complete independence of organisms and cooperation.
Now, this is a very important point,
because when we look at human society later on,
we're going to see that human societies, too,
exist as crowds of individuals,
but over time, those individuals get more and more interdependent.
And that raises a very important question
to which we have no clear answer yet,
which is, can you imagine humans eventually becoming so interdependent
that we'd have to start thinking of society as a whole
as a sort of single organism?
And I'll just leave that question hanging in the air.
Okay, genuine multicellularity
requires, as we've seen, that all the participating cells
have identical genetic material,
and that's in order to avoid competition between them.
If they're identical, they can cooperate.
What happens in human beings, for example,
is that a fertilized cell
will create billions of clones as the embryo develops.
Each of those clones has exactly the same genes,
but they don't develop in quite the same way.
Though they have identical genetic material,
different cells are activated in different ways,
depending on where they find themselves in the developing body
and the chemicals that surround them.
So different chemicals can persuade the RNA inside those cells
to unzip the DNA and use different parts of it,
get different instructions, and perform in different ways.
So in this way, each cell slowly starts developing a specialist role,
and it'll eventually turn into a distinct type of cell,
a liver cell, perhaps, or a neuron.
So within human bodies, you have specialization,
as in human society, with different cells specializing in special functions.
As a result, the organism as a whole becomes much more complex,
and it's capable of a much wider range of functions
than would be possible for a single cell.
So multicellularity allowed the construction of gigantic organisms,
organisms that existed, in fact, on a completely different scale
from those of most of the history of life on Earth.
Imagine yourself as a prokaryote,
and you're looking at yourself as you really are.
What would we look like?
Presumably, of course we can't really tell,
but presumably you would look like a huge moving equivalent
of the Empire State building, only probably much larger.
So imagine the Empire State walking around New York.
That's probably what we would look like to these organisms.
Some large organisms, like ourselves, contain as many cells
as there are stars in the Milky Way.
Once the first multicellular organisms appeared,
they evolved rapidly in an adaptive radiation.
Now I'm going to use this phrase adaptive radiation again.
It's quite helpful, so let me try and explain it clearly.
Adaptive radiations occur quite frequently in evolutionary history.
We've seen already, this is actually one of the great ideas
of Stephen J. Gould, who I've mentioned before,
the pace of evolution can vary greatly.
Sometimes it's very, very fast, sometimes it's very, very slow.
Sometimes a new organism appears which has a new trick,
let's say, photosynthesis as an example of that,
but it's a trick that could be used in multiple ways.
And very often when that happens,
what you find is that a whole series of individual species appear
very, very quickly, each of them using the same trick,
but in slightly different environments.
That's an adaptive radiation,
and something like that seems to have happened
with the appearance of multicellular organisms,
and that's why in the Cambrian you suddenly get a huge array of new species.
It's as if once the trick of multicellularity has been discovered,
evolution, adaptation starts exploring all the possible uses of that trick
on our Earth.
Okay, now we've got multicellular organisms.
Before I go further, let me spend a bit of time talking about how we classify them.
Now, we've already touched on the idea of taxonomy.
It was pioneered, we've seen, by Carl Linnaeus in the 18th century.
We've already met him, and we saw that he was one of the great opponents
of the idea of evolution, but also the pioneer of modern taxonomy.
Now, we need to look slightly more closely at how taxonomy
groups different types of organisms.
We want to understand different types of multicellular organisms,
so we need to get a bit of a grip on taxonomy.
What taxonomy does is group organisms into many nested categories.
I should warn you that there's not yet total agreement about the best system,
so occasionally you'll find slightly different bits of terminology
dropping up in different systems of taxonomy,
but they all share the same basic features.
Today, the largest generally recognized category
divides all living organisms into two super kingdoms.
This is the largest division of all between living organisms,
and it's one that most biologists accept.
It's the division we've seen already between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
There are two fundamental types of organisms,
and we, of course, are eukaryotes.
We're made of eukaryotic cells.
That's the super kingdom.
Below that comes a level of kingdoms.
Kingdoms include, for example, animals, plants, and fungi
amongst multicellular organisms.
We're animals.
Then come phyla.
That's the plural of the Latin phylum.
Phyla include chordates, the backbone organisms.
Below that come classes such as mammals,
then orders such as primates,
and finally species such as human beings.
Now, don't worry about the details. We'll come back to this later on.
What you need to remember is this picture of nested hierarchies,
which enabled us to determine the precise place of an organism within life as a whole.
And we'll see later how this elegant system allows us to define a species
such as our own with great precision
and assign it a precise position in the family tree of life on Earth.
Okay, multicellularity is perhaps the most important large transition
we talk about in this lecture.
Now I want to go on to the next three,
and the second is the appearance of vertebrates.
The appearance of organisms with backbones, with spines, chordates.
We belong to the phylum of chordates or vertebrates.
Organisms, multicellular organisms with backbones.
The first vertebrates evolved about 500 million years ago
in the Ordovician period on the geological timescale,
and they evolved from worm-like ancestors.
I'm probably going to keep saying this for a bit.
Meet the relatives, get used to it.
We evolved from worm-like ancestors.
They were probably pretty unimpressive, the first vertebrates.
Fish-like beasts with no heart, no brain, a bit like modern Lancelots.
It's hard to love them, but they were our ancestors.
All vertebrates have a structure.
Unlike amoeba, where you can't really say where is the front or the end,
vertebrates are sort of stretched out along their spine,
and that means they have a front and they have a back.
Now we take this for granted,
but it's worth remembering that this is something that evolved,
and it represents a new level of structure.
They have a front and a back,
and they have a complex system of internal communication
through nerve cells that run along the spine.
Vertebrates include fish, amphibia, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
And we, of course, fit within the mammals.
So with vertebrates you can see clearly the appearance of new types of structure,
one of the defining features of increasing complexity.
So each of our sub-thresholds is itself adding a bit of complexity to life on Earth.
That's the second threshold.
Now on to the third.
To land.
I need to remind you that up to this point,
almost all living organisms have existed in the seas.
A lot, of course, would stay there.
And eventually some land animals, such as the ancestors of Wales,
would return to the sea.
But now what we're going to do is we're going to follow the story
of those that migrated to the land.
This is the third great transition,
the movement of some multicellular organisms from the sea to the land.
Plants and insects probably reached the land first about 500 million years ago
during the Ordovician period.
The first vertebrates to leave the sea did so about 400 million years ago.
That's during the Devonian period.
Now we need to think about what a challenge this was.
Life we saw evolved in the sea, and there's very good reasons for this.
Liquid provides the ideal environment for the complex chemical dance
from which living organisms were created.
Moving beyond liquids was a huge challenge.
You needed first a strong skeleton.
Water gives you buoyancy, it supports you.
Outside of the water, your skeleton has to support your weight.
So you're going to need a tougher skeleton.
You're going to need a tough skin to avoid drying out.
Your internal organisms are going to need to act as if you still lived in water.
So you'll need a skin that protects you from drying out.
And that's so our internal organisms can carry on existing
in a sort of at least semi-liquid environment as they had before.
Try going for a few days without water,
and you'll get a sense of the fact that we are still basically aquatic organisms
that have made special provisions for living outside of the water.
You needed special apparatus enabling you to breathe,
to breathe oxygen directly rather than through the water.
And you also needed, and this was perhaps the most difficult thing of all,
some way of reproducing in a watery environment.
You need some way of reproducing so that your very, very fragile offspring
don't perish in this hostile environment.
A good way of getting a sense of how difficult this was
is perhaps to think of what it meant for humans to walk on the moon.
We required an entire special exterior in order to deal with such a hostile environment.
It was extremely cold, there was no oxygen,
there was no pressure, so people walking in space need very special apparatus.
And the earliest organisms on land had to make an equally complex adjustment.
The first vertebrates to live for prolonged periods on land
were probably a bit like modern lungfish.
Once again, get used to it.
These are our ancestors, we have to learn to love them.
Lungfish can survive for some periods on land
if the ponds they live in dry out.
It's a type of organism that has endured for a long, long time.
You can still find them on the earth today.
And ancient lungfish may have not been that different from the ones we find today.
Two important classes of vertebrates were the amphibia,
which lived on land permanently but returned to water to lay their eggs.
They evolved about 400 million years ago during the Devonian.
And the reptiles.
The reptiles evolved about 350 million years ago during the Carboniferous period.
That's the era in which much of the cold that we excavate today was laid down.
Reptiles laid their young in eggs so they could live permanently on the land.
They didn't need to stay near the sea or near water to reproduce.
Eggs with a leathery skin could protect their young
and keep them in a liquid environment until they were ready to face the land.
Now let's move on to the fourth transition, mammals.
Now we're getting seriously parochial.
In terms of the biosphere as a whole, mammals weren't particularly important
until maybe quite recently.
Or numerous, but we happen to be mammals.
So mammals naturally interest us and we can even feel some empathy for them.
Try feeling empathy for an amoeba. It's really tough.
Mammals we can empathize with.
So this is the fourth transition, the appearance of the class of mammals
about 250 million years ago during the Triassic.
As you remember the supercontinent of Pangea, as it was forming,
a huge number of living species vanished during the so-called Permian extinction.
The Permian period lasted from 290 to 250 million years ago.
This mass extinction may have been caused by a massive asteroid impact,
although we really don't know.
Another possibility is that it was caused by plate tectonics.
A world with many different separated continents and islands
is a world with a huge potential for diverse species.
But if you bring them all together, then competition between species
is going to eliminate so many that you're going to find that biodiversity shrinks.
So biodiversity on Pangea was probably a lot smaller than before and after.
Think of the diversity you find on isolated islands today to get some feeling for this.
The Galapagos are a very good example.
So that's another possibility.
That may have accounted for this massive extinction,
but the massive extinction in turn may help us understand
why there seems to have been a sudden proliferation of new species
after the appearance of Pangea.
And the mammals were amongst that new group of species that appeared as Pangea assembled.
The removal of so many earlier species
created space for a rapid adaptive radiation of new species.
Two important new classes of vertebrates were the dinosaurs and the mammals.
Both appeared in the Triassic period between 250 and 210 million years ago,
and they flourished.
The class of mammals contains furry, warm-blooded organisms
that nurture their young within their mother's body and feed them with milk.
Even humans have fur, though not very much.
The earliest mammals were probably shrew-like animals
that foraged for insects at night and scurried around beneath the feet of huge dinosaurs.
They were not terribly impressive, but they once again are our ancestors.
Then, about 67 million years ago, right at the end of the Cretaceous period,
a massive asteroid impact, the so-called Cretaceous event,
destroyed most large species, including dinosaurs.
Now, this is something that was not known even 30 years ago
until the work of Walter Alvarez and his father, the physicist Louis Alvarez,
proved that it was true, and it revolutionized geology
because most geologists resisted the idea of catastrophic changes like this.
Mammal species now diversified, with the dinosaurs removed,
suddenly there are a lot of niches that you can fill,
so suddenly we find all sorts of new species of mammals
appearing from about 65 million years ago,
and they start filling the niches vacated by the dinosaurs.
We're still not certain why mammals fared better than dinosaurs.
Many were probably killed, but perhaps the fact that they were small and nocturnal
helped in some sense.
Perhaps fur and warm-bloodedness also helped them.
As part of this mammalian radiation, there appeared a new order of mammals,
the primates.
The primates were tree-dwelling mammals with stereoscopic vision,
hands designed to grasp, and large brains.
And you and I are primates.
Thank you.
