must have been crushed into a single, tiny, dense hot point.
A primeval atom, as he called it.
And it followed remarkably that by measuring the rate of expansion of the universe,
we could date the moment of creation.
This was a remarkable breakthrough and a remarkable achievement.
It solved the problems posed by an infinite universe
for an expanding universe had to be finite,
and it had to contain finite amounts of light and heat.
It also fitted well with Einstein's recent theories,
which, though he was reluctant to admit this at first,
implied that the universe must be either expanding or contracting.
Nevertheless, for two decades, hardly anyone took the idea seriously.
The name Big Bang was coined for it by one of the naysayers, Fred Hoyle,
who we're going to meet again.
He'd worked with Gamov.
He used the phrase with derision.
This was just a Big Bang that this is all about.
In fact, the theory, as we'll see in the next lecture,
would be clinched in the 1960s.
So what I've done in this lecture is show how evidence accumulated
over many, many centuries for a rather startling new image of the universe,
and it showed that the universe was expanding,
and that meant that the universe had a beginning,
and that meant that the universe had a history.
And that is why the universe deserves to be regarded as a part of history,
and that's why it's part of this big history course.
Thank you.
Lecture 6 How Did Everything Begin?
So, here we are.
We're at the very beginning.
There's nothing around us.
Don't be fooled by the stuff you can see here.
There's nothing around us.
No space.
There's not even any time.
Zilch.
But something is about to happen,
and that will be the first of all historical events.
In fact, what's about to happen is that a universe is about to be created.
So, what's the recipe for making a universe?
Another great cocktail party question is you're swigging your margaritas.
To survive the cocktail,
you'll need another non-technical answer like the one I tried to give to earlier questions.
So, that's the sort I'll offer.
100 years ago, this question would still have seemed the purest metaphysics.
How did everything begin?
It would have seemed a question beyond evidence,
and only be answered philosophically or within religious traditions.
Now, we have the evidence, and I described some of it in the last lecture,
to offer a powerful, rigorous, evidence-based scientific answer to this fundamental question.
And what I want to do in this lecture is look at the outlines of that answer
and some of the evidence on which it's based.
In the last lecture, I described the origins of modern cosmology
and how western cosmology evolved over 2,000 years.
And what we saw was that in the early 20th century,
careful scientific work and a lot of observation began to yield a powerful answer
to questions that had previously seemed unanswerable, such as how the universe was created.
So, now I'm going to look at that answer.
Okay, so this is clearly, for any attempt, like this course in big history,
at a unified count of the past, this has to be the first question of all.
Where did everything start? How did everything start?
Where did all the stuff around us come from?
The living and the dead? The simple and the complex?
Our parents? Our aunt Edna? Our grandparents? Our children?
As far as we know, all human societies have asked this question.
It's one of the deepest questions one can ask and every society must have asked it.
And they've also offered answers to it.
But we also know that most of the answers that were offered in earlier societies
were based on very, very limited evidence.
And that explains in part why they're so astonishingly variable.
But we should not dismiss those answers.
They may seem naive to us.
Often embedded in them was a huge amount of good empirical observational evidence.
They were rich, they were intelligent.
They were based often on as much evidence as a society could muster.
And even more important, they mattered. They really counted.
And the reason they counted was that they told people who they were and where they were.
Imagine a group of people in the Paleolithic sitting around a campfire,
wondering how did everything start?
Imagine the kids asking all these questions about the stars, about the mountains, and so on.
And saying, finally, one of them saying, yeah, but how did everything start?
Someone is going to have to give them an answer.
And that answer, whether we like it or not today, is going to be powerful.
So it's very important when we look at the scientific account of origins
to also pay our dues to the many other alternative accounts
that have been developed in the past.
It'll also help us understand the modern answer
if we compare it briefly with those traditional answers.
So let me try and summarize the types of answers.
This is just a very loose summary of the types of answers
that different societies have offered to this fundamental question.
Here's the first, and perhaps the most common.
Traditional answers to the question of the origins of everything often begin with a god, or gods.
They say the universe was created by a deity or deities.
Now, sometimes the gods are a bit amorphous.
They sort of lurk in the background, but they're there nevertheless.
Here's a passage from a Mayan text
that hints at how the gods may always be lurking in the text there, in the back there.
This is a very rich text, and I'm just quoting a sentence or two from it.
So I hope it just captures the power of the idea of a deity to explain origins.
Here's how it goes from the Popul Vuh, the council book.
Whatever might be is simply not there.
Only murmurs ripples in the dark in the night.
And now a god will appear.
Only the maker, modeler alone.
And notice how this god is a bit like a potter.
It's a very, very common image of God as a potter, making the world as a potter makes clay.
Only the maker, modeler alone, sovereign, plumed, serpent.
And now the gods seem to multiply.
The bearers, baguettas, are in the water, a glittering light.
They are there.
They are enclosed in ketzal feathers in blue-green.
Now that's one very common strategy to explaining the origins of everything, to suppose the existence of a god.
But there's a problem with it, of course.
You can imagine a bratty kid at the back of this group who's discussing the origins of the universe saying,
yeah, but who made God?
Who made the modeler?
Who made the guy in the ketzal figures?
And this is actually a very deep question.
It's always going to be there.
And I suspect most people in most societies were aware of at the back of their minds that there was this dilemma.
Who made God?
Okay, second strategy.
And these strategies aren't separate.
They often overlap, as we'll see.
Many creation stories posit a sort of initial chaos out of which something emerged.
Now the word emergence is very, emerged is very appropriate here.
I've talked about emergence, the way that out of chaos something new can emerge.
And I think something similar is going on in these stories.
Here's a source.
It's the Rig Veda.
The basic Hindu scriptures, which were probably written down about 3,200 years ago.
And once again, I'm just picking a tiny passage from a very, very rich religious tradition.
Here's how it goes.
There was neither non-existence nor existence then.
What we're talking about is a sort of state in which there's not quite nothing,
but there's not quite something, the sort of potential.
That, in fact, is very like modern accounts of the vacuum.
There was neither non-existence nor existence then.
There was neither the realm of space nor the sky which is beyond.
What stirred?
Where?
In whose protection?
Can you see how a sort of conscious being of some kind seems to be creeping into the story?
There was neither death nor immortality then.
There was no distinguishing sign of night nor of day.
And then we get very clearly the idea that lurking somewhere is a conscious presence, a deity of some kind.
That one breathed, windless, by its own impulse.
I love that phrase and I think it captures very beautifully the difficulty of explaining origins.
So that's another strategy.
The universe emerged out of a primeval chaos, perhaps with a nudge from a god.
Many creation stories talk about a birth from egg.
Some accounts describe the universe as a sort of living organism,
which, like living organisms, was born from a parent or from a sort of cosmic egg.
Note the analogy with Lemaitre's idea of a primeval atom.
And then another alternative is to think of the origins of the universe as a sort of awakening.
This is poetically perhaps even a deeper idea.
There are many traditions that describe it as a sort of awakening, but here too you'll find
there always seems to be a god lurking in the background.
Here's a story from the Kararu people of South Australia.
Inside a deep cave below the Nullarbor Plain slept a beautiful woman, the sun.
The great father spirit, this is where the god appears of course,
but the great father spirit gently woke her and told her to emerge from her cave
and stir the universe into life.
The sun mother opened her eyes and darkness disappeared as her rays spread over the land.
She took a breath and the atmosphere changed.
The air gently vibrated as a small breeze blew.
It's a lovely image.
Okay, now let's move on to the modern account of origins.
One of the things the modern account doesn't do is posit a divine creator
and it does so very, very systematically and very deliberately.
And there are two real reasons for this.
The first is one we've already seen.
If you posit a creator you may be not solving your problem of creation,
but actually simply creating a new one.
There's an infinite regress.
You have to explain the creator.
You have to explain how the creator of the creator was created and so on.
But there's a second problem with deistic accounts of the origins of the universe.
There's no evidence.
Science knows of no evidence-based way of showing the existence of a creator god.
So this is something, even if you believe in such a god,
you cannot talk about that god in terms of science.
Nevertheless, the modern account of origins faces the same problem that all creation stories face.
And I'll call that the paradox of beginnings.
Who created god? Who or what laid the egg?
How can you get from nothing to something?
And quite frankly, the modern account of creation has no better solution than any other story.
We just don't know what there was before the Big Bang.
We don't even know if time or space existed.
It's actually characteristic of science,
unlike some forms of institutionalized religion, that it admits its ignorance at this point.
Most cosmologists will say, we reach a point where we can say nothing more.
Now, cosmologists are also human.
And this means that many of them actually are desperately trying to think their way through this puzzle.
Stephen Hawking has famously suggested that perhaps the question's a bad one.
Perhaps we're simply getting caught in a bad question.
If the universe, if the geometry of time-space, of space-time is actually circular,
then to ask what there was before the beginning is as ludicrous as to ask what is north of the North Pole.
Perhaps it's a silly question.
Others are pursuing different directions.
You may be aware of the fact that at CERN, on the Swiss-French border,
they're building the Large Hadron Collider, which will be the largest particle collider ever built.
CERN is the European Organization for Nuclear Research.
The Large Hadron Collider will be a 27-kilometer-long circular tunnel.
It's running under the French Swiss border.
It's designed to smash particles together with almost as much violence as during the Big Bang.
In other words, to take us back to the conditions of the Big Bang and to see what happens.
This is evidence with a vengeance.
We may actually get new evidence about what happened at that moment.
So watch this space. It'll be interesting.
Okay, so at the beginning, the modern account of creation is really as arbitrary as any other.
We just don't know.
Then, from a tiny, tiny fraction of a second after the moment of creation,
we can tell, and this is itself quite remarkable,
we can tell a well-grounded scientific story based on masses of carefully tested evidence.
It begins 13.7 billion years ago.
Now, to explain this story, I'm going to need some very, very large and very, very small numbers
for which we'll use exponential notation.
So let me briefly explain what I mean how exponential notation works.
Some of you will be very familiar with this, but in case you're not, let me try and explain it briefly.
You remember Powers of Ten?
I talked about that in the second lecture.
It's a similar sort of principle.
A figure one with two zeros after it is a hundred.
That represents two tens multiplied together.
The figure one thousand with three zeros represents three tens multiplied together.
So in exponential notation, what we do is we write ten,
and then we put a tiny superscript two for a hundred,
and ten to the three for a thousand.
That means ten multiplied by itself three times.
One million is ten to the six on the same principle.
Now, we can do the same with fractions.
One hundredth is naught point zero one.
It's one tenth, one over ten, multiplied by itself twice.
So one tenth multiplied by itself.
So what they do is they write ten to the minus two.
That means instead of ten multiplied by itself, it's one over ten multiplied by itself.
Ten to the minus three is one thousandth and so on.
So I hope you've got the basic principle of exponential figures
because now I'm going to start using them.
Okay, now imagine we're back at that campfire.
I'm a modern scientist trying in very simple language to explain what actually happened.
Here's the story.
At the very beginning, we can't say anything.
So our story is going to start ten to the minus thirty-five of a second
after the moment of creation.
Yes, that's a decimal point followed by thirty-four zeros with a forlorn one later.
It's that small a bit of a second.
From that moment on, we can tell a good scientific story.
So just before that, something appeared.
What can we say about this thing that appeared?
Well, it was tiny.
It was probably the size of an atom.
It was also inconceivably hot.
Think as many gazillion centigrade as you like and you're probably not there yet.
The other thing we know about it is that it's expanding very, very rapidly,
like a sort of huge explosion.
That was the point of Fred Hoyle calling it the Big Bang.
And as it's expanding, it's cooling.
So already we know quite a lot about it.
It's tiny. It's very hot. It's expanding.
And as it's expanding, like every expanding gas, it's cooling.
At the very beginning, matter and energy are indistinguishable.
It's a sort of mishmash of stuff and forces and things.
Then what we'll see happening is that out of this mishmash, distinct things start to appear.
It's as if through the fog we can start to see clear things.
It may help to think of phase changes.
A phase change occurs when steam cools and turns into water.
Steam gets cooler, cooler, cooler, cooler, cooler.
Then suddenly, at 100 degrees centigrade, it turns into something else.
It turns into water.
Now a whole series of phase changes, a bit like that,
happened in the early universe as it cooled.
Things and forces appeared.
Gravity appeared.
And the strong and electromagnetic forces,
and also the fourth fundamental force, the weak nuclear force.
Now I'm not going to talk about the weak nuclear force.
We don't need it. I don't want to go there.
