But the four fundamental forces appear.
The strong force holds the nuclei of atoms together.
The electromagnetic force holds atoms together
because it holds particles with opposite charges together
and drives apart particles with the same charge.
It drives electricity and magnetism.
Now something quite bizarre happens.
It's not the only bizarre thing happening.
It's known as inflation from, now another figure,
10 to the minus 33 to 10 to the minus 32 of a second,
the universe expands much faster than the speed of light.
Now even the non-scientists amongst you will have heard
that nothing can move faster than light.
So what's going on? Well, what's happening is
nothing is necessarily moving faster than light.
The fabric of space-time itself is expanding faster
than the speed of light.
And the universe grows from the size of an atom
to the size of a galaxy.
So this phase is known as inflation.
Then something else bizarre happens.
And remember we're still in the very early moments
of the first second of the universe's history.
Particles start to appear out of the murk, quarks,
which are what protons and neutrons are made from.
And they appear in opposite forms.
And when these forms meet, they annihilate each other.
So a huge amount of matter appears,
and then immediately it annihilates itself,
releasing energy according to Einstein's formula,
E equals mc squared.
And what this means is that of all the matter created
in the beginnings of the universe,
only perhaps something like a billionth remains.
So all the matter around us seems to consist of about
a billionth of the matter created in the Big Bank.
The rest was annihilated in this bizarre game
of subatomic musical chairs.
Okay, it leaves just a few survivors this game.
And these full-on survivors form protons,
which are positively charged, and neutrons,
which are electrically neutral.
And they will form the core of atoms.
Electrons also form.
They're lighter than protons and negatively charged.
They play the same game of musical chairs
as electrons with positive charges annihilate electrons
with negative charges, leaving just one billionth
of all the ones that are created.
And the rest goes in a flash of energy.
Now let's move forward.
A few minutes after the Big Bank,
what does the universe look like?
Well, it's now bigger than the galaxy.
It consists of a hot plasma.
That is to say, a mixture of energy
and charged subatomic particles.
It's a bit like the center of the sun.
Because the universe is so hot,
particles and energy are moving fast
and interacting violently.
The particles, the subatomic particles,
they're all charged.
They all have electrical charges.
They're all sparkling.
Energy and matter have sort of separated,
but not yet completely.
Now we move on 380,000 years, OK?
And we come to the next crucial episode in the story,
the next crucial phase change, if you like.
Suddenly, at a certain point, at a certain temperature,
a lot of things change.
And this is what happens.
The universe is now cool enough
that protons with positive charges
can capture electrons with negative charges.
And they form simple atoms of hydrogen and helium.
Now atoms are neutral
because the two charges cancel out.
So imagine all the matter in the universe
suddenly turns into atoms
and goes electrically neutral.
And now energy and matter
are more separate than they've ever been before.
In fact, energy can now flow through the universe freely
without getting entangled in the charges
of these loose subatomic particles.
And early Big Bang theorists hypothesized
that at that point there would be a sort of flash of energy.
Now what happens?
The universe cools.
It enters what we can think of as a sort of dark age
that may have lasted several hundred million years.
If you want to try and imagine it,
though honestly there's a lot of guesswork here,
you should probably imagine empty space
with a very, very faint glow of energy through it.
Now that's a very simple account,
attempt to capture the modern story of creation.
I hope you'll agree that in some ways it's quite as strange
as any creation story you can find in any culture.
And we also have to say one other thing about it.
Scientists are very confident that most of what they say
is about the origins is more or less accurate.
It's evidence-based.
But there's a lot we don't know.
Let me just give you one powerful illustration.
We know that there's a lot of stuff out there
that we know nothing about.
This is known, the scientists call this,
because I can't think of anything better to call it,
dark matter or dark energy.
We know it's there
because studies of the movements of galaxies
show that the stuff out there
that's exerting a powerful gravitational pull.
But we can't figure out what it is.
We can't identify anything associated with that stuff.
And yet this stuff may account for up to 95%
of the universe's total mass.
I think how bizarre that is.
What we're saying is that we seem to understand
only 5% of the universe.
Now that's the downside.
We have to admit that our understanding is still fairly limited
in that area.
There's a lot of the universe we don't understand.
But now we're going to put that aside
and carry on with the story.
Of that stuff, by the way,
70% may consist of undetected forms of energy
and 25% may consist of matter-in-forms we can't detect
because they don't emit radiation,
such as cold, dead stars or planets,
or perhaps because they're too small,
such as the subatomic particles known as neutrinos.
Again, watch this space.
There's exciting science going on.
Certain experiments could clarify some of this.
It's the sort of thing in which there could be
very important developments in the near future.
Okay, now what I want to do is look at the evidence.
Why should anyone believe this weird story?
And the answer is because, like all the strong claim science makes,
it rests on a colossal amount of carefully tested evidence.
And what I want to do is just briefly describe
some of the main pieces of evidence.
And I'm going to describe five main pieces of evidence.
Okay, first piece of evidence for the Big Bang,
the red shift.
And I've already described this.
As we saw, Hubble used the idea of the red shift
to show that the further away an object was,
or rather the most remote objects in the universe
seemed to be traveling away from us.
And the further away they were, the faster they were traveling away.
And the red shift, you'll remember,
is the fact that absorption lines on stellar spectra
sometimes seem to be shifted towards lower frequencies,
towards the red end of the spectrum.
And that's interpreted as a sign that they're moving away from us.
It's a Doppler effect.
Now, this evidence meant that the universe must be expanding.
If it's expanding at some time in the past, it was infinitely small.
That's the first and most powerful,
well, perhaps not the most powerful,
but one of the most powerful pieces of evidence for Big Bang cosmology.
I qualify that because it actually took 20 years or more
before cosmologists began to take this idea of a Big Bang seriously.
The second piece of evidence is the cosmic background radiation
or CBR.
And it's this piece of evidence that really clinched Big Bang cosmology
in the 1960s.
It's slightly technical, but I'm going to try and describe it in non-technical language.
Until 1965, Big Bang cosmology had a rival theory,
the steady state theory,
and this was supported amongst others by Fred Hoyle,
who we've met before,
and who was to become one of the great outspoken opponents of Big Bang cosmology
and opposed it throughout his life.
Hoyle and his colleagues argued that the expansion of the universe
was caused by the continuous creation of new matter.
This was a process that had been simply going on forever.
Matters always being created in the middle of the universe.
Now, you've got two rival theories of the origins of the universe.
The scientific question to ask is,
how can we discriminate between them?
And supporters of Big Bang cosmology had an idea
about how you can tell the difference between them.
You remember that about 380,000 years after the Big Bang,
I said that matter and energy finally separated
as matter became electrically neutral.
And theorists argued there must have been a sort of flash of energy at this point,
and it ought to pervade the entire universe.
And they argued it should still be detectable as a very, very weak energy source
coming from all parts of the universe.
If it could be detected, they argued it would prove their theory right.
But how could you detect it?
How can you discriminate between these two models of the universe?
Well, it turns out it was found more or less by accident in the middle of the 1960s.
In 1964, two engineers, radio engineers, Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson,
were trying to construct an extremely sensitive radio antenna
to detect signals from satellites.
They wanted to eliminate all background noise,
so they could hear signals, the signals they wanted very, very clearly.
And as they tried to eliminate background noise,
they found there was a persistent sort of hum in the background that they couldn't get rid of.
They tried everything.
At one point, someone said, I should say that the antenna was a horn-like apparatus.
Someone said, I think there may be pigeons roosting there.
And as any scientist knows, pigeon droppings are matter.
They are not at absolute zero, so they're emitting radiation.
So perhaps this was the sort.
So they clean out the pigeon droppings, and it's still there, that hum.
And then eventually, someone said to them,
this is actually what was predicted by Big Bang cosmology.
There ought to be energy coming equally from everywhere in the universe, everywhere you look.
And that clinched it, because no other theory could explain this astonishing fact
of energy coming at you not from a specific point in place.
So you can say it's coming from that galaxy or this star, but from everywhere.
And that's what really clinched Big Bang cosmology
and made it the central idea of modern cosmology.
Very briefly, I want to list some other pieces of evidence in support of the theory.
One is just the age of the universe.
So this is the third piece of evidence.
Big Bang theory predicts that we can estimate the age of the universe,
and the estimates now are about 13.7 billion years.
No object has ever been found that's older than 13 billion years.
If the universe was in fact infinite, this would be very bizarre indeed.
But of course, this fits very well with Big Bang cosmology.
If the theory is right, then the young universe ought to have looked rather different from today's universe.
Because above all, it ought to be more compact.
Things should be closer together.
And if you look over huge distances in space, say you look 12 billion light years into space,
in effect, you're looking 12 billion light years away.
So you can see what the early universe was like.
And when you look at it, you find that indeed it is rather different from today's universe.
With cosmology, unlike any other historical discipline, we actually have time machines.
We call them telescopes.
That's the fourth bit of evidence, and the fifth is the chemical makeup of the universe.
Big Bang cosmology predicts that in the Big Bang, huge amounts of hydrogen and helium were made,
but there was no time to make any elements more complicated than that.
It predicts that something like three-quarters of the early universe should consist of hydrogen and most of the rest of helium.
And that, in fact, is exactly what you see when you look out at the universe.
So for these reasons, despite this bizarre story, Big Bang cosmology offers a scientific, well-tested explanation of how the universe was created.
However, this early universe didn't yet contain anything of much interest.
How can you get something more interesting in such a universe?
That's the question we pursue in the next lecture.
Thank you.
The First Stars and Galaxies
The last lecture described how Big Bang cosmology explains the origins of our universe.
In fact, the origins of everything that we know of.
So, we've got ourselves a universe.
That's the good news.
Without a universe, we're going nowhere.
The bad news is that the universe is still not terribly interesting.
It's got a bit of structure.
For example, there's a difference between matter and energy.
There are atoms, and I suppose you could say that in a sense, atoms are complex things.
But there's not much structure here.
I mean, after all, what's in it?
We have lots and lots of hydrogen.
Very simple atom.
One proton at the center.
One electron whizzing around in a shell outside.
We've also got lots of helium.
The thing about helium is that helium is an inert gas.
It's by many standards very, very boring.
There's not much you can do with helium.
So, we've got hydrogen atoms.
We've got helium atoms.
We've got lots of energy.
We've got all that cosmic background radiation sort of pumping through.
And what else do we have?
We've got so much cold, empty vacuum.
That's our universe.
So, here's the problem.
How can you move from something this simple
to the vastly more varied and beautiful world that we inhabit today?
How can you generate complex things with such simple components?
