Photosynthesis produces oxygen we've seen as a byproduct.
And that is exactly why free oxygen begins to build up in the Earth's atmosphere.
By 2.5 billion years ago, free oxygen starts building up,
and we've seen the evidence for this in rusted bands of iron.
So here's a second crucial piece of evidence for the appearance of photosynthesis,
the appearance of these rusted bands.
But the appearance of oxygen itself marks a very important stage in the history of life on Earth.
For most prokaryotes, oxygen was poisonous.
We've seen, essentially, why we've seen that oxygen is a violently reactive chemical.
It likes nothing better than to get at simpler, fragile chemicals and break them up violently.
And that's why Lin Margulis and Dorian Sagan have described this change as the oxygen holocaust.
As oxygen is building up, it's toxic for huge numbers of prokaryotes,
and it probably killed off large numbers of them.
This revolutionary change in the atmosphere provides one marker for the beginning of a new ion,
the protozoic ion, from about 2.5 billion years ago.
So that's our second stage.
We've got the appearance of prokaryotes, which indirect evidence suggests occurred perhaps 3.8 billion years ago.
And then we've got the appearance of this complex reaction of photosynthesis,
which allowed living organisms to tap into the energy of the sun.
And that seems to have appeared quite early, perhaps 3.5 billion years ago.
And all in all, what this shows is that life appeared surprisingly rapidly on the Earth,
almost as soon as it was possible.
And that may mean that wherever the conditions for life are good,
there's a reasonably good chance that life will appear.
Stage three, eukaryotes.
I've talked about prokaryotes, now we're talking about eukaryotes.
E-U-K-A-R-Y-O-T-E-S.
This is the third crucial transition in the era of single-celled organisms.
We don't know exactly when eukaryotes appeared.
It was probably sometime during the protozoic eon more than about 1 billion years ago.
Most biologists would probably tell you today that this was one of the most revolutionary changes in the entire history of life.
To a non-biologist, it doesn't necessarily appear terribly exciting,
but most biologists regard the distinction between eukaryotes and prokaryotes
as one of the most fundamental divisions of all between different types of living organisms.
So this is important.
And let me add immediately that we are constructed entirely of eukaryotes.
So without this revolution, we would not have existed.
Lynn Margulis, one of the most important biologists of the 20th century,
she has really pioneered work on study of what she called the microcosmos, the world of bacteria.
And she's been very important in demonstrating how dangerous it is to neglect to underestimate this world.
She showed that eukaryotes evolved through the merging of once independent species of prokaryotes.
Evidence for this is the presence, the fact that you can find in all eukaryotes, internal organelles, as they're called.
In our bodies, we have organs.
Eukaryotes are more complex than prokaryotes in the sense that they have various different organelles inside.
And some of those organelles have their own DNA.
And that suggests that they had once existed quite independently.
Two organisms have sort of merged to form eukaryotes.
Now eukaryotes, like prokaryotes, are single-celled organisms, but somehow other single cells have got inside them.
How?
It's not entirely clear.
Perhaps they were eaten, but continued to survive and began to find it rather cosy inside their new hosts.
This we'll see is an example of a much more widespread phenomenon in the history of life, and that's symbiosis.
Two species that don't compete to the death, but rather find advantageous ways of cooperating that help them both.
These organelles include mitochondria.
Mitochondria can extract energy from oxygen, and they have their own DNA.
And chloroplasts, which can extract energy from sunlight through photosynthesis.
So all plant-like organisms have chloroplasts.
Now, so it's these organelles that make it possible to claim that eukaryotes represent a significant increase in complexity.
Here we have a structure that simply has more components, more bits and pieces than that of a prokaryote.
But so does the fact that eukaryotes, in turn, will make possible the creation of new types of organisms that are even more complex than them.
Because eventually we'll see that eukaryotes could assemble into larger organisms, but we'll come to that later.
Now, the merging of these various organisms within eukaryotes through symbiosis anticipates the later creation of multicellular organisms.
Eukaryotes are not quite multicellular, but they're pointing in that direction.
Most eukaryotes are much bigger than prokaryotes.
They're about ten to a thousand times as large as prokaryotes, and some can just be seen with a naked eye.
They're not only bigger, they have a more elaborate reproductive apparatus in the sense that their DNA doesn't just float free inside the cell
to be bombarded, as Bill Bryson described, by all the various things moving around inside the cell.
The DNA of eukaryotes is protected within a special container, the nucleus.
So this is one of the organelles. The cell has a nucleus in its center which protects DNA.
And that's important because it means the DNA can preserve its genetic code much more faithfully, and reproduction can become more accurate.
And we've seen that many eukaryotic cells contain mitochondria.
Special organelles that once lived as independent organisms.
What these can do is generate energy from oxygen.
And oxygen provides a much more powerful source of energy than the types of metabolism used by most prokaryotes, such as fermentation.
So eukaryotes flourished in an oxygen-rich atmosphere, and indeed it's possible that their evolution was a response to the appearance of oxygen.
So the appearance of eukaryotes marks a significant increase in the complexity of life.
Lynn Margulis and Dorian Sagan write,
The difference between the new cells and the old prokaryotes in the fossil record looks as drastic as if the Wright Brothers Kitty Hawk flying machine had been followed a week later by the Concord jet.
So that's stage three, the appearance sometime in the protozoic eon of eukaryotes.
Stage four, sexual reproduction.
This is the fourth crucial transition, the appearance of sexual reproduction, probably about one billion years ago.
And it seems to be associated in some sense with the appearance of eukaryotes.
Prokaryotes regularly exchange genetic material. This is a bit like the internet.
It's as if they grab passing bits of genetic material that float in the environment, they use it and then pass it on.
So prokaryotes live in a very different sort of reproductive world from us.
But they normally reproduce simply by splitting into two identical individuals or clones.
In most eukaryotes, reproduction takes a slightly different form.
What happens is that two organisms, two eukaryotic cells, swaps some genetic material before reproducing,
and the offspring shares genetic material from both parents.
It'll inherit a mixture of genetic material from the two parent individuals.
I have to say this, don't think this was necessarily fun sex.
This wasn't necessarily very sexy at all.
The genetic aspects of sexuality emerged much earlier than the fun bits.
Okay, why is this so important? Why is this swapping of genetic material before reproduction?
It's important because it meant that the offspring of eukaryotic cells were no longer simply clones of their parents.
Sexual reproduction introduces greater variation between individuals.
The offspring are never exactly the same as their parents,
so you find that individuals start to vary from each other much more than in the prokaryotic world.
And we've seen already that natural selection sort of seizes on variations between individuals,
and that's what it builds on to eventually lead to change and to new species.
So if you have a mechanism like sexual reproduction that generates more variety between individuals,
you shouldn't be surprised if evolution speeds up,
and that seems to be exactly what happened during the last billion years.
In effect, the emergence of sexual reproduction increased the efficiency of the mechanism of natural selection.
As natural selection helps organisms sort of search constantly for new ways of exploiting the natural environment,
so evolution speeds up.
Let me summarize.
In this lecture, I've surveyed the first three billion years of the history of life on Earth,
beginning perhaps 3.8 billion years ago, ending about 600 million years ago.
During that entire time, all organisms were single-celled.
Now we go to the last 600 or so million years of the history of life on Earth.
What happened then?
We're seeing the build-up of new structures that eventually would contribute to the emergence of our own species, human beings.
Thank you.
Here we are.
We're at the very beginning of the Cambrian era, slightly less than 600 million years ago.
On a timescale in which the 13 billion years since the Big Bang are shrunk to a mere 13 years,
and that's a timescale we've already seen, the Cambrian begins about seven months ago.
That's almost contemporary history, in fact, on the scales of this course.
If you look around, the first thing you'll notice is that you can see no large living organisms.
In fact, you can't see any living organisms at all.
And in fact, as we saw in the previous lecture, that has been the norm for most of the Earth's history.
And the reason, of course, is that there were plenty of living organisms.
We thought they're all around you, but they're all single-celled, and you can't see any of them with a naked eye.
We just happen to be designed, because of the way we are, we're multicellular organisms, to notice larger organisms.
They're the ones that are worth noticing, they're worth thinking about.
Small organisms, our bodies will deal with, our minds can't deal with them.
So, we won't see the tiny organisms.
And we often forget how much of life is still dominated by single-celled organisms.
If someone from Earth finds themselves on an Earth-sized planet, sometime in the next few centuries,
the odds are they're going to find an environment like the very, very early Cambrian, if they're lucky.
They may not see life, even if it's there.
But single-celled organisms still shape our world in many, many ways,
and it's worth reminding ourselves of that before we move on to look at larger organisms.
Many aspects of the working of our world, including, for example, the breakdown and disposal of waste products,
or the spread of disease, are dominated by the ceaseless work of this vast realm of single-celled organisms.
But their importance is also more intimate to us.
In fact, single-celled organisms make up a substantial part of our own bodies.
They're crawling all over us, and they're crawling all through us.
And because they're smaller than eukaryotic cells, there are probably far more bacteria on and in our bodies
than there are actual body cells.
In a sense, most of us is single-celled prokaryotic organisms.
Most of them, by the way, are in your gut.
There's another reason why single-celled organisms are important.
There's a sense in which we have to remind ourselves that we, too, from a certain point of view,
are merely vast crowds of billions of single-celled eukaryotic cells, organisms.
However, there is an important difference, and that leads us to the subject of large multi-celled organisms like ourselves.
Each individual cell in the crowd of eukaryotic cells that make up our bodies is identical genetically to all the others.
DNA is identical to that of every other cell in your body.
They're like lots of identical twins, or identical billions, if you like.
And this, it turns out, is really rather important.
The biologist Richard Dawkins has argued in many works, such as his classic book, The Selfish Gene,
that the real competition in the biological realm is not between organisms as such, but between genes.
Genes are large sections of DNA code that are designed to produce certain mechanisms or certain functions.
Genes are strips of our genetic code.
It's genes, he says, that really compete.
And our bodies can be described merely as, in his phrase, throw away survival machines for genes.
Genes ride our bodies and look for ways of moving from body to body so they can make themselves more or less eternal.
They want the body they occupy to survive and reproduce them so they can be replicated in another body.
So, this is the question.
How can a hundred billion cells, roughly the number in our body, possibly cooperate in a single organism?
And the answer is, they can if they are genetically identical.
If they preserve the same genetic material, then they will have a common purpose.
They're trying to preserve the same genes and so they can work together.
They don't need to compete with each other and they can collaborate in ensuring the functioning of a large single organism.
Okay, so because genetically identical cells don't compete, they create the illusion, or is it an illusion of a single organism
that just happens to look like a crowd of billions of distinct organisms.
That's us.
And that's true also of all other large organisms on Earth.
Now, the previous lecture described how life evolved during the first three and a half billion years of the Earth's history
when all organisms were single-celled and most were prokaryotic.
And we saw that perhaps 85% of the history of life on Earth has been a history of single-celled organisms.
Now, we discussed the last 15% of the history of life on Earth, the history of multi-celled organisms,
or rather the era in which multi-celled organisms appear.
And we, of course, are one of the most recent examples, so this story is pointing towards the eventual appearance of human beings.
We will get to them.
Okay.
How did single-cells combine to form multi-celled organisms?
And how did multi-celled organisms first evolve to create our ancestors?
We'll trace the evolution of multi-celled organisms during the last 600 million years.
And what we'll do is describe four more transitions on the evolutionary pathway that leads to our own species, homo sapiens.
These are the last four of eight stages in the history of life.
Let me remind you briefly of the first four stages we discussed in the last lecture.
The first was the creation of the first prokaryotes, the first living organisms about 3.8 billion years ago.
The second was the appearance of the chemical reaction photosynthesis mediated by chlorophyll,
which allowed life on Earth to tap into the energy generated by the sun,
but also began to generate new oxygen, free oxygen, in the atmosphere.
The third transition was the appearance of more complex eukaryotic cells,
and the fourth was the appearance of sexual reproduction.
It goes without saying that much more went on.
This is simply a series of what we could call sub-thresholds, important transitional points in the history of life on Earth,
but I think none are quite as important as the major thresholds of this course.
These are some of the crucial stages within the larger story of the evolution of more complex life forms.
Now what we're going to do is just follow one branch of evolution.
It's not the most numerous one, but it's the one that leads towards us,
and it's also the one that leads in the direction of greater complexity.
Okay.
Stage one of these last four stages, the creation of multicellular organisms.
The first transition we discuss is how single cells manage to form single organisms,
consisting of large numbers of cells.
As late as the 1950s, most biologists were convinced that life first appeared on Earth only in the Cambrian era,
about 570 million years ago, and there was a very good reason for that.
That was when the first fossils seemed to appear, at least the first fossils visible to the naked eye.
We now know, as we saw in the last lecture, that single-celled organisms had already existed for almost 3 billion years.
But until quite recently, this was not known.
And so it was believed that life itself appeared only about 570 million years ago.
The Cambrian was thought of as the period in which life itself first appeared.
We now know life appeared very soon after the Earth itself was created.
So what the Cambrian era really marks is the appearance of the first multicellular organisms.
Now, this was a complex process, as you can imagine.
How do you get millions, billions of prokaryotes to cooperate?
For large organisms to work, billions of cells had to work together.
They had to be able to communicate with great precision.
How is this possible?
Now, evolution is often thought of as dominated by competition.
In fact, as we'll see over and over again, there are many forms of cooperation in the natural world.
Natural selection can often work through cooperation.
Two organisms find they work very well together.
Those that work best together have more offspring,
and over time, the relationship gets closer and closer and closer
through what's often known as co-evolution.
And the general word to describe cooperation between living organisms is symbiosis.
It's an extremely important idea, and we'll come back to it.
But think how complex the symbiosis, the cooperation, had to be to create large organisms.
Billions of cells had to be able to work together.
Each cell had to know its role in the overall plan.
It had to be able to get its share of the energy available to the entire organism.
So you need systems for moving energy around, systems for moving information around.
Each cell has to know its precise function in the overall thing.
In short, making sure that these huge, lumbering beasts could exist in function
is a staggering organizational feat.
But it isn't, of course, the first example of cooperation in the natural world.
Let's look at some other forms of symbiosis,
so we get a clear idea of what makes multicellularity different.
We've already seen that the formation of eukaryotes
involves the emergence of an intimate symbiosis between prokaryotic organizations.
Somehow, the first eukaryotes seem to have absorbed prokaryotes
without destroying them, and these became the internal organelles of eukaryotes.
So eukaryotic cells are already pointing us in the direction of multicellularity.
Now, here's another looser example of symbiosis or cooperation,
stromatolites.
We've already seen that stromatolites form like coral reefs.
They're formed from huge colonies of individual prokaryotes
that live together, and their dead bodies slowly build up
and form these reef-like structures,
some of which appeared very early in the history of the planet.
Now, there's clearly cooperation going on.
The sheer size of the colony can provide some protection for the individual organisms.
But there's not much organization here.
Each organism basically does its own thing.
This is a very loose form of cooperation.
A second type is illustrated by some sponges.
This is a fascinating experiment.
There are sponges that look clearly like single organisms.
They certainly fool you and me.
You can take these sponges, though, and you can pass them through a sieve.
You can press them through a sieve,
so you're breaking them up into their individual components.
Does that kill them? No.
The other side of the sieve, all the bits and pieces simply reassemble,
and the sponge goes its merry way.
So these are still really crowds of individual organisms,
but they clearly, they gain something from being together.
So they prefer to work together, but they can exist as individuals.
Here's another example that's taking us closer and closer to multicellularity.
Slime moles.
Slime moles would look to you and me like types of fungus, probably.
They consist mainly of a type of amoeba,
and they're right at the borderline between crowds
and genuine single multicellular organisms.
Let me describe a biologist's account of how a slime mold works.
Slime moles are made up of lots of amoeba-like organisms,
and here's a description by Joel de Rosny.
If you deprive one of these organisms of food and water,
it emits a distress hormone.
Other amoebas rush to the rescue,
and they gather into a colony about a thousand strong,
a thousand individuals, as it were,
but they move like a sort of slug in search of nourishment.
If they don't find it, they stop moving,
