They sit right at the borderline between life and non-life.
Let me explain what I mean.
Viruses are really little more than bundles of genetic material with no metabolism of their own.
The genetic material tells them how to reproduce so they can reproduce, but they have no metabolism.
What they can do, though, is hijack the metabolism of other organisms in order to reproduce.
They can baton on to other organisms and extract energy from them.
Next time you get a flu, you'll know that this is exactly what's happening.
Viruses are doing their things.
They're doing their thing.
They're using your metabolism in order to survive and reproduce.
And because they can reproduce, they can also adapt.
So they do two of these things very well, and they can get around the absence of a metabolism.
And it's because viruses can adapt that a virus such as the AIDS virus
can survive even in the extremely hostile environment that humans create for them by designing antiviral drugs.
So viruses test the rigidity of our definition.
Nevertheless, I think it'll take us a long way.
It'll cover most cases in which we're trying to distinguish between living and non-living things.
Now what I want to do is to focus on one of life's most striking features.
Let's call it life's astonishing creativity.
It's flexibility and adaptability.
It's ability to keep changing, making tiny changes in response to a changing environment.
It's this quality, this third property, adaptation, that allows life itself to flourish
and also to create new and potentially more complex forms.
Life is creative in a sense that non-living things are not.
But how and why?
How does adaptation work?
This we'll see is one of the most fundamental questions of modern biology.
And the answer comes from the way that the three emergent properties work together.
Now here what I'm going to do is summarise the answer in very general forms.
Later I'm going to come back and describe it much more carefully.
So at the moment let's simply ask why and how does this process of adaptation, the creativity of life,
tend to generate new levels of complexity?
Because this itself is characteristic of life.
Over time life emerges, it becomes so varied that emerges in more and more complex forms.
Now the key is the way that metabolism, reproduction and adaptation work together.
Metabolism supplies the energy needed to maintain their complex structures.
Reproduction makes it possible to copy these structures, particularly if they work.
So if you get a good metabolism you can copy it through reproduction.
And adaptation enables living organisms to keep tweaking their structures
so as to explore new ways of extracting energy from the environment.
So through adaptation we've seen living organisms effectively explore their environment
in a way that dead organisms don't do.
But how does this lead to greater complexity?
Why should life generate new levels of complexity all the time?
Now the first crucial thing to say here is that there seems to be no intrinsic drive to greater complexity.
This contradicts what some 19th century biologists assumed.
There's no intrinsic drive to greater complexity.
No particular reason why life should prefer complexity to simplicity.
Indeed, many species have evolved in the direction of greater simplicity.
From mole rats, which have lost their eyes, they've gone blind because they live under the ground and don't need them.
To snakes, which have lost their legs, it turns out they don't need them.
And to viruses, which we've seen have dispensed even with having a metabolism.
So evolution can take you towards greater simplicity.
Nevertheless over time the upper level of complexity is increased. Why?
Well this I think is the reason and it's fundamentally statistical.
If you have a large number of species and they're all sort of exploring their environment by adaptation,
they're all tweaking the way they relate to the environment.
Some of these experiments that go on are bound to be more complex than others for purely statistical reasons.
Now this itself may be why the upper level of complexity has slowly increased.
Of course, more complex organisms will need more energy.
So they'll have to develop a more powerful metabolism.
For example, the first organisms that learned to extract energy from oxygen about two and a half billion years ago
suddenly had access to new forms of chemical energy not available to other life forms.
This was a bit like striking oil for those organisms.
So we expect that over time at least some of these species are going to be more complex.
And that may simply be the crucial reason why over time living organisms have indeed become more complex.
So adaptation's the key to explain how more complex life forms have appeared over almost four billion years.
And that, of course, is something we need to explain in order to explain ourselves.
We must explain exactly how adaptation works.
Now explaining adaptation proved surprisingly difficult.
In fact, this was probably the greatest challenge of 19th century biology.
And we'll see in the next lecture that its solution was one of the great scientific triumphs of the modern era.
I think many scientists would be inclined to say that this was really one of the two or three greatest of all scientific discoveries.
But before we get to that, let's once again go back to traditional answers to explaining adaptation.
Probably the most common traditional answer to the question about adaptation was, as strange as it may seem today,
that living organisms don't change. There is no adaptation.
Living organisms appear adapted to their environments. They fit into their environments well,
because that was how a benevolent creator made them.
This explanation is present in the sacred texts of the Judeo-Christian Muslim tradition.
You can also find it in the work of Carl Linnaeus, the founder of modern taxonomy.
The system by which living organisms are classified.
Let me talk briefly about Linnaeus. We'll come back to him later on.
Before Linnaeus, classifying living organisms was in a state of complete chaos.
Think about the problem. I mean, think if you were to sit down and try to come up with a neat way of describing all the living organisms around you.
You don't need to think long to realize what a complex problem that was.
What Linnaeus did was to introduce a system that was simple enough that it's still in use today.
Every living organism can be described with a simple two-word description, such as Homo sapiens, the description for our own species.
In a sense, Linnaeus did for biology, what Mendoleev did for chemistry, and Headsprung and Russell for stars.
They found a way of classifying or arranging a huge amount of data that turned out to be extremely illuminating.
So even Linnaeus accepted that species were fixed. In other words, what he meant was there are clearly borders, there are strict borders between them.
He knew that individual, there was a bit of wriggle room in species, but basically species were fixed.
However, even in Linnaeus' time, many biologists had very good reasons for thinking that living organisms were actually a lot more flexible than that,
and perhaps the borders between them were illusory. Here are some of the reasons for thinking this.
By the 18th century, many fossils had been found of creatures that no longer existed, such as trilobites or dinosaurs.
We have drawings of these from the 17th century, and this raised the question for those who believed that God had created species as they were today.
Why should God have destroyed his own creations? If God was a benevolent designer and a perfect designer, presumably God should have been able to create perfect organisms.
Now, there was a sort of way around this, Noah's flood. Perhaps God had actually got so irritated with some of his organisms that he decided to wipe them out.
It's perfectly possible, but it's not entirely satisfactory, as it seems to imply that the first creations were not that perfect.
So there was a way around the finding of fossils, but it was not ideal. But there's another reason for thinking that species were a bit more flexible than was normally assumed.
And this was that animal breeders knew perfectly well that animals do change, and in fact there's a lot of wiggle room for changing them.
Indeed, what animal breeders do is to deliberately change species, and they can do it.
Darwin's origin of the species spends a lot of time talking about breeding. He was fascinated by the amount of flexibility that breeders could find in different species.
He quotes a famous breeder of pigeons, Sir John Subbrite, who used to boast that you could more or less order the sort of pigeon you want.
And he used to say he would produce any given feather in three years. So if you say, I'd like a feather that's this shape and this color, he could do it in three years.
But he said it would take him six years to obtain head and beak. In other words, if you want a particular type of head and beak, it might take him six years to do it.
We're talking, of course, about designer pigeons. But the point is that pigeons turn out to be very flexible.
You can look at pictures of 19th century pigeon breeders' products, and you see a huge variety.
Look today at dogs. They're very closely related. But look at the amount of variety that exists within what we normally think of as a single species.
So by the 19th century, there was growing evidence that species really are very flexible. They really do change, and maybe the borders between them were permeable.
But how do you explain that? How do species change? And why when they change are the changes adaptive?
Why do those changes enable them to fit well into their environments?
Well, one of the most serious 19th century attempts to explain adaptation is associated with the work of the French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Le Marc.
In 1809, remember, we're in the time of the Napoleonic Empire. Le Marc proposed that species change in effect because they want to.
The famous example he gave is that of giraffes. So you imagine an environment, a savannah environment, where you have a sort of horse-like animal with a longish neck.
And maybe the tasty leaves are quite higher. So this animal has an advantage. It can get to the leaves on top of shrubs and trees.
And what Le Marc did was to imagine that this creature over time stretches its neck higher and higher.
And he argued that over time, over many generations, you're going to find the necks are slowly going to get longer.
And eventually they might even turn into giraffes.
What's wrong with this? I suspect that most of you can pick straight away what the problem is with this argument.
And the trouble is that any animal breeder could have pointed out to Le Marc what was wrong with this argument.
And this is what it is.
Qualities acquired during one's lifetime are acquired characteristics. They are not passed on to one's offspring.
Imagine, ghastly thought, but imagine that I were to spend a lot of time in the gym and develop a body like my governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Now, imagine also, God forbid, that I were to have some more kids.
Would they all be born with bodies like Arnold Schwarzenegger? And the answer, of course, is no, thank God.
And the reason is because acquired characteristics, characteristics you acquire during your lifetime, are not passed on to your children.
What you pass on are inherited characteristics, characteristics that you received from earlier generations.
A fattened pig, a pig that you have fed a lot of food to so as to make it fat, will not necessarily produce fat piglets,
but a pig that had very fat parents may produce fat piglets.
So Le Marc's theory didn't work.
Now, we've seen that life represents a new level of complexity based on control of energy, the capacity to reproduce,
and the ability to adapt to changing environments.
We've also seen that in the middle of the 19th century, the riddle of adaptation, this task of explaining how the living organisms adapt.
Why is life so creative?
This was the key to understanding what made life different from non-life.
It remained unsolved, this riddle.
Charles Darwin would solve the riddle in a book that he published in 1859.
Thank you.
These lectures are titled Big History, The Big Bang, Life on Earth, and the Rise of Humanity Part Two.
We've already seen in previous lectures that one of the major changes introduced by scientific accounts of the universe
is that they have historicized science.
This is a really profound revolution in our thinking about the universe as a whole, the universe that we inhabit.
And a lot of it happened in the 60s.
Modern scientific theories, several of which were clinched in the 1960s,
have shown that it's not just human societies that have long histories of change that we can study and date.
The same is true of the universe as a whole, as we've seen.
It's also true of stars.
It'll be true of our sun.
It's true of the Earth.
And, as Alfred Wegener showed, it's true also of the Earth's surface.
So many aspects of our reality, of our universe, that were once thought to be fixed, static, unchanging, in fact, are changing and they have a history.
This change, in fact, is one of the best reasons for attempting to construct a course such as this course of lectures in big history.
We've learned in the last 50 or 100 years that change is characteristic of most of the universe, not just of human society.
Today we look at the work of Charles Darwin.
And what we'll see is that one of Darwin's fundamental achievements was to show that change was also characteristic of life and of living species.
In other words, life too has a history.
It's not fixed and unchangeable.
It has a history of long-term change.
Living species also change and that means that life has a history and therefore it's crucial, as Darwin understood, to figure out how that history works.
How do species change over time?
Why does life change?
And this is his great achievement, as I said in the last lecture.
What he did was to solve what I've called the riddle of adaptation, explaining how and why life slowly, slowly changes over time.
And that in turn explained life's astonishing variety and complexity.
So here's the question.
How do living species adapt?
I argued that adaptation is one of the most distinctive features of life in general.
So explaining adaptation was the great riddle of biology and that's what Darwin solved.
So what I want to do in this lecture is essentially to describe Darwin's very elegant solution to the riddle of adaptation.
It's a solution which has been added to, nuance has been added, but basically it still stands today and it remains at the center of modern biology and life sciences.
Charles Darwin is going to be at the center of this entire lecture.
So let's talk a bit about Charles Darwin.
His dates are 1809 to 1882.
He was born into a wealthy family and a family with a long tradition of scientific research.
He was lucky, in fact.
Any scholar, any researcher has to envy him.
The result of being born into a family that had money and a commitment to research was that he was able to spend most of his life studying the one thing he most wanted to study, which was the natural world.
You really do have to envy him.
How many of us would love to be so privileged?
I recently visited his house, Down House, which is in the village of Down, D-O-W-N-E, in Kent in England.
Down's a lovely old village.
It's probably still much the way it was in Darwin's day.
You can go, you have a choice of two or three very nice pubs, and at one end of the village is his house.
It's not that spectacular architecturally.
It's quite big.
It's probably a fairly conventional Victorian manor house.
And Darwin was certainly the leading figure in the village.
But as you look through the house, you get a wonderful impression of a large Victorian household.
And you certainly come away with the impression of a very benevolent environment, but also one that was designed to support Darwin.
His wife, Emma, the marriage seems to have been an immensely happy one.
His wife, Emma, clearly regarded it as her main function to keep the house running well so that Darwin could follow the very rigid routines that he followed for many years.
You knew exactly when he'd get up, exactly when he'd take his first walk, exactly when he'd take breakfast, exactly when he'd play cards, exactly when he'd go into his study.
So the house was run to support this scholarly life.
He had a butler called wonderfully, Parslow.
Every British butler, I think, should be called Parslow.
And in the evenings, when he needed to relax his brain, what Darwin did was play billiards with Parslow.
Apparently the games were fairly competitive.
So he lived in this wonderful, benign environment.
He himself also seems to have been, in many ways, a very kind, unlikable man.
I think it's symptomatic that he called his children the blesseds.
A famous scholar who calls his children the blesseds has to have a certain sweetness in him.
So he was lucky to.
This was the environment in which he was able to study life, to study natural organisms.
Let's talk about his family.
One of his grandfathers, Erasmus Darwin, had been a doctor who was fascinated by how living organisms seemed to change over time.
He, like an increasing number of 18th or early 19th century naturalists,
was increasingly convinced that species do indeed change over time.
And he understood that this was the great puzzle for biology.
The solutions he came up with were pretty close to those of Lamarck.
And we saw in the last lecture what was wrong with Lamarck's solution.
He confused, acquired, and inherited characteristics.
Erasmus Darwin also had a penchant for writing about the natural world in verse.
Now, that's clearly an art we've lost.
I dread to think what would happen if I tried to present an academic paper in verse,
and I promise you the rest of these lectures are not going to be in verse.
We seem to have lost these sort of skills.
His other grandfather, Josiah Wedgwood, was an extremely well-known scientist.
He was a friend of James Watt, the inventor of the steam engine,
and of Joseph Priestley, one of the fundamental figures in the history of chemistry.
But he was also an entrepreneur, and he was founder of the Wedgwood pottery works.
So Josiah Wedgwood himself combines the entrepreneurial and the scientific traditions of this family.
As a child, Darwin was fascinated by the natural world.
He was a kid who loved nothing better than to go out and find bugs.
His father, who wanted him to go into one of the respectable professions,
such as being a clergyman or a doctor, at one point dispaired of him entirely.
He wrote to him, you care for nothing but shooting, dogs, and rat-catching.
And you will be a disgrace to yourself and all your family.
I guess every family has a record of bad predictions about the future of one member of the family or other.
Well, that has to count as one of the great wrong predictions about the future of a young boy.
Darwin resisted pressure to become a surgeon.
His father sent him to Edinburgh.
He started training.
He was so appalled by the screams of patients undergoing operations without anesthesia
that he swore he'd never be a surgeon.
In fact, in Edinburgh he spent much of his time collecting beetles.
He also resisted attempts by his father to turn him into a clergyman,
as someone who almost certainly was an atheist for much of his life.
This was probably a wise move.
His father placed him at Cambridge after the failure of the Edinburgh experiment.
At Cambridge too, he spent most of his time collecting beetles.
In fact, he wrote in his autobiography, and I quote,
No pursuit at Cambridge was followed with nearly so much eagerness
or gave me so much pleasure as collecting beetles.
He also realized that his father too was not too harsh a man
and would never force him to take up a career he hated.
He wrote later on,
I became convinced, and again you have to envy him,
I became convinced from various small circumstances
that my father would leave me property enough to subsist on with some comfort.
So he understood he could pursue the things that really interested him.
Darwin later described as the most important event of my life,
an invitation he received in 1831 when he was about 23
to travel around the world as the naturalist on board a ship called the Beagle.
The Beagle's main mission was to chart the coast of South America
and the invitation was issued by the Beagle's captain, Robert Fitzroy,
and Robert Fitzroy offered to give up part of his captain's cabin to an,
and I quote,
any young man who would volunteer to go with him as naturalist to the voyage of the Beagle.
Darwin's father once again, opposing clearly the direction of history,
didn't like the idea but was persuaded by Josiah Wedgewood, not the potter,
but Darwin's uncle and eventual father-in-law to let Darwin go, and he did.
And the voyage lasted from 1831 to 1836.
It was really a pivotal moment in Darwin's life, or pivotal five years in Darwin's life.
The Beagle travelled first to South America, to Brazil,
then south around Cape Horn, up the western coast of South America,
across the Pacific via the Galapagos Islands, which would play a huge role in Darwin's career,
to Tahiti, to New Zealand, to Australia, to Mauritius, around South Africa,
around the Cape of Good Hope, to the Cape Verde Islands, and then back to Britain.
Darwin collected specimens and fossils and stored them with meticulous neatness
in the tiny space available in the captain's cabin,
and he also took detailed biological and geological notes.
If you go to Darwin's house, you'll find that he stored stuff there
with the same kind of care that was needed to live in a tiny cabin on a ship.
When Darwin left on the Beagle, he shared what was at the time the dominant belief,
and that was that living species had been made by the creator more or less in their existing form.
It was understood that there was some degree of flexibility, a bit of change, a bit of wriggle room,
but essentially species remained fixed as made by the creator.
They were borders to how much they could change.
What he saw on his travels shook this conviction and forced him to rethink what a species really was.
Let me try and convey some of the impressions that shook this conviction.
