and counts also as a new emergent property.
Another example is their management of markets and their unprecedented power to coerce and we'll see more.
So states also generate new emergent properties and all these ways the appearance of states counts
as a significant mini-threshold, a significant increase in the level of complexity in human history and human societies.
Okay, now let's go back to the general idea of power.
This is an idea, as I've said before, that is more slippery than it looks
and it's been debated widely within political science and philosophy and in sociology.
We just need some very broad general definitions to help us explain the build-up to tribute taking states
to understand how these structures were constructed over several thousand years.
Now power, I've said, is slippery. So what is it? How can we define it? What is institutionalized power?
Here's an attempt at a reasonably clear and concise definition of institutionalized as opposed to personal power.
I will define institutionalized power as the concentration in the hands of a few people
of substantial control over considerable human and material resources.
Let me break that definition down. It's got two components and it's important to be aware of both of them.
The first component is control. Someone or some institution controls something.
The second is what is being controlled, the resources being controlled and it's important to be aware of the distinction.
It matters because where there are few people and resources to control, as in Paleolithic societies,
power is of limited significance. You may control one or two people, but it does make a huge difference to a large number of people.
It doesn't become a historical fact. So this is why power structures are less significant in the Paleolithic era.
Control may have existed, but it was exercised over very small numbers of people and resources.
Individuals coerced other individuals, but the power was purely personal, exercised within family-sized groups.
Leaders or rulers didn't exist in any sense that would be recognized today and groups took decisions
rather as families do today on group outings. Here's a quotation from Richard Lee, who we've seen before.
Richard Lee studied the people of the Kalahari in the late 20th century.
And here's his description of the form that leadership took among the kong.
You'll remember that the clique is characteristic of many of the indigenous languages of South Africa.
So this is my attempt to do the clique. And this is Richard Lee on leadership in foraging communities.
In a egalitarian societies such as the kongs, group activities unfold, plans are made,
and decisions are arrived at all apparently without a clear focus of authority or influence.
In other words, no institutionalized forms of leadership.
He goes on.
Closer examination, however, reveals that patterns of leadership do exist.
When a waterhole is mentioned, a group living there is often referred to by the kong by a single man's or woman's name.
These individuals are often older people who have lived there the longest or who've married into the owner group
and who have some personal qualities worthy of note as a speaker, an arguer, a ritual specialist, or a hunter.
In group discussions, these people may speak out more than others.
They may be deferred to more than others.
And one gets the feeling he writes that their opinions hold a bit more weight than the opinion of other discussants.
So he concludes, whatever their skills, kong leaders have no formal authority.
We could use the phrase institutionalized authority.
They can only persuade but never enforce their will on others.
So this is the absence of institutionalized power.
This is paleolithic forms of leadership.
As populations multiplied, though, as well as the goods they produced, power began to matter more and more.
So in other words, as the resources potentially available to be controlled,
think of not just people but also warehouses full of goods, grain perhaps, or precious metals.
As the resources began to expand, power begins to matter a lot more,
as leaders have the possibility of gaining control over more and more stuff and more energy.
So this is why the available resources are critical to the scale of different types of power.
Very roughly speaking, we can think of this as a sort of modular process.
We can think of village headmen acquiring leadership roles in villages
and regional rulers gaining authority over a number of villages
than even more powerful leaders gaining authority over regional bosses.
And in each case, what's happening is that individuals are finding the possibility of controlling more and more resources.
And this is the way that their power is slowly built up.
In practice, of course, the changes are always much more complicated
and must always remind ourselves of the dangers of an over-schematized view of historical processes.
Now with that reminder, I return to my attempt to clarify how institutionalized power evolved.
I hope now we have a slightly more subtle idea of what we mean by power
and in particular institutionalized power.
And we can now go back from the first states to the early agrarian era
and start trying to explain the slow build-up of these complex institutionalized forms over several millennia.
So we'll ask how after 200,000 years in which institutionalized power didn't exist,
how did some individuals manage to start exerting significant power over others?
Now to understand the process, it will help to imagine two distinct ways of mobilizing power,
two distinct types of power, they're really complementary, they're different faces of power.
The first I'll call power from below and the second I'll call power from above.
Now let's begin with power from below.
By power from below, I mean power that is conceded to a leader by individuals or groups who expect something in return,
just as domestic plants or animals expect something return, we can imagine, from humans.
They expect to benefit from subordination to skillful leaders.
People expect something in return.
Now in this sense power from below is very clearly a symbiotic relationship.
As societies became larger and complex, the need for leadership increased.
Leadership became more important in order to achieve group goals as groups became larger.
In a group of two or three people, you can do everything by consensus.
In a group of several hundred, you start needing leadership structures.
If you want to build an irrigation system or you want to build a wall to defend your village against a rival village,
you need some organization, you need some leadership.
So here's a very general principle.
As societies get larger, they find more and more that they need leadership in order to cope with more and more complex tasks and challenges.
So this is a process driven by agriculture.
Agriculture leads to larger communities, larger communities create more possibilities for conflict,
more needs for group activity and more need for leadership.
This idea of power from below is very familiar.
We all experience it a lot of the time.
Familiar modern examples include, for example, if you're a member of a club and you want the club to be able to function fairly efficiently in some way,
perhaps to collect dues, you're probably going to elect officials.
And you as a member of the club implicitly grant some authority to those people and you grant them the right to take some crucial decisions.
So this is power from below.
It's very, very familiar indeed.
When we think of power as legitimate in the modern world as opposed to illegitimate,
when we think of it as legitimate, such as the right to tax in a democratic society,
we're generally thinking of it as power from below, even if it's backed by the threat of force, e.g. for not paying taxes.
Now that's power from below.
It's very familiar.
It's all around us and it's a crucial component of all power systems.
And we often forget about it.
Now power from above, the other side of power.
Power from above depends on the capacity to make credible threats of coercion.
Power from above, unlike power from below, which just depends on a certain amount of agreement between people on common goals,
power from above depends on the pre-existence of organised, disciplined groups of coercers
who are loyal to a leader and able to enforce the leader's will by force when necessary.
In modern societies, the police and armies play such a role.
But so do many other officials, such as tax collectors.
In such an environment, people obey because they will be punished if they do not.
This aspect of power highlights the coercive element in power relations.
The element that I said was critical to the existence of tribute-taking states.
You want to know whether there's power from above.
You look for the presence of jails, police, armies, enforcers, gangs of thugs.
And you know that such power exists.
Now, we also need to be clear that power from above can never exist on its own.
There can be no such thing as a purely coercive state.
And the reason for this is very simple. Maintaining an apparatus of coercion is costly.
And it depends on maintaining the willing support of the coercers.
So the gang with which you work has to be supporting you.
No individual can single-handedly coerce millions of others.
There has to be some consensus at least amongst the coercers.
So, coercion.
Power from above depends on the previous existence of complex structures of coercion.
Now, it depends on the existence of complex structures.
Now, in practice, the two forms are always intertwined.
Protection rackets, for example, offer a service.
It's often the racket itself that is the likely source of danger.
So does the payment of protection money count as a form of power from below or power from above?
Which was my father-in-law dealing with?
He could have chosen not to pay to the police benevolent fund or to the other organization.
As any member of a democratic society may decide not to pay taxes.
But in both cases, there are unpleasant consequences.
Okay, this has been an elaborate attempt to clarify the nature of power.
We need to understand this clearly before we can look at the details of the construction of elaborate power systems,
of the structures that have dominated most of the last 5,000 years of human history.
Here's the final point I want to make.
Building coercive groups is complex and costly.
And the earliest forms of power emerged before such groups existed.
This is why the first power elites depended mainly on power from below.
Power from below can exist without power from above.
It doesn't work the other way around.
And what that means is that to explain the slow build-up to institutionalized power over 5,000 years,
we must begin by looking at forms of power from below.
So now let's start asking, how over 5,000 years do you slowly build up from the very simple societies
and structures of the early agrarian era to the elaborate, powerful, institutionalized power structures
of the later agrarian era to the first tribute-taking states?
That's the question we tackle in the next lecture. Thank you.
Applause
Music
Lecture 28, Early Power Structures
Applause
We're discussing the emergence of the great power structures
that have played such a dominant role in the last 5,000 years of world history.
And in the previous lecture, I tried to think very carefully about the nature of power itself
and to distinguish between the highly institutionalized forms of power
embodied in states within the last 5,000 years of human history
and the much more personal forms of power that were present in all earlier eras of human history.
Now the strategic era for understanding how you get from A to B is once again the early agrarian era.
So now we need to go back to the beginnings of that era and see if we can trace,
despite the extreme paucity of the evidence,
some of the main stages in the creation of these complex, institutionalized forms of power.
So we're looking at, if you like, the prehistory of the state.
The previous lecture described the appearance of the first tribute-taking states.
I used that label and defined it as power structures that had the ability, if necessary,
to impose their will through coercion.
Now we ask how did the first and simplest power structures evolve?
But first let's look at the evidence. What types of evidence do we have
if we're to try and construct a good evidence-based answer to this question?
We'll see that the evidence is far from perfect,
but it may be just enough to allow us to construct, in very general terms,
or to reconstruct the history of institutionalized forms of power
through this critical 5,000-year era of human history.
The evidence we need to answer this question comes mainly from archaeology and anthropology.
This is a mix we've seen before in looking both at the Paleolithic era and the early agrarian era.
Let's look first at archaeology.
Archaeology, that is to say, the study of the remains of past communities, past societies,
can offer many indirect hints about early power relations
and the build-up of forms of institutionalized power.
For example, the relative size and wealth of houses and burials may hint at inequalities of wealth and power.
An example, just to give one example more or less at random,
is the huge burial mound of Arjan in the inner Asian steppes.
It dates from the 8th century BCE, that is to say, it was formed about 2,800 years ago.
It was excavated in the early 1970s in the Russian Republic of Tuva on the border of Mongolia.
The tomb is from the early phases of the Scythian era,
and it represents the burial of an important pastoral nomadic steppe leader.
It included 70 distinct chambers arranged like the spokes of a wheel.
It contained about 160 saddled horses.
Each of these had been slaughtered for the burial.
They were under a mound 120 meters wide,
which probably required the labor of something like 1,500 workers,
according to the estimates of the archaeologists who worked on the site.
At the very center were buried a man and a woman.
They wore furs and elaborate decorations.
Subordinate princes or nobles or aristocrats were buried to their south, their west,
and the north of them, which gave them the place of honor in the east.
This was traditionally the place of honor in most iteration pastoral nomadic societies.
Now, if you stumble across such a tomb in the arid steplands of Central Asia,
what can you deduce about power?
You can hardly avoid the conclusion that even in this not particularly productive environment,
there existed very significant degrees of institutionalized power.
If so many people could be mobilized to honor the death of a ruler,
and quite a few of them, including these princes who were buried with the rulers,
were apparently even required to honor the burial by sacrificing their own lives,
you have to conclude that these people were very powerful.
They ruled large numbers of people and they had very considerable power over them
and probably very considerable coercive power.
In the steps, mobilizing coercive power in many ways is actually easier than outside of the steps
because the pastoral nomadic life way is so congenial to teaching to a training in warfare.
So that's just one illustration of the sort of evidence we look for if we're looking for power structures.
Rich infant burials demonstrate something else.
If you find infants that are buried with a lot of wealth around them,
then you know not only that there were wealthy people in that society,
but you know something else as well.
You know that wealth could be inherited.
In other words, this is not just one individual who built up their wealth during their lifetime,
they could pass on their wealth to their children.
That suggests the existence of institutionalized hierarchies of wealth and power.
Much more elaborate evidence can be found as well.
I'm thinking of evidence such as the amazing terracotta army
that was buried with the first ruler of a unified China or extensive fortifications and walls.
These all show the presence of armies and organized coercion.
These things you know you're dealing with powerful tribute-taking states.
Let me talk briefly about the terracotta army, which I was lucky enough to see a few years ago.
There are 8,000 life-sized terracotta soldiers and their horses.
They were mass produced to some extent,
but nevertheless you have quite a variety of costumes and faces.
You have them wearing the precise costumes for different military ranks.
They were buried to honor the first emperor of a unified China, the Qin Emperor Shi Huangdi,
whose dates are 260 to 210 BCE.
And they're part of a 20 square mile wide mausoleum.
This was discovered outside the city of Xi'an, the ancient Han capital in 1974,
by local peasants who were drilling a well.
Constructing the entire mausoleum for the emperor may have required the labor of 700,000 people over many years.
So this is monumental architecture at its most grandiose.
We'll see that one of the most remarkable similarities between all regions where institutionalized power appears in significant forms
is that you find monumental architecture.
Wherever institutionalized power structures appear, rulers seem to have constructed large, grand building projects
that are both examples of power because they require a lot of labor to construct them.
And they show that rulers or someone had the power to mobilize a lot of labor,
but they also displays of power.
So they count in fact as forms of propaganda.
They're designed to impress or over awe someone else with the majesty of the leaders and rulers.
