there was a sort of acceleration in technological change about 50,000 years ago.
Improved stone tools appear.
Here in a greater variety, new materials start being used, including bone and skins.
Cave paintings begin to appear and carved objects such as the Venus figurines
that are very widely scattered from Mongolia to Europe from about 25,000 years ago.
And many specialists have described this change as a revolution of the Upper Paleolithic.
As if suddenly there's a burst of creativity in this period.
And many have argued that this proves that even if Homo sapiens evolved earlier,
modern human behaviors and above all our creativity appeared only 50,000 years ago,
perhaps what we're talking about here is tiny changes in the wiring of the brain
that gave us, that through a switch, that gave us symbolic language and everything that goes with that.
And if so, this means the critical threshold was crossed just 50,000 years ago
and human history as a whole has only lasted for 50,000 years.
Remember, all this discussion is really about when human history begins, when our species begins.
Now, this is one of those points at which I have to remind you, I am not a paleontologist,
so I'm not the ideal person to adjudicate in these debates.
But recent work by two paleontologists, Sally McBriety and Alison Brooks,
has convinced me and many others that the most powerful evidence is on the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
In other words, the argument is that both our behaviors and our bodies appeared about 200 to 300,000 years ago.
So, with due warnings that things could change if new evidence appears,
that is the date I'll go with in the rest of this course.
I'll argue with McBriety and Brooks that our species appeared in Africa about 200 to 300,000 years ago.
Accordingly, I'll argue that human history really begins about 200 to 300,000 years ago,
and I'll take as a symbolic date about 250,000 years ago.
Now, why? What's the evidence for this?
In 2000, McBriety and Brooks wrote a long and extremely important article in the Journal of Human Evolution.
And in that article, what they argue is that the revolution of the Upper Paleolithic,
this apparent evidence for a sudden acceleration in technological creativity in Europe and Russia, is actually an illusion.
And it's created by the very simple fact that so much more archaeology has been done in Europe than in Africa.
Remarkably little archaeology has been done in Africa, despite the fact that we know that our species almost certainly originated there.
It's partly a simple matter of lack of funding.
So what they do is they suggest that what we need to do is go back very, very carefully over the somewhat limited evidence that is available for Africa.
And to ask ourselves the question, can we see the same things that appear during the revolution of the Upper Paleolithic earlier in Africa?
And they argue that if you look carefully at the evidence, you can indeed see just that.
From almost 300,000 years ago, they argue, there is evidence of many of the new technologies that emerge much later elsewhere and even hints of symbolic activity.
For example, you find evidence of the grinding of ochre.
Now, presumably, if you find a hominin species grinding ochre, why is it doing it?
Presumably to paint its body. And if you're painting your body, you're giving signals, you're conveying symbolic information of some kind.
Now, ochre. The use of ochre appears in association with a new hominin species, Homo helmiii, which they regard as an early version of Homo sapiens.
Here's another illustration. Blombos Cave in South Africa offers very good illustration of these sort of arguments.
It was occupied from 70,000 years ago. Its inhabitants certainly used ochre, presumably to paint their bodies.
They made fine, delicate stone tools. They used shellfish, which is a sign of adapting to a new and rich environment, the environment of the seashore.
They may have fished.
Evidence from sites such as Blombos Cave, and they list many more examples of this, suggests that in Africa, early humans, we're doing all the things we find in the Revolution of the Upper Paleolithic much, much earlier.
And that suggests that both our genetic makeup and our behaviors had been evolving in Africa since perhaps 200 or 300,000 years ago.
Now, a very brief summary. The details, many of the details, of exactly how our species evolved remain unclear.
But I've argued that there's very good recent evidence for a rapid appearance of modern humans about 200 to 300,000 years ago somewhere in eastern or southern Africa.
If this evidence is pointing to the right direction, then that means that that's when the critical threshold was crossed. That's when human history really began.
Thank you.
Now, try and get your imaginative juices going. Imagine, here's what I want you to try and imagine. Imagine you're one of the earliest humans.
You may live 200,000 years ago, or perhaps 100,000 years ago.
Of course, you would have no consciousness of the fact that you're one of the earliest humans.
You live in Africa.
Biologically speaking, you're more or less identical to the humans who live today. Your body is the same.
You have the same range of emotions. You can communicate freely and eloquently with other humans.
You're as intelligent as anyone alive today. You have as powerful a sense of community and you have as powerful a sense of family.
But obviously, the way you live would be very different from the way most people live today.
So how would you live? What sort of community would you live in? What would you eat? How would you see the world?
And what would your material living standards be like? Would you live well or not very well?
To put it slightly differently, how different would your life be from that of a human being living in, say, New York in the early 21st century?
In the previous lecture, I concluded that our species Homo sapiens appeared in Africa about 250,000 years ago.
We saw that there's still some room for uncertainty about that, but the evidence is very powerful for that conclusion.
So now we ask, how did they live? What can we know about the life ways of our Paleolithic ancestors?
We'll see that we have enough evidence to sketch out some very general answers to these important questions, but not enough to be much more precise.
Here, of course, we can't give names, we can't give precise dates, we can't say when battles happen and so on.
So we have to offer a very general sketch of life in the Paleolithic, and that's what I want to do.
But before I begin, I want to talk about periodization, about how we're going to divide up human history into particular eras.
We need to tidy up the chronology, and I want to be clear about how I'm using the word Paleolithic,
because you'll find it used slightly differently.
In this course, we're going to divide human history into three large eras.
The first is the Paleolithic, the second is the Agrarian Era, and the third is the Modern Era.
This large chronological division will shape the rest of this course,
so it's very important to be clear about it as we begin to survey the history of our own species.
Let's talk just briefly about the history of periodization.
Chopping up history into different parts is one of the most tricky challenges that historians face,
and the results are bound to be slightly arbitrary, but to do so is absolutely vital.
If we're to talk about historical change with any clarity.
The classification of historical eras by archaeologists has traditionally focused on different tool types,
and this is simply because tool types of different kinds, particularly when made of non-perishable materials such as stone,
are what archaeologists are most likely to see.
So, a classification developed in the 19th century that classified the great archaeological eras into eras of stone, of bronze,
and of iron, the stone age, the bronze age, and the iron age.
This was the brainchild of a 19th century Danish archaeologist, C.J. Thompson.
In the mid-1860s, an English naturalist, John Lubbock, further subdivided the stone age into an old stone age.
The Paleolithic, the old era of stone, and a new stone age, the Neolithic era.
We'll see that the Neolithic era begins at about the same point as our agrarian era,
but in this course we're going to prefer the term agrarian era.
Now, here we have one more of these classification systems that we've seen several times in this course that are very simple,
but they bring clarity to a mass of data, in this case archaeological data.
And what these labels suggested was that behind the mass of archaeological information that was accumulating in the 19th century,
it was possible to see a certain directionality, particularly, of course, in the history of technology,
because most of the surviving remains from Paleolithic sites represented technology.
Now, let's be clear about how we're going to use the term Paleolithic, or old stone age.
It's often used for the entire period since Homo habilis made stone tools some two million years ago.
And you'll find that usage elsewhere.
So let me be very, very clear that in this course we're using it slightly differently.
Here, I'm using it to mean the first era of human history.
So it begins when humans appear.
And that means, as we saw in the last lecture, about 250,000 years ago.
So in this course, the Paleolithic means the era from about 250,000 years ago when our species first appeared
to the earliest appearance of agriculture about 10 or 11,000 years ago.
Now, let me just summarize some very broad general features of the Paleolithic era of human history.
First of all, it is, of course, by far the longest era of human history.
In a sense, it laid the foundations for human history.
Everything that happens later builds on what happens in the Paleolithic era.
So it's a real shame that historians so often ignore it.
Of course, prehistories don't, archaeologists don't.
But historians, by and large, tend to ignore it.
Why?
Well, one reason often given is that prehistory requires different skills from those of a historian.
Historians work with documents and archives.
There aren't any written documents for the Paleolithic era.
What you need to study it is the skills of archaeologists who work with things, objects, remains.
So historians will very often say, you know, I do written documents.
I don't do what archaeologists do. Let them deal with that.
Now, this is all true, of course.
And these divisions between disciplines that we've seen many times are, of course, extremely helpful.
And they mean that people can develop a particular expertise.
But we've also seen several times in this course that the divisions between disciplines can hide things as well.
They divide up problems and they make it very difficult to see a problem or a question as a whole.
And there's actually something slightly bizarre about this particular division.
Let me caricature it slightly.
When historians say, I don't do the Paleolithic because I do written evidence.
It's a bit as if Sherlock Holmes were to say in the middle of one of his investigations,
sorry, chaps, I can't pursue this case any further because there are blood stains and I don't do blood stains.
Well, one possible response to this might be, of course, well, if you do don't do blood stains,
then perhaps you should learn to because that's what we need to do to solve this problem.
Or at least you should talk to someone who does do blood stains because otherwise we'll never be able to solve this case.
And something like that is also true of human history.
We'll never be able to see human history whole if we insist too rigidly on these divisions between different types of expertise.
So we have to invade the archaeologists territory a bit.
So this is one more sign of how discipline boundaries can hide problems.
They may focus research, but they can also obscure important questions.
Okay, back to the Paleolithic.
To get a preliminary sense of the distinctive features of the Paleolithic era,
it may help if we compare it very, very broadly with the other two eras, the agrarian era,
which runs from about 10,000 years ago to just a few centuries ago,
and the modern era, which covers just the last few centuries.
So here's just a very, very broad comparison so you can see these three eras clearly.
The Paleolithic era occupies the entire period from about 250,000 years ago to about 10,000 or 11,000 years ago.
That is about 96% of the time that our species has existed.
It covers by far the largest chronological period in human history,
which is one more reason why it's a shame that it's so often ignored in courses on history.
The agrarian era occupies most of the last 10,000 years.
In other words, it occupies essentially the other 4% of human history.
The modern era covers just a few centuries, a tiny fraction of human history chronologically speaking.
However, of course, you'll immediately understand this way of putting it is interesting and illuminating,
but it's also slightly deceptive.
And one reason for saying this is that Paleolithic populations were extremely small.
It's a good bet, as we'll see, that even at the end of the Paleolithic,
there were no more than 5 or 6 million humans on Earth,
and at the very beginning there may have been for most of the Paleolithic perhaps less than a million humans.
So, of all the humans who have ever lived, and the Italian demographer Massimo Livibaci
has estimated that about 80 billion humans have lived since our species first appeared,
of all the humans who've ever lived, probably only about 12% lived in the Paleolithic era.
So, in terms of human lives, the Paleolithic era represents a much smaller proportion of human history,
only about 12%.
The agrarian era dominates human history.
It represents about 68%, and the modern era, despite being extremely short,
may have included the life spans of some 20% of all the humans who've ever lived,
and that's simply because so many humans have lived in the modern era.
Okay, now what evidence do we have?
Let's return to the Paleolithic era.
What evidence do we have about Paleolithic life ways?
We have two main types of evidence.
First, archaeological remains, and secondly, modern anthropological studies of societies
that may have been similar to those of the Paleolithic.
So, let's begin with archaeological remains.
Most important, these are probably the most important single type of source.
Blombos Cave, which I mentioned in the last lecture, is a very good example of the sort of evidence available.
You can find living sites, you can find the tools that Paleolithic humans used.
You can get a very good feeling for their life ways from their material remains.
However, things can't talk to us, so very often we need to supplement the material remains
that archaeologists use with insights from modern anthropological studies.
Anthropologists have studied many societies, particularly from the 1960s, I should say,
many modern societies that live by a foraging or hunting and gathering technology
very similar to that of the Paleolithic era and lived in similar types of groups.
And these are very suggestive about some of the problems such communities face
and some of the solutions they may come up with,
but we need to remember that such analogies are also potentially misleading
because modern foraging societies have been greatly influenced by modern societies.
They are modern societies, even if they look in some ways like Paleolithic societies.
After all, why should desert Australian communities resist the temptation
to use four-wheel drives, cell phones and high-powered rifles when they go out hunting kangaroo?
Now these two types of evidence enable us tentatively to reconstruct
some of the main features of Paleolithic life ways.
So now what I'd like to do is try and sketch out some of the crucial features
of those life ways insofar as we can construct them today.
The first thing to say is probably that the communities that people lived in
were small family-sized groups.
There's no equivalent of the nation-state.
The family is the basic unit, the family or the kinship network.
We're talking probably about groups that could vary from very small,
five, ten people, maybe to twenty or thirty, moving together
and occasionally meeting up with neighbouring groups
amongst whom they have relatives.
So that's the sort of basic social structure of this world.
These groups are so small that relations are personal.
All human relations are personal.
The fleeting, anonymous relationships of our world barely exist.
Society means family.
Second, the primary technology we can describe as foraging.
You'll sometimes see it described as hunting and gathering.
Foraging, of course, is a label that embraces a whole range of different specific technologies.
Essentially what it means is taking the things you need from the environment
and using them without processing them a huge amount.
You take stones from the environment.
You take plants for food.
You take insects or animals for food.
And you use them more or less, not completely, more or less in their natural form.
Now immediately we need to ask,
are we simply saying that Paleolithic humans live in exactly the same way as all other animals?
Don't all animals do exactly this?
They scour their environment.
They get the food they need.
They get the other things they need from their environment.
And they use them more or less without processing.
Well, in many ways, yes, that's certainly true.
But there's a critical difference between the foraging of our ancestors
and the foraging of other species such as chimps or gorillas.
And the difference is one we've seen already.
It's collective learning.
Through collective learning,
Paleolithic humans accumulated much more knowledge about their surroundings
than any other animal species.
And that meant as they travelled through their environments,
they approached the environment,
they approached the challenges of foraging
with infinitely more information than other animal species.
This is the difference.
Human foraging is informed by information that's accumulated over many, many generations.
Human parents can pass on to their children much more information than, say, chimp parents.
Now, a further general point about these technologies is that they are extensive.
This is a slightly technical term and I'll be making use of it later on,
so we need to be clear about it.
To survive by foraging,
Paleolithic humans like other animals that survived by foraging needed to exploit large areas.
So, Paleolithic communities had to be small and they had to be nomadic.
They travelled regularly to different parts of their home territory.
