And this can tell us a lot about diets and life ways.
For example, Homo habilis seems to have had an omnivorous diet dominated by plant foods such as leaves and fruits,
but also including some meat.
Now, what does that tell us?
It tells us that despite the conviction of an earlier generation of anthropologists,
early humans were not necessarily hunters.
In fact, it seems that the vast majority of our ancestors were not.
They spent a lot of time collecting fruits, collecting nuts, collecting vegetable foods of various kinds.
And as we'll see, they probably got their meat by scavenging.
How can you tell? How can we tell this?
How can we tell the difference between hunting and scavenging?
Well, once again, microscopic studies of remains can tell us a lot about this.
Above all, the cut marks and scratches on animal bones that have been found at hominine sites
can determine whether the hominines hunted themselves or scavenged remains killed by other animals.
And Homo habilis, it seems, scavenged most of the meat they ate.
So once again, this suggests that even if some of our ancestors did use meat, they were not really hunting.
It might help to try and imagine the sort of scene we're thinking about.
Imagine our ancestors watching from a distance or behind a tree as lions or hyenas bring down a zebra
and then kill it and eat most of the meat.
Then imagine them waiting till the predators leave and scurrying in,
equipped with a few fine blades that they've made to see if there's anything left on the bones or in the marrow.
It's not quite as impressive a picture as that of human hunters, but if it works, it works.
And of course, meat is extremely rich food.
And if you have a diet with some meat in it, may have been a very productive source of energy.
Okay, now that's a long discussion of some of the things we can learn from studying fossils
and the things that hominines and our ancestors left behind.
And I hope it gives you some idea of how much information a good paleontologist can tease out of these remains.
Now I'd like to look at a second category of evidence that's been used to construct our modern account of human evolution.
And that's the study of primates in the wild.
The crucial work here, and I mentioned this in passing in the previous lecture.
The crucial work here was done, the pioneering work, by two former students of Leakeys,
Jane Goodall and Diane Fosse.
They really pioneered the study of apes in the wild.
Before their time, no one had seriously spent a lot of time watching great apes in the wild.
They'd mostly been studied in captivity in zoos.
And the work begun by those two and followed now by a whole generation of researchers
have transformed modern attitudes to our closest relatives, the great apes.
And what they've done is they've encouraged researchers to think of them not purely as alien species,
but also as species that may have enough in common with us that we can, to some extent, use our capacity to empathize with them.
They encouraged the idea that good research might involve empathizing with the creatures you're studying.
And they showed that the great apes have extremely complex and clearly defined social relationships.
And they showed also that those relationships differ greatly from species to species.
We can't just take a particular species of society and use that as a model, for example, for early human societies,
because the societies, even of closely related chimp species, bonobos and other chimp species, are quite different.
To give one illustration, chimps, standard chimps, have complex hierarchies in which males compete for political ranking.
They form alliances, they challenge each other for dominance physically.
And the most successful, these are the Don Corleones of the chimp world,
the most successful gain greater access to the females, or perhaps we should put it the other way around.
The females are most likely to select as a mate the most successful, the Don Corleones,
the ones that can provide them protection and resources and powerful alliances.
Therefore, they tend to have more offspring. This is what Darwin called sexual selection.
Their genes are going to spread more in the next generation.
These studies also show that humans are not the only great apes to use tools.
One of the earliest things they found was that the great apes use tools as well.
For example, let me just give one famous example.
Chimps often strip leaves from sticks to fish out termites or ants from termite or ant mounds.
Now if you want to try it, here's how, though really I wouldn't recommend it and I have to say I've never tried it myself.
What you do is you stick a slim stick into an ant or termite's nest, then you draw it out quickly with bugs crawling all over it.
Then comes the tricky bit. What you have to do is quickly sweep your hand along the stick.
You gather up all the ants, then you shove them into your mouth and then you crunch down on them quickly.
If you do it all in one clean, efficient movement, the ants won't have much of a chance to bite you.
But if you mess it up, it can be painful.
And it's actually young chimps have been observed learning how to do this by imitating their mothers.
However, no apes make tools as sophisticated as those of habilis.
Despite that, the fact that they do use tools undermined Leakey's claim that habilis was the first great ape or hominin species to use tools.
So studies of related species in the wild have added a lot to our understanding of social relations amongst them
and provide very interesting models for understanding what hominine and early human societies may have looked like.
Now the third basic type of technique I want to discuss briefly is genetic dating.
This is one of the most recent techniques for studying human evolution and it's revolutionized our understanding of the story of human evolution.
It's part of the chronometric revolution which I mentioned in the fourth lecture.
Genetic dating techniques or molecular dating techniques were pioneered in the work of Alan Wilson and Vincent Sourish
in work which they first published in 1967.
So let me try and explain very simply how it works.
Many genes it turns out in the genetic code are not expressed in the physical body
and this means they have no real impact on the survival chances of an organism.
And what that means is that they can change randomly without affecting the process of natural selection.
So there's a lot of random change that goes on inside the genome of any organism.
And where you have random change, it's a bit like shuffling a pack of cards,
you would start using statistical techniques.
And you can use these for example to estimate how different two genomes are from each other
and how much random change has gone on.
And this is particularly valuable if you suspect the two species were once related.
So at one time the two were identical.
You can slowly estimate how much change has gone on.
And then there's another step.
You can estimate how different the two genomes are.
And then by taking species whose history we know well,
you can calibrate these differences against other evidence
such as the knowledge that mammal species diverged rapidly after the sudden extinctions of 65 million years ago.
And you can roughly estimate how rapidly these changes occurred.
So then in principle you can get to the point where you say these two species diverge genetically by such and such a percent
and roughly that ought to mean that they've been diverging genetically for 10 million or 20 million or 50 million years or whatever it is.
This is the basic principle of genetic dating.
Now when they first proposed this idea they were met with great skepticism
and this was largely because most biologists resisted the idea that genes could change randomly.
They were convinced that most genes were so closely linked to fitness
that they were shaped not by random processes but by natural selection.
But it's since realized that actually a very large part of the genome of most large organisms is not used and therefore has no impact on fitness.
And since they first published the idea, the technique has been refined, it's been used over and over again
and it has now been shown that it correlates very closely with other evidence.
So it's now a very powerful tool for paleoanthropologists.
These calculations by the way are even clearer if you use the DNA within mitochondria.
Remember, mitochondria organelles within cells.
These inherit their genes from the mother through the fertilized egg and therefore they don't get mixed each generation.
Now how did these techniques revolutionize our understanding of human evolution?
Wilson and Sarich showed that the DNA of humans and chimps differs by little more than 1%
and they estimated that this suggested that the two species had had a common ancestor about 7 million years ago.
At the time that was revolutionary because most biologists were convinced that humans and chimps were far farther apart genetically and historically
that the lines had diverged 15 to 20 million years ago, perhaps 30 million years ago.
And those claims were based on fragmentary studies of fragmentary skeletal remains.
Now the date that Wilson and Sarich established is now very well established in our understanding of evolution.
So what it shows is that we're much closer to chimps than we once thought.
And we had a common ancestor only 7 million years ago, very recently in terms of human evolution.
The technique was peculiarly crucial because very few fossils exist from this crucial era of about 6 to 7 million years ago when hominin evolution began.
OK, we've looked at the evidence. We've looked at the fossil evidence, studies of neighboring species in the wild today and genetic dating techniques.
Now we're ready finally to introduce human beings.
And let me ask, raise this question again. What is the threshold that leads from not being a human to being a human?
One of the most fundamental questions we can ask. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
What does it mean to be a human being?
Is there any deeper question we can tackle?
Remember Pascal's remark, for what is man in nature?
A nothingness in respect to infinity, a hole in respect to nothingness, a median between nothing and everything.
One of the central aims of a course like this must be to help us think about what it means to be human.
What is our real place in the overall scheme of things?
Do we matter or not?
Can we define the role we play within the universe?
I don't guarantee we can come up with perfect answers to this question in this course.
But what is absolutely certain is that it's easier to think about these large, grand questions about the meaning of life within the very large and multidisciplinary perspective of big history.
In fact, one of the reasons I love teaching big history is that it validates these questions.
It encourages us to think seriously about questions such as the meaning of being human.
And it encourages us to think that they are not just metaphysical or philosophical questions,
but they are questions to which there may be good, rigorous, evidence-based scientific answers.
It encourages us to think, in other words, that it's reasonable and legitimate to think about them.
And that's something that I fear many educational institutions today don't encourage.
Certainly my own experience was that if I raised the sort of deep questions about the meaning of life that as an adolescent,
I used to spend a lot of time thinking about it.
If I tried to raise those in class, they were dismissed as not serious.
And we were told that the serious questions were smaller and much more manageable.
So one of the lovely things about big history, I think, is that it can encourage us to think that these questions can at least be tackled in a serious way.
So it provides a powerful way of legitimizing these deep and fundamental questions,
which I think certainly every young person needs to be wrestling with,
but probably everyone else throughout their lives.
In the previous lectures, I described the history of life on Earth,
and I described the evolution of our own ancestors through the adaptive mechanism of natural selection.
That's the mechanism that Darwin described clearly in the 19th century.
The next group of lectures takes us across a new threshold,
and what it does is describe the appearance of our own species and the earliest stages of human history.
And I'm going to argue that this is indeed a radical threshold.
The appearance of our species marks something new in the history, certainly of the planet,
something radically new, and it marks the beginnings of a build-up towards new forms of complexity.
We've seen so far how similar we are to other living organisms.
Now we must start asking the opposite question.
What is it that makes us so different that the appearance of the first humans,
perhaps 250,000 years ago, at the beginning of the Paleolithic era of human history,
counts as a fundamental turning point in the history of our planet?
What justifies treating the appearance of our species as a new threshold of complexity?
Is this merely parochialism, a sort of species bragging?
Or are there perhaps objective reasons for making such a powerful claim about the nature of our species?
That's what I'm going to argue in what follows.
Now this lecture is going to be a bit theoretical.
It's going to try to pin down the nature of the threshold
and pin down in very general terms what makes us so different.
Now if we ask this question, what makes us so different?
What possible answers are there?
Well, let's begin with one of them.
It's our control of the energy of the biosphere.
This one distinctive feature of our species is the colossal amount of energy we control.
Remember where the energy comes from that supports the biosphere
and how that story links the different stories we tell in this course.
Most of the energy that sustains life on the biosphere is manufactured by fusion reactions in the core of the sun.
It arrives on Earth where it's put in storage by photosynthesizing plants.
It's then consumed by them for their own growth or used by the organisms that eat them.
Or it's buried in the ground to be consumed millions of years later
in the form of fossil fuels such as the stuff you put in your car this morning.
Each species on Earth gets its share of that energy budget
through what ecologists often describe as the food chain.
Now what's really weird about our species is that over about 250,000 years
we have slowly got our hands on more and more and more of that energy.
And I'm going to argue that this is a process that is hard to see in the early stages of our history
but it actually begins 250,000 years ago.
Let me remind you of the figures Eric Chesson has given.
He calculated that about 20,000 ergs per second per gram
flow through large-bodied animals such as apes.
Modern humans, that's at the end of human history,
use on average 20 times as much energy, something like 500,000 ergs per second per gram.
Now that's calculated by dividing total energy consumption of modern humans
by the number and mass of human beings.
It doesn't necessarily represent what any particular individual consumes
but what it shows is that as a species we're controlling a staggering amount of energy.
Now we know these figures are very, very rough and ready
but I hope you'll agree that their implications make sense.
We all know that as a species we are controlling a lot of the resources of our biosphere.
We guzzle energy at an astonishing rate and we use resources at an astonishing rate.
So the question is why?
What is it about us that enables us to do this?
Now I'm going to argue that human control of energy and resources began
as soon as our species appeared.
In fact, it rises out of the very nature of our species.
It's very hard to observe in the earlier stages of human history.
So human control of energy and resources increases very, very slow
in the Paleolithic era before about 10,000 years ago.
Then we can see it start to build up as agriculture appears and then modern human societies.
In the Paleolithic era, the earlier stage of human history,
humans probably used enough energy to stay alive with a small surplus
but the build up of energy control was apparent in the fact that humans started spreading
to more and more environments.
In fact, in the course of the Paleolithic they spread to more environments
than any other large species.
In the end of the Paleolithic they'd spread around the world.
Early agriculturalists may have been using up to 12,000 kilocalories a day
and today each of us uses on average, it's been estimated, about 230,000 kilocalories a day.
In contrast, think of a closely related species, the chimps,
and you ask whether chimp control of energy has built up in the time that chimps have been on this earth.
That's the answer, and the answer is no.
Chimp use of energy, like that of all other species, has remained essentially stable.
They used just enough to stay alive with perhaps a slight surplus.
More energy, more control of energy allowed our species to multiply.
Till today there are a few hundred thousand chimps
and their numbers are dwindling quite rapidly, but there are six billion humans.
In fact, even at the end of the Paleolithic there were probably about six million humans.
More people, more energy help explain why human societies,
particularly in the last 10,000 years or so, have become more and more complex.
Remember there always seems to be a rough correlation between energy flows and complexity.
So, in this and the next lecture I will argue that this extraordinary buildup of control
over energy and resources by our species is not just a modern phenomenon.
On the contrary, it was made possible by changes that occurred at the very beginning of our history.
It was made possible by new capacities and new abilities that are in a sense defining features of our species.
Now, what's going on? How can we explain this?
Astonishing buildup by a single species of control over resources.
Let's be clear about how extraordinary it is.
We do not know of a single species in the planet's history
and the entire story of life on Earth that I've described in the last few lectures
over almost four billion years.
We don't know of a single species that has controlled energy on such scales
or that's shown this ability to control more and more energy.
So, this raises the question, what is it about us that explains why
in the course of our history we've slowly got control of more and more resources?
What is it about us?
