Despite occasional periods of political breakdown, Egyptian dynasties would rule the region for almost 2600 years.
They show remarkable stability, much more than in Sumer or Mesopotamia.
And the geography of Egypt may help explain some of its more distinctive features.
And perhaps the crucial thing here is the regularity of the Nile floods.
They may explain why Egyptian civilization avoided the sort of ecological collapse experienced in Sumer towards the end of the third millennium BCE, just around 2000 BCE and as we'll see in many other early agrarian civilizations.
Here a hieroglyphic writing system developed early, possibly under Mesopotamian influence, but it's so different that that influence can't have been overwhelming.
Here writing took the rather different form of hieroglyphics rather than the cuneiform writing of Sumer.
There were developed trading systems. The Nile was a wonderful river along which to trade. Trade winds heading south and river currents heading north made sailing up and down the river relatively easy.
And we know that Egyptian rulers sent expeditions for ivory and gold, for example, to Nubia and Punt in modern Ethiopia and also to Lebanon for its famous cedars.
We still have fine illustrations of a fleet that was sent by Hatshepsut, one of the few female pharaohs who ruled soon after 1500 BCE.
The expedition to Punt returned with many exotic goods including gold, ebony, baboons and myrrh.
So I hope that gives a very general impression of some of the distinctive features of Egyptian agrarian civilizations.
Now let's cross to the east to the Indian subcontinent.
Early in the third millennium, cities and states appear in the north of modern Pakistan and India in what has come to be known as Harappan civilization.
Here too there was a distinctive geography but once again a large fertile river system plays a crucial role.
This region was dominated by the presence of the Indus River. The Indus River brought very rich silts down from the Himalayas.
But its flooding was much less predictable than the Nile so the Induses are more dangerous river quite frankly than the Nile as the Tigris and Euphrates incidentally were also more dangerous than the Nile.
In this region too population seems to have built up quite rapidly and the appearance of the first agrarian civilization seems to have been the result of some sort of a population explosion.
By 2500 BCE in an area where there hadn't been huge populations before you quite rapidly find a lot of small towns and at least two huge cities.
These are now known as Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. They are the best known archaeological sites in this region but there are many many other sites.
Each of these cities had probably and you'll understand that this is there's some guesswork involved here but probably it's been it's been estimated about 40,000 inhabitants making them about the same size as a rook.
And as we've seen for the time these are these are colossal megalopolises. Houses and streets were built along a grid system using prefabricated bricks.
Now here we get much more of a sense of urban planning than we do in the higgledy-piggledy streets of a place like Uruk.
The cities seem to be more spacious and more carefully planned.
We know there were water and sewage systems. There were apparently uniform systems of weights and measures.
There were also all the other things we see. Highly specialized crafts and markets and a quite significant quite significant evidence of international trade.
We know that Harappan civilization traded with Central Asia.
In fact evidence has been found of communities of Harappan merchants in Central Asia late in the third millennium and they also traded with Mesopotamia.
And again we know this because we find trade goods from these regions.
So that's one powerful reminder that none of these civilizations was entirely self-contained.
In Harappan civilization too a writing system evolved. However the Indus writing system has never been deciphered.
So our knowledge of Harappan civilization at the moment is rather rudimentary. It depends on archaeology.
We cannot read the inscriptions that survive from this region which is very frustrating.
And it limits our ability to understand how the political system worked.
The fact that there seem not to have been large palaces also makes it really hard to get a handle on how the politics of these systems worked.
So here the inability to use the written records really is extremely frustrating.
It greatly limits our understanding of aspects of this world such as its religious traditions and also its political traditions.
One of the questions we'd love to ask of Harappan civilization for example is to what extent did its traditions survive in later Indian subcontinent traditions?
For example some of the surviving sculptors from Harappan civilization seem to show figures in yoga positions. What does this mean?
The Indus Valley civilization collapsed early in the second millennium and it collapsed very rapidly indeed.
We're not absolutely certain why. It used to be thought that invasions from the north were an important part of this.
But now the tendency is to stress ecological factors.
Overpopulation may have caused ecological collapse through deforestation, erosion, flooding and desertification.
So here we have a second spectacular example of ecological overreach leading to an almost total decline of agrarian civilization in the region for many centuries.
A very powerful reminder that the complexity of agrarian civilizations like all forms of complexity may be associated with fragility.
Now let's move further east. This is the fourth region, East Asia and China.
The earliest evidence of agrarian civilizations in China emerges along the Yellow River whose fertile, lurse soils, that's L-O-E-S, were formed from dust blown in from Inner Asia.
If you go to Beijing today you'll see haze which has a lot to do with cars but the other thing it has to do with is the Gobi Desert kind of blowing in and settling in Beijing.
Agriculture along the Yellow River in northern China was highly productive but flooding was always a problem.
And as a result, finding ways of controlling water flows seems to be one of the earliest problems tackled by Chinese rulers.
Chinese traditions and written traditions go back a long way or they allude to very ancient periods.
They describe two ancient dynasties, the Xia and the Shang.
A possibly mythic King Yu was the legendary founder of the Xia dynasty and it's symptomatic that he spent a lot of his time finding ways of preventing flooding.
Cities and states, many states begin to appear along the eastern Yellow River late in the third millennium.
This is about the time when Saigon unified much of Sumer.
The Xia dynasty was probably one of several regional kingdoms but the only one to which we have written references.
Its capital at a city called Erli Tao has been recently excavated.
The Shang dynasty ruled for much of the second millennium.
Bronze metallurgy becomes important and horse-drawn chariots are used in warfare that chariots probably arrived from the west, from the steplands, maybe even further west, as well as wheat and barley.
One of the great unresolved issues in Chinese archaeology is the extent of diffusion from the far west, from Mesopotamia or perhaps even from India.
The Shang rulers controlled many cities.
They had large armies equipped with mass-produced weapons and armor and they built massive royal tombs and palaces.
So we're clearly dealing with very substantial states.
And there may have been other similar kingdoms, kingdoms of similar scale in other regions of second millennium China.
Writing emerged here too.
But here it seems to have emerged by a slightly different path from in Sumer.
It's not clear how crucial a role accountancy played.
It probably did play some role, but attempts to divine the future, attempts at divination seem to have been a crucial role here.
Shang writing appears using symbols carved on tortoise shells or other bones.
And some of these symbols can still be read today.
Here we have remarkable continuity in the writing systems.
And writing, as I said, was closely linked to divination.
One of the forms of divination involved taking a shell, heating it up, looking at the cracks and using the cracks to forecast the future.
The rituals clearly played a very important role, both in family life and in political life.
But deities and priests seem to have played a somewhat smaller role than in Mesopotamia or Egypt.
Now, this brief survey may give some sense both of the similarities and some of the more important differences between the great civilizations of Afri-Eurasia.
But of course, I'm not even pretending it can do justice to the many detailed nuances that distinguish cultural or religious life in these different regions.
Now I want to move on to the Americas.
And let me remind you that now we're crossing to an entirely separate world zone.
So the appearance of agrarian civilizations in the Americas is quite distinct.
There's no evidence at all at the moment of any form of diffusion from Afri-Eurasia.
In the Americas, agrarian civilization appears independently in two distinct regions.
We'll survey these civilizations in much more detail in lecture 37.
So here I'll just mention some of the crucial features.
The first of these two regions is Mesoamerica.
Mesoamerica includes southern Mexico and parts of Central America.
The first, let's call them incipient civilizations because there's plenty of room for debate about whether we should call these agrarian civilizations yet or not.
But they're certainly well on the way to being agrarian civilizations.
Appear among a people that archaeologists call the Olmec during the second millennium BCE.
In the first millennium BCE, we get very clear evidence of cities and states.
And the first ones appear in the Oaxaca Valley where Monte Alban is widely regarded as the first major city to appear in the Americas.
Incidentally, I'll come back and talk about Olmec in a later lecture.
They are absolutely fascinating and they produce these wonderful basalt heads that you will have seen.
Okay, back to the first millennium BCE.
This is when the first clear evidence appears of agrarian civilizations in the Oaxaca Valley.
By the first millennium CE, that is to say we're about between 2000 and 1500 years ago, there were cities and states throughout much of Mesoamerica.
In this region, great river valleys appear to have played a less important role than in the great civilizations of Afro-Eurasia.
Though here too in each region, you can identify techniques that allowed agricultural productivity to rise.
These included the clearing of forest lands, particularly in the regions that would become the heartlands of Mayan civilization in the Yucatan later on.
And they also included the planting of crops in artificial swamp lands.
This is a quite distinctive American form of irrigation and this would provide the basis for the rapid population growth around what later became the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan within the last millennium.
So that's Mesoamerica and we're going to look at Mesoamerican civilization in much more detail later on.
Finally in the Andes, state cities, state systems emerged in the first millennium BCE along the arid coasts of Peru and up into the highlands.
Along the Andes, in this region, the crucial thing seems to have been the linking by trade and through political systems of different ecological regions.
And along the arid coasts of Peru, there were abundant fisheries.
In the Andean uplands around Lake Titicaca, for example, you could grow maize, potato and quinoa.
And here anthropologists argue that it's the flows of wealth and trade between these regions that generated the commercial flows and the energy flows on which the first agrarian civilizations were formed.
Exchanges of crops and other goods between lowland and upland regions therefore laid the foundations for the first large empires.
And the first really large empire in this region is probably the Inca Empire which flourished in the 15th and 16th century CE.
And finally, let's note the negative. In other words, let's note where agrarian civilizations didn't appear.
Above all, the fact that they don't appear in the Australasian zone.
Papua New Guinea had agriculture. It might have supported flourishing populations except, as we've seen, its agriculture was based on root crops.
And in Australia, you never get agriculture until it's brought there by European migrants in the 18th century.
Now we'll see in a later lecture that forms of intensification certainly occurred here.
The trajectory even in Australia is towards intensification, but you don't get agriculture, you don't get agrarian civilizations.
Okay, this brief tour, I hope, of the earliest agrarian civilizations has hinted at some of their variety, but we've seen there were also striking similarities.
And I'm going to explore those more carefully in the next lecture. Thank you.
Lecture 32. The World That Agrarian Civilizations Made
The previous two lectures described the emergence of agrarian civilizations in several different regions.
And we saw that they had some distinctive features. Now what we're going to do is focus once more on their similarities.
We want to understand agrarian civilizations as a distinctive phenomenon in human history, one of the emergent phenomena, if you like, generated in the course of human history.
Such phenomena can tell us a lot about our nature as a species, which is why it's important to stand back and try to see them clearly and not get too tangled up in the specific details of specific civilizations.
Why were all agrarian civilizations so similar, despite the limited contacts between them particularly early on in the era of agrarian civilizations?
It's very important to appreciate that the similarities between them, and there are a lot, as we'll see, are in fact odd.
Why should humans not have developed, for example, utterly different types of communities, as each region went its own merry way, so that we'd have seen absolutely no similarities between human history and different parts of the world?
What pressures might have steered human history in different regions along loosely similar parts?
Of course, the question is particularly striking if you contrast the Afro-Eurasian and American zones, because at present we have no evidence of any significant contact between these regions.
So as with the history of agriculture, this odd simultaneity suggests very powerfully that though our gifts as a species did not rigidly determine the course of human history,
what they did do was they tended to nudge it in distinctive directions, and very loosely we can even define the nature of that direction.
Collective learning ensured that over time humans would control more and more resources.
That would allow populations to grow. That would allow for denser and inevitably more complex types of communities.
Now once these more complex, denser communities have emerged, people in quite different parts of the world will likely to find themselves facing many of the same challenges.
How to organise large groups so as to achieve collective goals, goals they all shared?
How to prevent excessive conflict within and between groups?
How to defend themselves when conflict was unavoidable?
How to deal with garbage? How to deal with disease and so on?
All these problems were bound to emerge once denser, more complex communities appeared.
And the fact that the challenges were rather similar may explain why there are so many interesting similarities in the solutions that humans came up with quite independently in different regions.
So the many striking similarities between agrarian civilisations, even where there was no significant contacts, count as one of the most interesting and important factors about human history.
Because they provide powerful reasons for thinking that human history is in some sense directional, that it was shaped by large general factors that you can only see if you look at human history on a large scale.
And in the next few lectures we'll be looking at some of these similar features and trends.
This lecture concentrates on some of the general structural features of the 4000 year era that was dominated by the presence of agrarian civilisations.
Instead of discussing each civilisation in turn, we'll discuss these large features that they all seem to have shared.
As Robert Wright puts it, if we relax our vision and let the details go fuzzy, then a larger picture comes into focus.
As the centuries fly by, civilisations may come and go, but civilisation flourishes, growing in scope and complexity.
Now let me take a little time out to be clear about some definitions and labels.
Though labels for eras and types of societies are inevitably artificial, we need them.
Because to understand the past and particularly to see the large patterns that we look for in big history, we have to break the past into manageable chunks.
Now remember that we're using two linked labels for the epoch from 3000 BCE to about 1000 CE.
Essentially they're synonyms. One is the later agrarian era and the other is the era of agrarian civilisations.
If I use one of these labels, I'm implying the other. They mean the same thing.
The later agrarian era, or era of agrarian civilisations, was dominated. It was the era dominated by agrarian civilisations.
And agrarian civilisations we've seen are large networked regions with cities.
It's the word cities, incidentally, that explains the word civilisations.
Civilisations is related to the Latin word for citizen and tribute taking states.
And all of this is sustained by the labour of millions of peasants or small farmers.
Now there's a second piece of terminology we need to clarify, although we've used it already, and that's the idea of world zones.
Before the modern era, human history played out in four separate world zones.
These had virtually no contact with each other, though within the zones there was at least some degree of contact right across them.
So it was as if human history took place on four separate planets.
Now this we've seen is a direct result of the fact that geologically speaking, we live in an era of the planet's history when the continental plates are scattered.
Scattered over the surface of the earth. So that's what generates this parallel history in different world zones.
And it's the parallels between the different histories of different world zones that raise some of the deepest questions about the driving forces of human history.
Now let me just briefly summarise some of the main features of each of these zones.
The zones incidentally existed of course in the Paleolithic era, but they become really, really significant and helpful as a conceptual device in the agrarian era and particularly in understanding the later agrarian era.
So let's look at them. First, the Afro-Eurasian zone, the zone that includes Africa and Eurasia, these two huge land masses.
The Afro-Eurasian world zone includes not only Africa and Eurasia but also offshore islands such as Britain and Japan.
It was the most ancient of the world zones because this is where humans evolved in Africa.
It was also the largest and the most varied of the world zones. It reaches from the tropics to the Arctic and it reaches almost around at least a third of the world.
And this may explain, this combination of age, diversity and size may explain its dominant role in world history.
This we've seen is where agriculture first appeared as well as the earliest agrarian civilisations.
So in some sense the pace of history is also speeded up, at least in some parts of this world zone.
The Americas are the second world zone. Since the two American continents touched each other a few million years ago, this has counted as one world zone in a slightly different geological environment they might have counted as two.
So the American world zone, North American, South America, was the second largest, though it was settled quite late, probably within the last 13,000 to 15,000 years, although it's conceivable as we've seen, that some settlement was earlier.
This was the second world zone in which agrarian civilisations appeared quite independently, though they appeared as we've seen significantly later than in Afro-Eurasia.
The third world zone I've called Australasia. The Australation world zone includes modern Australia and Papua New Guinea, as well as offshore islands such as Tasmania.
And one justification for linking those three areas is that as we saw during the last Ice Age, they were indeed a single land mass when world sea levels were lower than they are today.
Now this was the second of the world zones to be occupied by humans. Humans arrived here probably as early as about 50,000 years ago.
But in this world zone, the striking and interesting thing is that though agriculture did appear in Papua New Guinea, it was based there on root crops which could not be stored easily and did not therefore provide the foundation for a flourishing agrarian civilisation.
And in the main part of this zone, in the Australian continent, agriculture itself did not appear, so here no agrarian civilisations emerged.
That's the third world zone, the Australation zone.
The fourth often gets omitted in surveys of this era. It's the Pacific zone.
It was settled within the last 4,000 years by seafaring communities from Southeast Asia who brought the elements of agriculture with them.
So here in this zone, some elements of agrarian civilisation or probably we should say sort of embryonic signs of agrarian civilisation did appear.
They appeared on some of the larger islands such as Hawaii.
But in general, the islands of the Pacific were too small to support communities large enough to count as major agrarian civilisations.
So in summary, we can say that agrarian civilisations appeared in only two of our world zones, the Afro-Eurasian and American zones.
Though humans had appeared in all four zones and in some sense agriculture had appeared in all four zones.
Now before we return to agrarian civilisations, we need to remember one more thing about them and that is that they never included all human societies.
Do you remember the bar scenes in Star Wars?
Here you find odd, somewhat dangerous looking people who are clearly from the edges, from the margins. They are barbarians.
All agrarian regions, all agrarian civilisations were surrounded by regions that their elites tended to look down upon and regard as barbarians.
For the Greeks, incidentally, the word barbarian may have been a way of conveying the sort of stammering noise that they heard when listening to foreigners.
So not everyone lived within agrarian civilisations, even in the era of agrarian civilisations.
What other types of communities were there?
Well, getting a clear list of this will help because it will help us get a sense of the major types of human communities that coexisted in this era.
This area we'll see is one of the most varied eras in human history.
Okay, one of the major groups that continued to exist on the borders, usually on the borders or sometimes well beyond the borders of agrarian civilisations were communities of independent farmers.
Many people continued to live in small farming communities with rudimentary political structures.
Now, these are survivals, if you like, of the villages of the early agrarian era.
So these communities represent the survival of the world of the early agrarian era.
Much of northern Europe, incidentally, consisted of communities like this in the time of the Roman Empire.
This was the barbarian frontier that the Romans fought in northern Europe.
Now, second type of community are pastoral nomads.
In arid regions of inner Asia, parts of North Africa and parts of East Africa and in the Middle East, there were communities of pastoral nomads.
Some of them, like the Mongols in the 13th century, would pose very serious threats to neighbouring agrarian civilisations.
And the reason for this is that the life way of pastoral nomads inculcated military skills, the capacity to move through the landscapes,
the ability to hunt, the ability to manage large animals, endurance, so that pastoral nomads were ferocious and dangerous enemies.
You could simply mobilise most of the men and you've got an army.
I've done a fair bit of reading about pastoral nomads and they absolutely fascinate me and I wish I could justify devoting more time to them in this course.
But the only thing I'll say is that these pastoral nomadic communities, particularly the ones in inner Asia,
would form very, very powerful rivals to greater agrarian civilisations.
On the North Chinese border, for example, conflict with pastoral nomads was probably the dominant issue in foreign policy for some 2,000 years.
So pastoral nomads are immensely interesting and immensely important, but reluctantly I'm going to have to move on.
The third major type of human community that we need to remember about throughout the era of agrarian civilisations is foraging communities.
That is to say, communities that lived with the sort of technologies that we saw in the Paleolithic era.
In some regions, such as Australia, everyone continued to live in foraging communities.
Foraging remained the dominant technology, the dominant life way in Australia until modern times.
And foraging communities could be found in Australia and many other parts of the world, indeed right into the 20th century.
So when we talk about agrarian civilisations, we must never forget that there are also these other communities and though they were less numerous than the populations of agrarian civilisations, they occupied very large areas of the world.
So now the typology of different types of human communities that we're slowly building up has four main members.
Kin based foraging communities typical of the Paleolithic, the communities of farmers living in villages or very small towns that was typical of the early agrarian era.
Third, the pastoral nomadic communities of the steppes and of arid zones.
And finally, the large complex communities of agrarian civilisations.
This typology gives us a good idea of the range of different types of community that our species could live in.
And it's striking to contrast this range, by the way, with the much more limited range we find in our close relatives, the Great Apes.
This is one more reminder of the astonishing variety of ways in which our species has lived in the course of its history.
Now, now let's turn finally to agrarian civilisations.
And I want to summarise some of the crucial structural similarities between them.
Wherever they appeared, whether there was contact between them or not, agrarian civilisations showed some similar features.
The first is size.
Agrarian civilisations are very large communities compared to all earlier human communities.
They were huge and complex, with hundreds of thousands or millions of inhabitants linked by religion, trade, economics and politics.
So the appearance of agrarian civilisations marks a sort of quantum leap in the size and interconnectedness of human communities.
That's the first feature, size.
Secondly, what supported them? What sustained them?
They were supported by the surplus labour and produce above all of peasants, of peasant farmers who made up most of the population.
Now, peasant life was tough in agrarian civilisations.
And to illustrate this, I want to use some wonderful vivid passages from an Egyptian document written about 3,200 years ago at the end of the 2nd millennium BCE.
