Chimps have to do it more or less alone.
Now if you doubt this for a moment, just ask how much of the knowledge in your brain
or the information embedded in the objects you use around you, such as your watch or your computer,
could have been generated by you alone in a single lifetime.
Collective learning therefore explains why only humans have a history of constant change.
Constant change comes from this slow build-up of information.
Indeed, I'll argue that human history is all about the many changes made possible by our capacity for collective learning.
Collective learning explains why we've got better and better at extracting energy and resources from the environment
and it explains why collectively we have become one of the most complex entities in the universe.
Now let me summarize. This lecture has tried to describe the nature of the threshold that was crossed
when our species first appeared between 200 and 300,000 years ago.
It's tried to explain what it is that makes us different.
And I've argued that what makes us different is the fact that because of our ability to communicate through symbolic language,
we have access to a new and much more rapid and powerful adaptive mechanism
than any other organism or any other species in the history of life on Earth.
That explains why unlike all other species, we keep finding new ways of extracting energy and resources from our environment
and it's that slow build-up of knowledge that will explain why eventually human societies start becoming more and more complex
and it's that that explains why human history is really very different from the history of other species
and that I'll argue is why human history is so fascinating. Thank you.
Lecture 21, Homo sapiens, the first humans.
The last lecture was more theoretical than chronological. In it, I tried to tackle, I began to tackle
what is for a human being like you and me, one of the most fundamental questions we can ask
and that is, what is it that makes us as human beings different?
What is distinctive about being a human being?
In the last lecture, I tried to define a threshold that was crossed with the appearance of the first human beings.
Let me remind you briefly about the definition I offered of that threshold.
By arguing that humans have a quite exceptional capacity to adapt and by adaptation, remember,
I'm referring to something that all living things do and I mean the ability to keep changing slightly
so as to find new ways of extracting the energy and resources they need from their environment,
their environment in order to survive.
And I argued that human beings adapt much more rapidly and more continuously than any other organism on Earth.
We have this astonishing ability to adapt.
Now, as adaptation means, amongst other things, finding new ways of getting energy from the environment,
that explains why in the course of human history beginning very, very slowly at first and then faster and faster,
we have learned to control more and more of the energy and resources of our biosphere
until now we are controlling what is, for a single species, a quite extraordinary share of those resources.
So then we ask the question, why are we so good at adaptation?
What is it about us that explains why we seem to be able to adapt faster, more continuously than any other organism on Earth?
And in the last lecture, I suggested that our astonishing ecological creativity
arises essentially from our capacity for symbolic language.
That is to say, we have a system of communication that is vastly more powerful than that of any other organism we know
and that makes it possible for us to share learned information unlike any other species.
So the result is that humans can share not just genes, but also learned information, the things that each individual learns.
And as a result of this, the learning of each individual can in principle be stored within the collective memory of the community as a whole.
And that means that that information can slowly accumulate and be made available to other members of the community
and also to later generations who can, in their turn, add to it.
And that is why information, knowledge, culture, if you like, is cumulative for our species and it's not for any other species.
Now we move on to the main question of this lecture.
If this argument that I described in the last lecture is correct, how can we tell when the first real humans appeared?
What evidence should we look for to show the presence of symbolic language and a new level of ecological and technological creativity?
We've defined the threshold, how can we identify it in the record?
What evidence might indicate that this crucial threshold has been crossed?
Or to put it slightly differently, when did their first appear creatures that are, for most purposes, just about identical to you and me?
Now unfortunately this is one of those areas where the evidence is thin.
It's so sparse and ambiguous that we have no perfectly clear-cut answers.
Instead we'll see there are several conflicting theories about the evolution of Homo sapiens.
So it's peculiarly vital in this case, given the importance of the question to look carefully at the available evidence.
So what evidence should we look for? Let's be precise about what we're looking for.
I think we can imagine two main types of archaeological evidence that might provide an indication that the threshold I described to collective learning has been crossed.
The first is evidence for symbolic language, and the second will be evidence of an accelerated capacity to adapt and learn.
So let's focus first on symbolic language.
How could we tell if an organism appeared, say in the last, sometime in the last million years, that had a capacity for symbolic language?
Language leaves no direct archaeological traces. However, it may leave indirect traces.
For example, studies of the base of the skull can show how the larynx was placed in a particular species of hominine,
and that can suggest how well a species could manipulate sounds.
So if we assume that symbolic language is associated with a capacity to manipulate sounds in a rich and precise way, that may be suggestive.
And a second clue to symbolic language may be the appearance of what in retrospect we can call art objects.
Evidence of sculpture or cave painting or body painting.
If we have a hominine species that seems to be constructing art objects in some sense, we have to suspect that that species is capable of symbolism.
And if it's capable of symbolic thinking, it's capable of symbolic thought and language.
So those two types of evidence might hint at the presence of symbolic language.
The second type of evidence we look for is evidence of accelerated adaptation.
A species that suddenly is changing its relationship to the environment extraordinarily fast.
Now what form might this evidence take?
Well, it ought to take the form of evidence of a sort of technological acceleration, but it might also take the form of increased geographical range.
As we see a species moving into different types of environments, because we know that each environment may require slightly different technologies.
So if we see a species migrating into different types of environments, it's a very good bet that that species is showing a considerable degree of technological adaptability.
So we have some general ideas now about the types of evidence we're looking for.
Evidence of accelerating technological changes is, I'm afraid to say, as scarce as evidence of symbolic language, particularly from Africa, where our species probably evolved.
But we'll see later on that there are at least forms of evidence that are highly suggestive.
Now, with these questions in mind, let's go looking for possible signs of the appearance of a species capable of collective learning.
The first species, let me remind you, in the history of life on Earth.
We've seen that fossil evidence for most of the last million years is dominated by two other hominine species, Homo ergaster and Homo neandertales.
Now, let's begin by looking at them. Could they speak? Will they capable of symbolic language? Could they adapt with the virtuosity of modern humans?
In other words, should we regard the appearance of Homo ergaster or neandertales as the point at which the crucial threshold was crossed?
Let's start with ergaster.
As we saw in lecture 18, ergaster evolved almost two million years ago.
We know that some members of ergaster migrated to Indonesia and China. They left Africa, migrated along the southern shores of Afro-Eurasia to Indonesia and China.
They probably used fire. They certainly used Ashulian stone tools, which were, as we've seen, more precisely constructed than the Aldoven tools of Homo habilis.
Now, what does this tell us? Well, this is certainly evidence of technological creativity. But is it evidence of exceptional creativity?
The sort of exceptional creativity we're really looking for.
Other species, including other apes, such as orangutans, but also other species of mammals, such as tigers and elephants, had also migrated from Africa to Asia.
So perhaps we shouldn't be too impressed by this. In southern parts of Eurasia, they found landscapes and environments not too dissimilar to those of Africa.
So this is not a proof of extraordinary adaptability.
Evidence on how efficiently ergaster-controlled fire remains limited.
If you find evidence of fire in caves, and we do find this evidence, in caves outside Beijing, in Zhegodian, and if the caves also contain ergaster remains, what exactly does it mean?
Now, one possibility is that there's no real link between the two. They weren't there at the same time.
But it could mean that ergaster occasionally maintained fires. It could even mean that they had significant control over fire.
They knew how to start fires from scratch. They knew how to maintain it carefully. But the truth is, we don't really know.
And as we've seen, the stone tools of ergaster barely change over one million years.
That certainly does not suggest a species that is continually adapting and developing new technologies.
Now let's look at Homo Neanderthalis. Can we find any evidence in the literature on Homo Neanderthalis that this threshold has been crossed?
Neanderthals are fascinating, precisely because they seem so close to the threshold that creates modern humans.
They lived in Ice Age Europe and Russia. In fact, there's very good reason to think that they were genetically adapted to cold climates.
Neanderthal remains show that they were as tall as us, and they had brains as large as ours.
Indeed, possibly slightly larger than ours.
They also manufactured new and more precisely made stone tools that are known to paleontologists as musterian tools.
These are often very small. They appear in a wider range than the Aschulian tools manufactured by ergaster.
Neanderthals probably used fire. They lived in very cold environments, so it's hard to believe that they couldn't make use of fire.
And we also know that they could hunt, and they could hunt large Ice Age mammals such as mammoth and woolly bison.
Now, think for a moment of what that means.
Bows and arrows haven't been invented yet. Guns certainly haven't been invented yet.
So what you're doing is you're trying to bring down a colossal animal, an animal bigger than most elephants today.
And you're trying to do it probably with a spear that has a point that's been hardened in fire.
So you're going to be trying to rush in close to this mammoth and stab it.
This, frankly, is very dangerous work, and quite a few Neanderthal remains have signs of serious wounds to prove it.
So Neanderthals are very clever. They did adapt to a difficult environment, the environment of Ice Age Russia, Ice Age Europe.
Yet, even Neanderthal technologies don't quite show the sort of variation and creativity that we're really looking for.
They don't vary that much over 200 to 300,000 years.
And besides, there's no firm proof that the Neanderthals had symbolic language.
Indeed, studies of Neanderthal skulls suggest that their larynx would not have allowed them to speak like us.
However, I should add that serious claims have been made that Neanderthals did have a capacity to think symbolically.
The most powerful of these are claims that Neanderthals bury the dead.
Now, if they bury the dead, then that means they're thinking in terms that we can hardly avoid describing as sort of religious.
That really would seem to imply symbolic activity, though these claims have been disputed.
For example, there's a famous burial of a Neanderthal child in Teshiktash Cave in modern Uzbekistan,
and around the child, laid out in what seems to be a systematic pattern of the horns of mountain goats.
But again, this could be disputed. We're not absolutely sure that they're laid out there deliberately.
In Iraq, in Shenedar Cave, the 50,000-year-old remains of a Neanderthal have been excavated that are surrounded by flower pollen,
and it's been suggested that what happened was that the Neanderthal was buried and flowers were strewn around its grave.
It's a very beautiful picture of what may have happened. It's very attractive and it's very tempting to accept it.
Unfortunately, archaeologists can be real spoilers, and it's also been suggested that the flower pollen may have simply blown into the cave,
creating the impression of a formal burial.
So it has to be said that at the moment, we have no firm evidence for symbolic activity amongst Neanderthals,
though there are enough hints of this that I have to say that the jury is still waiting on this one.
We could find our ideas of Neanderthals are revised in the near future.
But in the meantime, I think we have to argue that Neanderthals don't quite cross this divide.
There's one more reason for saying this, and that is that recent analyses of DNA extracted from Neanderthal skeletons,
and this I have to say is an extremely delicate art.
But the scholars involved in this project are getting better and better and better at this.
Recent analyses of DNA extracted from Neanderthal skeletons suggest something very, very clear indeed.
It suggests that Neanderthal and human lines split more than 500,000 years ago, maybe 600,000 or 700,000 years ago.
And what that suggests is that we really are talking about different species.
We're not talking about minor variations on the same species,
and that evidence also seems to rule out any possibility that humans and Neanderthals interbred.
So, here we are.
Though tantalizingly close to us,
neither Ergaster nor Neanderthals display quite the technological creativity that is the birthmark of our species,
nor apparently the ability to communicate with the fluency, precision and speed of modern humans.
Both species disappeared about 20,000 to 30,000 years ago,
probably under pressure from our species.
We don't know whether there was any direct contact between the species.
It may just be that modern humans hunted more successfully, invaded their territory,
and they found that the resources available, given their technologies and their ways of extracting resources, diminished.
If so, that would confirm my argument.
It suggests that they couldn't quite adapt to the threat posed by our species.
There are tantalizing, and I have to say, I think, rather melancholy hints
among some of the latest finds of Neanderthal sites near the Pyrenees
that late Neanderthals were trying to imitate human technologies, but apparently without much success.
So now let's focus on our species, Homo sapiens in a narrower sense.
How did we evolve?
Currently, there are two competing explanations for the origins of Homo sapiens.
The first is the multi-regional hypothesis, and the second is the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
So let me begin with the multi-regional hypothesis, as it's called.
This has been defended for many years by an American scholar, Milford Volpoff,
and an Australian scholar, Alan Thorne.
And what they argue is that our species evolved gradually throughout Africa and Eurasia from Homo ergaster.
The story is that most hominines throughout most of the last million years
belong to a single evolving species with regional variants that show up today in racial differences.
So what they're imagining is that all these hominines, most of whom can be classified as ergaster
or Neanderthals for most of the last million years, are really part of a single evolving species
evolving slowly in the direction of modern humans over a million years.
The trouble is that evolution normally seems to start at a single point and spread.
The idea of sort of parallel evolution over this huge landmass strikes most anthropologists as implausible.
What you have to argue is that humans or proto-humans over this whole period
count as a single species because they're interbreeding, but this is a vast area.
And we'd have to assume quite a lot of contact to assume it's really a single species.
And this is why most paleontologists no longer accept the multi-regional hypothesis.
At the moment, it's distinctly a minority position.
Currently, most paleontologists prefer what's known as the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
Now, according to this, our species evolved quite rapidly,
not gradually, but quite rapidly, somewhere in South or East Africa within the last 250,000 years.
This theory builds on recent developments in evolutionary thought and dating techniques.
Now, I've mentioned Stephen Jay Gould before.
He and his colleague, Niles Eldridge, developed the theory of punctuated equilibrium,
which argues that evolution can sometimes be very, very fast indeed.
Sometimes it can happen extraordinarily fast, and sometimes it's very, very slow indeed.
There are periods of stasis and periods of rapid change.
So that sometimes new species may evolve within thousands rather than millions of years.
Do you remember the blue moon butterfly of Samoa, which has developed a genetic defense
against a dangerous parasite in just six years?
Well, that's the sort of evidence for the idea that evolution can sometimes be very fast.
One of the mechanisms for rapid evolution is what's known as allopatric speciation.
Now, imagine a species, and it's spread out over a considerable area.
Now, let's look at some of the individuals at the edge of the species range.
Let's say a small group of 10, 20, or 30 individuals.
What sometimes happens is a small group can get cut off from the rest of the population.
It could be a volcano, an earthquake, a flood, or something like that.
When that happens, these small groups can often diverge quite rapidly from the parent population.
Partly, this is because variations can spread very rapidly in small populations.
If you have an advantageous mutation, it simply doesn't have as much spreading to do
until it dominates the small population.
Secondly, such species may already be statistically atypical, simply through random variation.
So allopatric speciation can give you quite rapid change at the edge of the range of a species.
It may explain, for example, the rapid species formation that Darwin observed on the Galapagos Islands,
and it may also explain the sudden appearance of our species.
Modern genetic dating techniques also show that modern humans are extremely closely related.
The so little variation within our species, within the 6 billion humans alive today,
that it's hard to believe our species can have been evolving from a small group of ancestors
for more than about 200,000 to 300,000 years.
This is one of the most powerful reasons for thinking that we're a quite recently evolved species.
Indeed, genetic variations between neighboring groups of chimps or gorillas in the wild
appear to be greater than the variety you can detect in the 6 billion humans alive today.
So limited genetic variety points certainly to a relatively recent speciation event
because it means we've not been around for long enough to develop a huge amount of genetic variety.
Even if in that time we have developed an enormous amount of cultural variety.
Now, one more point under this heading.
The greatest variation between individuals appears within Africa.
In other words, most of the variation you find within our species appears within Africa,
and that too is extremely suggestive.
What it suggests is that our species is fundamentally an African species.
And that's where we've lived for most of our time on Earth,
so that is where the greatest genetic variation has accumulated.
Finally, a final piece of evidence for the out-of-Africa hypothesis
is that the earliest fossil evidence of anatomically modern humans,
that is to say that the first skulls and skeletal remains that paleontologists
broadly accept as representing our species come from Africa,
whose remains are about 160,000 years old.
Okay, there are two accounts of the appearance of our species.
The multi-regional hypothesis, which I've argued is now a minority position,
and the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
There's one more wrinkle to this.
There's another possible interpretation of the out-of-Africa hypothesis,
and it goes like this.
Perhaps we did indeed evolve in Africa,
but modern human behaviors.
In other words, the behaviors that make us different evolved much more recently.
Let's look at this argument because it's reasonably widely held.
Archaeological evidence seems to show that in Europe and Russia,
