They settled down, we saw.
They were foragers, but they settled down.
And once they settled down, their populations began to grow fast.
We can see this in the rapid spread of natufian villages in the fertile crescent.
Why would their populations grow?
Well, this was probably because once you're settled down
and you have this abundant resource, this wheat and these gazelles around you,
and you don't need to carry the old or the very young,
there's less need to limit population size.
So once you're sedentary, perhaps population's going to start growing more rapidly.
Okay, so that's the fourth factor.
Sedentism may lead to rapid population growth,
which may force them to start looking for new ways of getting food.
But why would they settle down?
Now, that takes us to the fifth part of this argument, the fifth step.
And here, we introduce the one factor that we know affected the entire world
and is therefore the best possible explanation for the simultaneity of this.
And that's climate change.
The last Ice Age reached its colder stage about 20,000 years ago.
And after that, climates began to get warmer, particularly after about 14,000 years ago.
By 11,500 years ago, after a brief cold snap, they had reached temperatures similar to those of today.
And during the interglacial of the last 10 to 11,000 years,
climates have generally been warmer, wetter and more stable than those of the Ice Ages.
This fact affected the whole world.
But how could this have triggered more sedentism and more population growth?
Well, here's the possible argument.
One way of dealing with this is associated with the work of two Californian scholars,
Peter Richardson and Robert Boyd.
Now, what they argue is actually the simplest argument of all.
It is that during the Ice Age, climate change was so erratic
that sustained agriculture was simply impossible.
You couldn't do it during the Ice Age.
So their argument is, well, once you get stable, warmer climates,
foragers knew how to do agriculture.
It was simply impossible before, so it's no surprise they start doing it.
So their argument implies that perhaps climate change is virtually the single key factor in the origins of agriculture.
As soon as agriculture became possible, humans started doing it.
Any argument as we've seen for which climate change is crucial is attractive,
because climate change is a global phenomenon.
But this argument on its own isn't quite going to work,
particularly if we're not persuaded that foragers are going to like the idea of farming.
So here's another approach.
Gardens of Eden and the Trap of Sedentism.
Warmer, wetter climates undoubtedly led to regions where certainly plant growth,
but also animal populations were more abundant than they'd been during the Ice Ages.
So this may have meant there appeared sort of pockets,
which archaeologists describe as gardens of Eden, areas of great abundance.
And modern studies of foragers suggest that when they find such regions,
foragers will often become more sedentary.
And foragers who become sedentary are often described as affluent foragers.
They're found in environments of exceptional ecological abundance.
The classic example here is the northwest coast of the USA,
where many foragers settle down relying on the abundance of resources such as salmon.
So this may explain why groups like the Natufians began to settle down,
but this can be a trap, and I'll call this the Trap of Sedentism.
Once you're sedentary, populations start growing.
And this is going to mean that within just a few generations,
you're going to find that what seemed an environment of abundance is now an environment of scarcity.
You have to increase food production in order to feed everyone.
So sedentary foraging communities who've now lost probably many of their traditions as foragers
find they're going to have to increase production.
There's probably not spare land around them.
They're going to have to tend their crops more carefully, water them, weed around them.
In short, they're going to have to become farmers.
Now in this rather roundabout way, pressure, population pressure,
may have played as powerful a role in the appearance of agriculture
as it did in the appearance of the first stars.
Now arguments like these work well in the fertile crescent.
Natufians almost certainly had a good understanding of natural plants.
They lived in a region with many promising domesticates.
We know that as they became sedentary, populations grew rapidly.
We know that warming climates may have encouraged them to become more sedentary.
And finally, we know that farming villages appeared quite rapidly
after a period of cooler climates which put a lot of stress on local populations from about 11,000 years ago.
So the argument works well in Mesopotamia, in the fertile crescent.
Elsewhere, the mix of elements may be slightly different.
But by and large, you should expect to find most of these factors wherever we find early agriculture.
In Mesoamerica, nomadic foragers may have cultivated crops of maize before they became fully sedentary.
But with these slightly, slight differences, the story may hold up in most parts of the world.
Thank you.
Let's begin with periodization, how we're going to slice up human history.
I've already introduced the fundamental periodization of human history we're going to use in this course.
We've seen it includes three main eras.
The first is the Paleolithic era, which we saw lasted at least 200,000 years
and possibly as much as 300,000 years.
The second is the Agrarian era.
It lasted about 10,000 years.
And the third is the Modern era, which will last just a few years.
Of course, we haven't reached the end of it yet.
Now I need to clarify an important subordinate periodization.
Within the 10,000 years or so of the Agrarian era.
I'm going to divide the Agrarian era into two main sub-periods.
The first is called the Early Agrarian era and the second is called the Later Agrarian era.
Obvious titles and I hope very clear.
In this lecture, I'm going to focus on the first of these sub-periods,
the Early Agrarian era.
The Early Agrarian era is that part of the Agrarian era
before the appearance of states and Agrarian civilizations.
That's probably the simplest way of defining it.
The remarkable thing about this era is that it seems to have largely vanished
from many accounts of world history,
even though it lasted for at least, as we'll see, 5,000 years.
Now that is as long as the time between the appearance of the first Agrarian civilizations and today.
So it's a very long and important period of time.
One of the advantages of the wide-angle lens that we use in big history
is that though sometimes you may get the sense that we lose the details, the specifics,
what it can do is often see some rather large phenomena that can be easily overlooked
with the small-angle lens and one of these is the Early Agrarian era.
Frankly, how can you lose 5,000 years of human history?
I think I know some of the answers.
One reason may be that historians are sometimes too keen to move from the introduction of agriculture
to the great Agrarian civilizations that this new technology eventually made possible.
Another reason may be that only with the appearance of Agrarian civilizations
about 5,000 years ago do you start getting writing
and with writing you get written evidence.
And of course historians are trained to use written evidence.
So this may be why historians find it very tempting to just skim over the earlier Agrarian era
on the assumption, presumably, that not much happened.
I'm going to try and demonstrate the opposite.
So we're going to stay a bit longer in the territory of archaeologists and anthropologists
and by doing so I hope we can rediscover this lost 5,000-year era.
So the last lecture discussed the origins of agriculture
and I tried to offer a possible explanation for the independent appearance of agriculture
in several different parts of the world.
Now what we're doing is looking at the world in the period after the initial appearance of agriculture
and we're asking what were Early Agrarian societies like?
Okay, now let's be very clear about definitions.
I'm going to define the Early Agrarian era as the period beginning with the appearance of agriculture
and ending with the appearance of cities and states.
So let's try and get the chronology clear.
Globally, if we think of this on a global scale,
the Early Agrarian era lasted for 5,000 to 6,000 years.
That's from the very first appearance of agriculture anywhere in the world
to the very first appearance of agrarian civilizations of cities and states somewhere in the world.
But locally, regionally, its duration varies and we need to be clear about this.
For example, the Early Agrarian era never began in Australia.
Agriculture entered Australia only in the last two or three centuries
with the arrival of immigrants from Europe,
both people as Aboriginal Australians refer to them today.
But it did begin, the Early Agrarian era did begin in neighbouring Papua New Guinea.
It began early and in fact it lasted to the present day.
So whereas in Australia there was no Early Agrarian era in Papua New Guinea,
just next door the Early Agrarian era lasted probably longer than anywhere else
except perhaps for the Amazon Basin.
We'll see that this sort of difficulty in trying to generalise about the world as a whole
is going to become more and more evident during the Agrarian era.
And the reason for this is, once again, it's the dynamism of agriculture.
As agriculture appeared in different parts of the world, the pace of change accelerated
and you find change occurring in different ways and at different rates in different parts of the world.
And that's going to force us now to be much more careful about making generalisations about the whole world
and we're going to have to make them about particular regions.
OK, we've seen that historians often neglect this era.
I'd like to argue in this lecture that this is a mistake.
It's not just that the Early Agrarian era embraces such a large period,
it's also that it lays the foundations for the eventual appearance of Agrarian civilisations.
In fact, if you don't understand the Early Agrarian era,
it's really hard to understand what Early Agrarian civilisations came out of and how they appeared.
So let's talk about some general features of this era.
During this era, probably the most general statement we can make is this.
During this era, the largest and most powerful human communities were villages or small towns.
Now, I stress this because we don't normally think of villages as power centres.
So we have to make a bit of an imaginative effort to remind ourselves that for some 5,000 years of human history,
villages were the most exciting, the most dynamic, the densest human communities that existed.
We'll see also that a lot of change occurred during the Early Agrarian era.
A lot of important things happened.
It was not any more than the Paleolithic, a blank spot in human history,
a period in which nothing happened.
So let me try and describe some of the important things that happened during this era.
The most important large-scale change was undoubtedly the spread of agriculture
in the Afro-Eurasian and American world zones, the two largest world zones.
Note that in the previous lecture, I critiqued what I called diffusionist accounts
of the initial appearance of agriculture.
But diffusionist accounts for the spread of agriculture, we'll see, make lots and lots of sense.
Once it had appeared in six or seven different parts of the world, it begins to diffuse from those regions.
Here's a very, very rough chronology for this process of spreading from independent centres.
10,000 years ago, agriculture was confined to the fertile crescent,
and maybe, as we've seen, Papua New Guinea.
In Papua New Guinea, very early, we saw evidence of a form of agriculture based on root crops.
And in fact, we saw there may also have been a lot of agriculture practised along coastal regions
in the tropics that are now underwater and based on root crops.
Here, there may be a whole world of societies waiting to be discovered by archaeology
that at the moment we know very little about.
So, 10,000 years ago, certainly in the fertile crescent,
almost certainly some form of agriculture in Papua New Guinea, in the Australasian world zone.
Note, these are two completely separate world zones, no connection between them.
By 8,000 years ago, you can find evidence of agriculture in China, in Southeast Asia,
and also along the Nile, in Northwest Africa, in modern Egypt, and Sudan.
That's 8,000 years ago. 5,000 years ago, it could be found in West Africa.
And also now, you've got the beginnings, early signs of agriculture in the Americas,
in a third world zone, the Americas.
You find early signs of agriculture both in Mesoamerica, in southern Mexico,
and Central America, and also in the Andes.
Peru, Chile, Ecuador, parts of Bolivia.
And you find it in Central Asia and parts of Europe by 5,000 years ago.
Now, 5,000 years ago, remember, is an important threshold,
it's when agrarian civilizations first appear.
By then, that's 5,000 years after the first appearance of agriculture,
we can say, we can be very sure about this,
most human beings lived as small peasant farmers.
And that way of life, the life of a peasant farmer,
would dominate the history of the next 5,000 years.
So, just to be clear what an important change we're talking about here.
In an era that's, as I've said, often neglected,
in 5,000 years, in the 5,000 years of the early agrarian era,
what had been the technology of a tiny number of communities
in just two parts of the world,
had become the dominant technology of most of humanity.
So, that's a huge and important change.
This change revolutionized the life ways of most humans.
The life ways of the Paleolithic era,
the foraging life ways of the Paleolithic era,
with their small kinship communities persisted in many areas.
Indeed, they would survive in some areas well into the 20th century.
They ceased for the first time in human history
to be the normal life ways of our species.
They became instead the life ways of an increasingly small minority of humans
who increasingly squeezed out of the most fertile,
the most abundant regions of the earth.
So, it's this fact that justifies the claim
that the early agrarian era marks a profound revolution in human history
despite its near invisibility.
By its end, a majority of humans found themselves
within what I've described as the emerging hotspots created by agriculture.
Now, why did agriculture spread so rapidly?
We'll see here that agriculture did not necessarily spread
because it was attractive.
In fact, we've already looked at this argument before.
On the contrary, for many foragers,
settling down as farmers meant taking up a harder,
more monotonous, less varied, less interesting, and more precarious life.
So, why should they do it?
Why did so many people take up farming?
The best explanation is probably this.
Agriculture spread because it could generate more resources than foraging
and could therefore support larger populations.
Those who are already habituated to the agricultural life ways
simply reproduced more than foragers.
They had far more resources to support growing populations.
So, farming communities grew and multiplied
