This document consists of advice, advice to a young man about the types of careers to take up.
And the first piece of advice you'll see is, do not be a peasant.
It's a reminder that within agrarian civilisations, peasants didn't just feed themselves.
That alone was tough enough. But like domestic animals, they also had to support others.
And forcing peasants to support others could be a brutal process.
So, let's look at this document.
The document begins by describing the trials of being a peasant.
By day it goes. He cuts his farming tools. By night he twists rope.
Even his midday hour he spends on farm labour. In other words, being a peasant is endless. There's always something to be done. It goes on.
He equips himself to go to the field as if he were a warrior. The dried field lies before him.
He goes out to get his team, his team of draft animals.
When he has been after the herdsman for many days, he gets his team and comes back with it.
So, first he has to go and locate his team, which has got lost.
Then the document goes on to describe how the team of oxen may have drowned in a swamp.
He's lost his oxen, one of his most crucial capital assets.
So, he has to borrow a team from someone else.
He scatters seeds they're immediately eaten by snakes, according to this document.
And because his seeds are eaten, he has to borrow seed as well as a team of draft animals.
Now, finally, he gets in trouble with an official, the all-powerful scribe.
And at this point, we see how the state, the tribute-taking system, also causes headaches for the peasant.
So, here's how this section goes.
Now, the scribe lands on the shore.
He surveys the harvest.
Attendance are behind him with staffs, nubians with clubs.
One of them says to the peasant, give grain.
That conveys very nicely actually, the fundamentally arbitrary and brutal way in which tribute-taking states often demanded resources.
Give grain.
There is none, says the peasant.
The document continues.
He is beaten savagely.
He is bound, thrown in the well, submerged head down.
His wife is bound in his presence.
His children are in fetters.
His neighbors abandon them and flee.
When it's over, there's no grain.
Now, this is a vivid, literary and heightened account of the world of the peasantry.
But as someone who spent a fair bit of time studying the life of 19th century Russian peasants,
I have to say, I don't really think it's over-drawn.
The peasant in the era of agrarian civilizations really was tough.
Now, another general feature of agrarian civilizations is specialization and a division of labor.
This is a world in which, unlike the world of the early agrarian villages,
where most people lived roughly the same.
You get in agrarian civilizations a vast range of different specializations, different professions.
Minorities, particularly in towns and cities, supported themselves by exchanging specialist skills.
Now, the Egyptian document I've just used describes several of these professions.
So, let me quote it again.
And once again, this is, remember, is warning to a young man not to attempt these professions.
The potter, it goes on, is smeared with earth like a person one of whose folk has died.
His hands and feet are full of clay.
His like one who is in the mire.
Then it goes on to describe another profession, the sandal maker, someone who works with leather.
The sandal maker mixes tan.
His odor is conspicuous.
His hands are red with matter, like one who is smeared with his own blood.
There's a whole range of professions, a great diversity of professions.
Now, here's a fourth critical feature of agrarian civilizations,
and that's the existence of tribute-taking states.
At the core, these were the organizing centers of agrarian civilizations.
At their core, we find tribute-taking states.
I've defined why I use this term already.
States exacted resources in labor, goods, or cash.
Tributary rulers and their servants claimed that they had the right to exact resources.
They often claimed that that right was based on religious sanctions, that they had the blessing of the gods.
But they could always back out those claims with the threat of force, and we call such exactions tributes.
Their coercive power depended always on the existence of organized armies or the minimum retinues of some kind
that could defend against external attacks and could also suppress internal resistance,
or as in the case of the scribe we've just seen, could impose their will on resistant taxpayers.
Administrative tasks within tribute-taking states, such as the collection and storage of tributes
or the administration of justice and law, were handled by organized groups of literate officials.
Now the document we've been quoting portrays the life of a scribe, and now its author gets to the point,
because what the author is going to recommend to the young man it's being written for is be a scribe.
This is a much more attractive life than that of the tribute-paying classes,
because now you're entering the elite world of tribute-takers.
So here's the description of being a scribe.
You call to one and a thousand answer to you.
You stride freely upon the road and do not become like an ox to be handed over.
A tired in fine raiment with horses whilst your bark is on the nile,
you're provided with attendance moving freely and inspecting.
A villa has been built in your city and you hold a powerful office by the king's gift to you.
Male and female slaves are in your neighborhood,
and those who are in the fields in holdings of your own making will grasp your hand.
This gives you some feeling for being a lord in this world, a member of the elite classes.
Writing, of course, is crucial to the work of the scribe,
and writing in some form appears in all agrarian civilizations,
though in some cases, as in the case of the Inca, it assumed fairly rudimentary forms.
In most cases, it seems to have begun as a form of accounting or record keeping,
and then eventually turned acquired a literary form.
Tributary rulers in all tributary states built monumental architecture,
tombs, palaces and temples designed to show their majesty and power.
These were a sort of form of pre-modern propaganda.
They were designed to impress enemies and to impress their own subjects,
but they were also a demonstration of their power because it took a lot of organization to build these things.
And at lower levels, rulers depended on local nobles or officials
who duplicated their power on smaller scales, such as the scribe we've been describing.
Now, here's a fifth general feature of agrarian civilizations,
is the existence of hierarchies, and often quite rigid hierarchies.
It's tempting to think of the word caste when we describe them.
Hierarchies very often based on birth, but not exclusively.
There were steep hierarchies of wealth and power.
Class hierarchies ranked groups by their lineage and social status.
Aristocracies were distinguished by their lineage, power, lifestyle and wealth.
And this was a world that was acutely conscious of rank and status.
Members of ruling elites generally despised the peasants who generated most of society's wealth.
And again, you can pick that up from the passages I've just been reading.
They also tended to regard those outside agrarian civilizations as inferior or subhuman,
uncivilized in fact, as in the following document from an 18th century Qing dynasty emperor Yongzhen.
Emperor Yongzhen writes in 1730,
What makes humans different from animals are the principles of morality.
The five relationships are the basis of human morality.
If you defy one of them, you are not human.
The primary relationship of these is that of ruler and subject.
In other words, if you don't exist within an agrarian civilization, you're not really a human being.
How can we call people human if they have no rulers?
Those who want to get rid of rulers are just like animals.
Those who are given rulers by heaven's mandate but try to defy heaven, in other words, rebels,
cannot avoid being exterminated by heaven.
Now, this was his polite way, or not so polite, of saying that the pastoral nomads on China's northern frontier,
with whom he'd engaged in a major war, barely counted as humans because they lived out, they were beyond the pale outside of agrarian civilizations.
Another group that the elites of tribute-taking societies often despised were merchants.
Though merchants were sometimes very wealthy and powerful, they were often deeply despised by aristocrats.
Now, here's a document that illustrates this, and it again comes from China, but this time from China in the Han era, the 2nd century BCE.
And this writer clearly sees merchants as standing below peasants because they didn't seem to do anything very useful.
This was a conventional Confucian idea of the nature of social hierarchies.
Well-to-do merchants writes our source, Chao Zou.
Well-to-do merchants accumulate goods and redouble their profits, while the less well-to-do sit in their shops and sell.
They control the markets and daily enjoy their ease in the cities.
They take advantage of the pressing needs of the government to sell at twice the normal price.
Their sons do not plow or hoe, in other words, they don't do anything very productive or useful.
Their daughters do not raise silkworms or weave.
They have fancy clothing, and they stuff themselves on millet and meat.
This conveys quite well a sort of derisional scorn of merchants that is characteristic of tribute-taking elites.
Power hierarchies also shaped gender hierarchies, as most rulers were men.
Women rulers were generally regarded as exceptional, which is why, incidentally, the pharaoh Hatshepsut is often represented wearing a fake beard.
However, women often ruled indirectly through husbands, lovers or fathers.
We shouldn't think that women were absent from these power structures at all.
The Byzantine historian Anna Komnena, whose dates are 1083 to 1153, describes very vividly the immense power wielded by her mother.
And here is a description from her history that conveys well the power of her mother.
It was composed, her history of the reign of her father.
Alexis Komnena, incidentally, was composed in a monastery where she'd been exiled after an unsuccessful plot.
And she modeled her work on the great Greek historians.
She writes,
She was, argues Anna Komnena, one of the most expert politicians of the time.
And I think that account suggests that we should always look for powerful women in the background when we're thinking of tribute-taking states.
Though women formerly were subordinate, very often they were crucial in traditional power structures.
Okay, now let's summarize some of this.
In this lecture, I've tried to survey some of the general structural features of agrarian civilizations.
In the next lecture, we start looking at how agrarian civilizations evolved over the 4,000 years since their first appearance.
Thank you.
Expansion and State Power.
For the next group of lectures, it might help if we imagine ourselves in a sort of combination time machine and space machine orbiting the Earth somewhere
and looking down during the era of agrarian civilizations over 4,000 years.
And what we're going to be looking for is a sort of pattern of spread and rise and fall over those 4,000 years.
So that's what we're going to do.
We're going to accelerate the pace of history very much and we're going to look at it from outside the Earth.
Take the view from space.
The previous lecture described some general features of agrarian civilizations as if agrarian civilizations were static.
Now what we do is we start looking for long-term changes over 4,000 years.
What were the main changes in this era that was dominated by these huge, complex societies we've called agrarian civilizations?
Can we stand back from the details and focus on the major changes?
Can we see them as if from space?
That's the question we tackle in this and the next few lectures.
So we ask how did agrarian civilizations change during the 4,000 years of the later agrarian era?
In this and the next two lectures, I'm going to focus on the Afro-Eurasian world zone.
It's by far the largest, it's by far the oldest and by almost any criteria, it's the most influential of the four world zones.
And then after these three lectures, I'm going to look at the rest of the world and that will allow us to try to get a sense of how typical the experience of Afro-Eurasia was,
how great the variety was of historical trajectories in different parts of the world during this era.
And beneath this comparison of different world zones, there lurks this deeper question that we've touched on already.
Do civilizations or do human societies more generally change perhaps in somewhat similar ways?
Do they evolve in roughly similar directions? Or do they for the most part go their own ways?
This question has a bearing on the even deeper issue of whether or not there are long-term tendencies in human history that have shown up wherever conditions were somewhat similar.
And by now, you'll not be surprised to find that I will be arguing that there were indeed some striking similarities.
Human history is not just a story of random change so that every society can go entirely in its own direction.
There are these long-term steering factors that seem to have driven human history, even in very different regions, along roughly similar trajectories.
So we want to get a sense of both the similarities and the differences between different agrarian civilizations and different world zones in this period.
And we'll see that one of the reasons for some similarities is diffusion.
The fact that over time, agrarian civilizations in some regions began to touch on each other.
They began to exchange goods, ideas, and people, and eventually they began to affect each other.
So that's one of the reasons for the similarities.
But when we look across world zones, we'll be comparing regions which had virtually no contact at all with each other.
So that is the real test of the long-term similarities and the trajectories of history in different regions.
Okay, so what we're going to see is that there are indeed a lot of differences, but underneath them we're going to find some striking and I think deeply interesting similarities
that can tell us a lot about the nature of human history and indeed about the nature of being human.
Okay, now, on to Afro-Eurasia and the Afro-Eurasian World Zone.
What I want to do in this lecture is to describe two distinct ways in which agrarian civilizations in Afro-Eurasia expanded during almost 4,000 years.
So this is very much the view from our combination space and time capsule over 4,000 years, but we're focusing on Afro-Eurasia.
The first is expansion.
I want to look at the way agrarian civilization, this new type of human community, spread around Afro-Eurasia, how it occupied larger areas and occupied incorporated more and more people.
So the expansion of agrarian civilizations.
Secondly, I want to look at the increasing power and reach of tribute taking states.
States are at the core, the core of all agrarian civilizations and we'll see that over 4,000 years their power expands, their capacity to control resources, their capacity to control people.
As rulers became more skillful at their trade and more knowledgeable about how to rule.
That knowledge, political knowledge, if you like, accumulated over 4,000 years.
So there's an emerging political technology.
As knowledge and understanding of governments and the nature of power began to accumulate within the elite groups that ran tribute taking states, we'll see their reach increased and so did the power of these states.
So these states got larger and they seem to have got better at the task of organizing and ruling these large and complex societies.
So first expansion, I want to look at the way agrarian civilization as a type of community expanded in the Afro-Eurasian world zone over 4,000 years.
During this period, agrarian civilizations of some kind spread to incorporate most of the population of the Afro-Eurasian world zone.
We begin 5,000 years ago in 3,000 BCE.
5,000 years ago agrarian civilization existed in Sumer, in southern Mesopotamia and also in Egypt and that's it.
4,000 years ago, in about 2,000 BCE, we can add one or two new areas.
Agrarian civilizations, we can say, also seem to have existed in the north of the Indian subcontinent and along the Yellow River in northern China.
Now I need to qualify that of course by saying that there is no absolutely rigid marker of the appearance of agrarian civilization.
So once again, these are rough sketch map dates I'm giving.
Agrarian civilizations light up in the Harappan region along the Indus Valley in the north of the Indian subcontinent and in northern China along the Yellow River.
By 2,000 years ago, agrarian civilizations were also flourishing around the Mediterranean Basin.
This is the era of the Roman Empire remember.
In south China, the Chinese Han Empire is now dominating not only the north of China but also the south and also in parts of southeast Asia.
And then by 1,000 years ago, agrarian civilizations have spread to Africa, south of the Sahara and to both western and eastern Europe.
We can get a slightly better sense of what this really means if we try roughly speaking to measure the expansion of agrarian civilization.
And here we're talking not just about the states but the whole, the areas they controlled as well.
None of them had rigid borders.
So again, there's a fair amount of guesswork here.
But there's an Estonian scholar who has attempted to make these some very rough calculations about the area incorporated within agrarian civilizations over this 4,000 year period.
And this is the Estonian-American scholar, Ryan Targipera.
And here are some of his figures.
He estimates the area included within states in square megameters.
To get a sense of what we mean by a square megameter, a square megameter is probably roughly the size of modern Egypt.
So now we need to upload a sort of mental map of Egypt to get a feeling for what a megameter is.
These are very rough calculations, of course, like Eric Chason's calculations of energy flows.
But what we'll see is that they do help us to get a sense of a larger pattern, even if there's plenty of wriggle room on the details.
And here are the results of his calculations.
In 3,000 BCE, states controlled just 0.2 square megameters.
Now, Targipera calculates that this represents about 0.2% of the area of Afri-Eurasia controlled by modern states today.
And of course that essentially means the whole of Afri-Eurasia.
This is a tiny area.
Today, states control virtually the entire region.
So what these figures show, what this first set of figures show, is that when agrarian civilizations first appeared in Sumer and Egypt, they were quite remarkable.
They were exotic.
They were very rare.
They affected a tiny number of people initially.
The vast majority of people 5,000 years ago, and we need to remember this because agrarian civilizations are so exotic, they'll kind of, they'll tempt us to think about them and to forget everything else.
We need to remember that most people still lived in the types of village communities that had become the dominant type of human community during the early agrarian era.
In 1,000 BCE, we've now moved on 2,000 years, agrarian civilizations control almost 10 times that area, almost 2.5 square megameters.
But even that's only about 2% of the total area of Afri-Eurasia that's controlled by modern states.
Now, this is a very significant expansion, but it's still a reminder that most of Afri-Eurasia remained outside agrarian civilizations.
Then, 2,000 years ago, with the appearance of huge empires in Persia, China and the Mediterranean, agrarian civilizations covered about 8 square megameters.
This is about 6% of the area under modern states.
This is about 40 times the area controlled when states first appeared.
So this gives us a pretty good feeling for the expansion of agrarian civilizations, even if it also reminds us of how much Afri-Eurasia remained beyond their borders.
