So these places were seats of power.
And that's why I've argued they include some of the first tribute-taking states ever to appear.
There are also sites of specialization and a division of labor.
That specialization and a division of labor, these count as emergent properties of agrarian civilizations.
What I mean by this is that in the village communities of the early agrarian era,
basically everyone did the same thing, everyone more or less, with very minor exceptions, was a farmer.
And probably in the villages of Mesopotamia this continued to be true.
In cities it's no longer true. Many city dwellers are specialists.
They don't grow food, they're dependent on markets for essential supplies
and therefore they need to be in an environment where states can police and organize markets.
There's a document from Sumer from about 2500 BC called the Standard Professions List.
It mentions many different professions including, and I'll just list some of them,
soldiers, farmers, priests, gardeners, cooks, scribes, bakers, coppersmiths, jewelers,
even snake charmers, and even the profession of king.
Now markets were vital also because Sumer, as we've seen, lacked basic materials such as wood.
So rulers supported merchants who traded within what we'll call a world system.
This is a terminology we'll use more later on.
That is a large area of several interlinked agrarian civilizations
between which there was a lot of trade.
And this world system reached to Egypt, to North India, to Central Asia, and to Anatolia.
We can tell this because we find in the archaeology of all of these regions goods that come from Sumer.
Another emergent property, warfare, linked with power.
Cities needed defensive walls and irrigation systems.
These could be built and maintained only by powerful rulers who could organize huge labor levies.
Rulers controlled labor to some extent probably through slavery, fairly coercive forms of control, or corvée.
In other words, obligations imposed on free people to occasionally supply labor instead of resources as tributes.
Forced labor was important in all early agrarian civilizations for a very simple ecological reason.
In societies without modern energy supplies, human beings themselves are the most exploitable sources of energy, apart from domesticated cattle.
Humans were, from the point of view of rulers, living batteries.
That incidentally explains why throughout the era of agrarian civilizations, slavery was such a powerful institution.
If you keep slaves, you have supplies of living energy, and they also happened to be reasonably intelligent as well.
So, humans were stores of usable energy for warfare, excavation, building, ditch digging, and so on.
In several of the cities of Sumer, archaeologists have found mass-produced, very basic beveled rim bowls.
And these were interpreted as evidence that the government was providing rations for huge levies of workers or slaves.
Now, in these cities, another emergent property we can describe it as, we find more organized forms of religion very closely linked to institutionalized forms of power.
To maintain the favor of the gods, particularly if you want to maintain the favor of very powerful gods that can look after not just an individual person or household, but an entire city,
it was necessary to build and supply temples such as the Aeana temple at Uruk, which was dedicated to Inana.
Indeed, in many of these Sumerian cities, there are powerful hints that the first real rulers, late in the fourth millennium, may actually been priests of some kind.
It's certainly striking that the first very large buildings we find in them tend to be temples rather than palaces.
One more emergent property, bureaucracies. Tributes, hierarchies, writing and armies, actually these all sort of tend to go together.
Rulers ruled through literate bureaucracies, powerful taxation systems, and paid armies.
These are features that would reappear in all tribute-taking states. Tributes. Let's look at tributes first.
Just as farmers extracted what we can think of as ecological rents from their domesticated crops and animals, by which I mean that in return for protection, they take a part of each crop or each herd,
in return for helping the crop or herd to reproduce next year. In the same way, rulers of Sumerian city-states collected resources from their subjects.
And we call these tributes because, like modern taxes, they were raised at least in part through the threat of coercion.
And we find hierarchies and classes. New hierarchies emerge with the wealthy and powerful at the top, and slaves and war captives at the bottom.
Here is William McNeill's description of Sumer's class system. We've met William McNeill before.
He is one of the doyens of modern world history. And in a recent world history that he wrote with his son, John McNeill, he writes,
Sumerian cities comprised three distinct elements. A group of privileged citizens farmed irrigated land nearby and headed substantial households comprising relatives, a staff of dependent field workers, and a few imported slaves.
Outside the walls, on the riverbank, a harbour community accommodated merchants, caravan personnel, traders, and sailors who came and went, bringing necessary imports to the city like timber, metals, and other precious materials,
while exporting woolen textiles, date wine, and other manufacturers in exchange.
The most distinctive element of Sumerian cities, however, he writes, was the presence of one or more divine households or temples.
These households were much larger than private ones, but the distribution of duties and income among members conformed in essentials to the way tasks and rewards were arranged within private households.
And in a rule, he'd have been referring to the Aana Temple of Inana.
Another crucial emergent property is bureaucracies and writing, the writing on which they were founded.
How did writing emerge?
It seems to have emerged in, we'll see this in all agrarian civilizations, it seems to have emerged out of accounting.
So this is what seems to be the logic for the emergence of writing, and to explain, and this seems to be the explanation for the odd fact that writing appears with agrarian civilizations.
We've seen a sudden buildup of populations and a sudden buildup of resources.
So suddenly we have rulers who control large amounts of resources, large amounts of people, but also large warehouses full of stuff, full of grain, full of precious metals that are being traded, full of stored tributes of various kinds.
Now if they've got these large amounts of stuff, we can call them treasuries in a later terminology, they clearly needed some method of keeping track of this stuff.
If you have only a small amount of stuff, you don't need to keep track of it, but if you're really building up large amounts, you need to keep track of it.
So suddenly, rulers need accounting, and it's these accounting methods that eventually evolve into the first writing systems.
Now how it did so varied from civilization to civilization, but this is what happened in Sumer.
At first it seems accounts were kept using tokens that sort of represented objects.
Now this could be a bit cumbersome, you could actually have to accumulate a lot of these tokens to represent a lot of objects.
Then it became common to cut marks in clay using wedge shaped papyrus stalks to represent objects such as sheep or units of grain.
And very often you can do sort of little cartoon like drawings to do this.
Now that's accounting, and it's quite easy to see how you can develop quite a useful accounting system in this way.
But how do you move from accounting systems to a written language that can convey, say, the epic of Gilgamesh?
The crucial step here seems to be what's known as the Rebus principle.
Here's an illustration of how it worked.
The Sumerian symbol for an arrow, the cuneiform, cuneiform incidentally means wedge shaped.
If you look at cuneiform writing, you'll find that these sliced papyrus produce wedge shaped marks in clay.
So the Sumerian symbol for an arrow in cuneiform looked, of course, like an arrow.
This is easy enough to imagine.
But as it happened, the word for life, which is an abstract concept, which it's hard to know how you could represent it in cuneiform or in a diagram.
The word for life happened to sound almost exactly like the word for arrow, and the word sounded something like t.
Now what this meant was that the symbol for an arrow could be used for the more abstract idea of life.
And this seems to be the crucial move to take you from what begins as an accounting system to a written language that can be used as richly, or almost as richly as spoken language.
By early in the third millennium, such changes meant that writing could record chronicles and even poetry.
And because now, finally, for the first time in human history, we have poetry, I can't resist citing an example of an early Sumerian lullaby.
These sort of documents suddenly allow us to feel that we're really getting into the world and psyche of humans who lived many millennia ago.
Now, don't correct my Sumerian pronunciation. I'm just going to try and give you some feeling of how this goes.
Usan ghanu, usan ghanu, usan ghanu ki dumungashe, usakulu ki dumungashe, i bad badani ukunib.
Now that's just the first four lines. And it means something like this.
Come sleep, come sleep, come to my son, hurry sleep to my son, put to sleep his restless eyes.
I think it's wonderful the way that writing and documents can take us into a world in a way we've not been able to do before.
Okay, let's move on. More emergent properties. Armies.
With such huge resources, rulers could hire paid enforcers or armies.
This is the crucial step from power from below to power from above.
Much early Sumerian writing describes wars fought by well-organized armies and a wonderful Sumerian mosaic of 2600 BCE,
which is known as the Standard of Ur, depicts the army of Ur with its donkey-drawn chariots and large convoys of captive.
It's really worth looking at.
And another crucial emergent property is monumental architecture.
Huge buildings or structures that are designed to impress your enemies but also to impress your subjects.
They're one of the keys to statehood.
The royal tombs of Ur from the late fourth millennium show the spectacular riches that rulers could accumulate
and the extraordinary expense lavished on the creation of awe-inspiring tombs.
As in the royal burials of many agrarian civilizations, servants and relatives of the king were often killed and buried to serve the king in afterlife.
And from late in the third millennium BCE, the typical form of monumental architecture in Mesopotamia would become the ziggurat,
a stepped pyramid-like temple dedicated to the gods of which the best preserved today is that of Ur.
The Tower of Babel has often been interpreted as a reference to the ziggurat of Babylon, which was dedicated to the god Marduk,
and the Babylonian word Babili meant Gate of God.
Now, two more significant things occur about 1000 years after the appearance of the first states,
and I'll describe these just very briefly.
The first is the appearance late in the third millennium under a rule called Sargon of the first multi-city state,
the first imperial state in the region, and it's based on a city called Akkad in northern Sumeria.
We actually have busts of Sargon.
This is one of the first great rulers whose names we know.
And finally, there's another crucial development that would recur in many agrarian civilizations,
and I'll call this ecological overreach.
The cities of Sumeria frequently experience catastrophic floods,
and these are the basis of the stories of biblical floods, but there was an even greater danger.
In around 2000 BCE, there's a massive crash of populations in Sumer,
and eventually it destroys Sumerian civilization, and civilization will drift north in Mesopotamia.
The fundamental cause seems to be an over-irrigation that led to an increase in salts of various kinds in the soils,
and then reduced the fertility of the soils, sharply reducing productivity of agriculture,
leading to a sharp decline in production, and eventually undermining Sumerian civilization.
This was a sign that these wonderful, complex structures that appeared were also extremely fragile,
and we see this is true of most agrarian civilizations.
So, voila, a whole series of linked features have come together to establish the first agrarian civilizations
with all their complexity and also their fragility.
Thank you.
Lecture 31
Agrarian Civilizations in Other Regions
Lecture 30
Lecture 30 described the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations in Sumer.
What I'd like to ask now is how typical that process was, and how typical Sumer was of agrarian civilizations.
If we're going to deal with the idea of agrarian civilizations as a larger category of human societies,
we need to try and get a quite precise idea of the degree of difference between them and the degree of similarity between them.
So, we can't just assume that Sumer was typical, though I will argue that in many ways it was.
Indeed, in a remarkable number of ways it was.
And I'll argue that these similarities are easier to see through the wide-angle lens of big history
than through the narrower lens that's normally used in historical scholarship.
Nevertheless, having said that, it's also important not to overlook the many significant differences that existed between particular civilizations.
And what I want to do in this lecture is note some of the more significant differences between civilizations
and the slightly different ways in which they appeared in region after region.
The nature of historical scholarship has tended to ensure that describing these differences,
the specific features of particular regions of agrarian civilization,
has been one of the dominant preoccupations of historians.
Partly, this sort of scholarship has been driven by forms of nationalism.
The history profession has been shaped profoundly by nationalism as it became more professional in the 19th century.
And what states did, of course, what states expected of historians was that they would write nationalist histories.
They would write about our people.
And so this is one of the powerful things that steered historians towards the idea of describing particular civilizations in their own terms.
But there's another factor as well that's driven historians in this direction.
That's the typical structures of the history profession since history became a professional scholarly discipline later in the 19th century.
Historians tend to train specialists in particular areas, either their own country or some other country.
And there's a lot of skills and techniques to be acquired in order to become a specialist.
You have to learn the language, you have to get familiar with the archives in a particular region.
So if you're a Chinese historian or say a Russian historian, you've already invested a lot in that civilization, that culture.
And this tends to steer historians towards questions about the distinctive nature of the particular civilization they're looking at.
So in this course we're going to be trying to resist the sort of gravitational pull of these questions and stand back and look at the general features.
But meanwhile, let's try and get a sense of the important differences that did exist drawing on this extraordinarily rich body of scholarship that has been built up in the last century or so.
So here we'll touch on some of the more striking differences between civilizations.
Agrarian civilizations we've seen were constructed using the huge human and material resources generated in regions of flourishing agriculture.
So one of the factors that undoubtedly led to differences between different civilizations was the precise geography of the regions in which they developed and the precise nature of the types of agriculture on which they were founded.
We've seen that regions of flourishing agriculture in general were a bit like the hotspots created by stars.
But as with stars, the precise nature of the end product could depend on the size and nature and the precise nature of the raw materials from which they were created.
Each region of agrarian civilization, therefore, was shaped by the particular type of agriculture that emerged and the geography of the region in which it emerged.
Now there's one important exception to the types of rules we've seen.
And I'd like to describe that first before looking at some of the main areas of agrarian civilization.
And this is tropical areas such as Papua New Guinea and perhaps the Amazon Basin.
Areas where agriculture may have emerged sometimes quite early as in Papua New Guinea but was based on root crops.
That is to say on crops that couldn't be stored as easily as you could store grains such as rices or wheats or maize.
The result in these regions was that the transition from flourishing agricultural systems to regions of agricultural civilization seemed at some stage to get blocked.
Here is W. H. McNeill's description of how this blockage occurred and this helps us understand why so few agrarian civilizations appeared in tropical regions or in regions such as Papua New Guinea
and why in Papua New Guinea, despite 10,000 years of agriculture, you don't get an agrarian civilization.
This is from the book he wrote with his son John McNeill called The Human Web.
This is what McNeill writes on agriculture in tropical regions.
Even if tropical gardening, that is the growing of root crops using techniques of horticulture,
anti-dated grain fields by thousands of years and it certainly did in some regions,
it remained comparatively insignificant for human history as a whole.
That is because tropical gardeners leave roots and fruits where they grow until ready for consumption.
Grains that ripen all at once must be harvested and stored and the consequent availability of concentrated supplies of food in farmer's storage bins and jars made the rise of states and cities possible.
Priests and soldiers could demand and get part of the grain harvest from those who had raised it as a price for protection from supernatural and human harm.
But without storage, massive and regular transfer of food from farmers to city folk was impracticable.
Inhibiting social and occupational differentiation, consequently he concludes,
the specialized skills of urban life could not arise on the basis of tropical gardening, however productive it might be.
So this is the one great exception to the rule that where agriculture developed,
it tended to accumulate to build up large populations and provide the basis for the eventual appearance of agrarian civilizations.
Now I want to go on and look at six different areas where agrarian civilizations appeared fairly early.
These are areas where agrarian civilizations seemed to have appeared either completely independently of influences elsewhere or perhaps under very limited influence from other regions.
I'll begin with the Afro-Eurasian World Zone.
Here what is striking is that agrarian civilizations emerged along fertile river systems in four different regions.
We've already seen this happening in Mesopotamia.
Now we've seen why fertile river systems were so strategic.
When irrigated, such regions could support the rapid development of very large populations.
They could generate population explosions as soon as you introduce viable systems of irrigation.
Let's begin with Sumer where we were in the last lecture.
We've seen how Sumerian civilization arose in the Euphrates Tigris Basin.
In the form of a cluster of competing city-states all dependent on irrigation.
Now what's striking is that it doesn't actually arise in those areas where rainfall agriculture is possible.
Here you see a very slow, gentle build-up of population.
It arises in the south where you get a very sudden population explosion caused by the fact that irrigation is introduced into a fairly arid region.
So it's the sudden population explosion that seems to have been crucial here.
And these rivers are also crucial because as we've seen they tend to bring silts down and generate very fertile soils.
So in this situation you can suddenly get very highly productive agriculture.
Here priests and temples seem to have played an important role in the emergence of tribute-taking states.
And states emerged primarily in the form of small city-states in the third millennium.
Though by the late third millennium secular rulers such as Gilgamesh have become more and more important.
And eventually by about just before 2000 BCE we find an overall ruler Sargon ruling several of these cities, in fact ruling the whole of Sumer.
So that's the broad pattern we've seen in Sumer.
Now let's look at Sudan and Egypt.
In modern Sudan and Egypt an agrarian civilization appears at about the same time based on the remarkable natural irrigation system of the Nile River.
The annual floods of the Nile, which is probably the world's longest river, brought, I say probably incidentally because there's competition with the Amazon for this title,
but it's certainly one of the world's longest rivers.
The annual floods brought nutritious silts from the south and sort of spread them over the lands to either side of the river.
After about 5000 BCE the Sahara Desert which before that had been a lot wetter than it is today and had supported quite a large number of small farming populations began to get drier
and people squeezed out of the Sahara and into the Nile Valley.
So as in southern Sumer populations appear to have built up quite rapidly and at least one of the factors involved was climate change.
But in this case, unlike Sumer, populations grew not in tiny concentrated cities but in a long ribbon of villages along the Nile.
Wheaton Barley is introduced probably from Mesopotamia about 5000 BCE.
They both flourish as did watermelons and other crops from Sudan, from the south.
And by 4000 BCE we have village communities stretching from the Nile Delta in the north to Nubia in modern Sudan.
Then small kingdoms begin to appear.
These were then quite rapidly united late in the fourth millennium into a single large state.
This is a process that happened much quicker here than in Sumer.
In just before 3000 BCE and perhaps 3100 BCE a southern ruler called Menez or in some sources Nama unifies the region north of Aswan into a single empire.
If you go to the Egyptian Museum in the centre of Cairo and I had the chance to visit that just two years ago.
This is the great museum that also contains the remains of Pharaoh Tutankhamun.
You can see the Nama Palette. It's a beautiful engraved slab of stone with images and hieroglyphic writing.
And it was probably engraved at the time of Nama.
It shows the Pharaoh very typically for this sort of royal propaganda smiting his enemies.
Cities were less important in Egypt than in Mesopotamia though Menez did establish a capital at Memphis.
There were cities south of modern Cairo.
So here power was based on a long almost continuous ribbon of irrigated villages extending along the Nile.
This was not strictly a city but it was a large area of almost continuous settlement.
A sort of almost city, a colossal assemblage of many closely linked villages.
Unlike the rulers of Sumer who seemed to have been either priests or kings, Egypt's pharaohs from very early on seemed to have been treated as gods.
Their tombs, the pyramids reflect their high status.
When I went to Egypt for the first time I had the chance to see the pyramids at Giza and I have to say that they were far more impressive seen directly than any picture I had seen.
And they really are awe inspiring.
If you want to inspire awe in your population it's a wonderful way of doing it.
So if they can awe a modern visitor they must have been astonishing to contemporaries.
The largest, the pyramid of Kyops was built between 2500 and 2600 BCE.
It used about 2.3 million limestone blocks each weighing about 2.5 tons.
Don't think of the labour involved in building this thing, it's staggering.
