So, it's a reasonable bet that almost all Paleolithic communities were both small and nomadic.
And this means that they may have camped in one place for maybe a few weeks
and then slowly moved around in seasonal migrations
that took them round very familiar circuits from territory to territory in different seasons.
Now, in the jargon of economists, this was an extensive way of exploiting the environment.
That is to say, it was one that depended on using a large area
rather than one that depended on exploiting a small area more intensively.
We'll come back to this contrast between extensive and intensive technologies later
because I'm going to argue that the Paleolithic is dominated by extensive technologies,
but with the appearance of agriculture, we start to get more intensive technologies.
Now, another feature.
These families I've talked about,
we can imagine Paleolithic communities travelling in these small nomadic groups, essentially families.
We need to add one more thing about, thing to this picture.
Modern evidence suggests that modern hunter-gatherers, modern foragers,
meet periodically with neighbours and relatives.
These groups, we shouldn't think of them as completely isolated at all.
There are many reasons for meeting.
You may want to swap information.
You may want to swap people, so an individual may marry a member of another community.
People who are discontented in their group can avoid further conflicts simply by moving to another group.
There are all sorts of reasons why people might move around.
They might do it just for a change.
But note that by doing so, by moving around in this way, what happens is durable kinship links
created between neighbouring groups so that each group has friends, contacts in neighbouring groups
and over sometimes very, very large areas indeed.
So we need to think of these two groups, the group that moves around together
and the larger kinship network which can cover a very large territory.
Now, when they come together, of course, they have to come together in an environment that's abundance
where there's enough food to support a gathering of maybe several hundred people for a week or two at a time.
So these have to be special places.
In the snowy mountains in Australia, there's a site where bogong moths used to spawn
and for a week or two, you get huge numbers of bogong moths
and this spawning season apparently used to attract large numbers of aboriginal groups to kinship meetings there.
These meetings are often described as carobberies in Australia.
At these meetings, they exchange marriage partners, gifts and, of course, information.
They may also have been sites for exchanges between groups.
Here's a following account from 1881 of meetings that took place in the Australian state of Victoria in the late 19th century
and I'm quoting from a standard prehistory of Australia.
It's from an account written in 1881 by a settler in Victoria called James Dawson and this is what he writes.
At the periodical great meetings, trading is carried on by the exchange of articles peculiar to distant parts of the country.
A favourite place of meeting for the purpose of barter is a hill called Norat near Terang.
In that locality, the forest kangaroos are plentiful
and the skins of the young ones found there are considered superior to all others for making rugs.
The aborigines from the Geelong district bring the best stones for making axes
and a kind of wattlegum celebrated for its adhesiveness.
This Geelong gum is so useful in fixing the handles of stone axes and the splinters of flint in spears
and for cementing the joints of bark buckets that is carried in large lumps all over the western district.
So I hope that gives you some feeling for these larger and usually more temporary gatherings
that seem to have been very characteristic of life in the Paleolithic.
Stephen Mithony in a book called After the Ice that I'll come back to later on
describes how these networks worked in the valleys of the Meurs and Les about 15,000 years ago in southern France.
Here you got territories of groups of hunters and gatherers who no longer travelled back south to the homelands of past generations.
We don't know exactly how many lived in these valleys but a figure of 500 people is usually taken to be the minimum.
This figure is derived from mathematical models of dispersed hunter-gatherer groups who periodically meet up to exchange members
and it corresponds with historically documented hunter-gatherers of North America and Canada.
Such gatherings he writes may have happened only once or twice a year.
For the most part the hunter-gatherers of the Meurs and Les valleys are likely to have lived in groups of between 25 and 50 individuals
divided into four or five families.
So I hope that gives you some sense of what we mean when we talk about society.
This was the world they lived in.
These were do-it-yourself societies.
By that I mean they didn't have states.
So all the things we expect states to do you had to do yourself or the family had to do
including administering justice.
Now the following example comes from the work of the anthropologist Richard Lee
who studies of the indigenous peoples of South Africa and the Kalahari
did so much to enrich our perceptions of societies living with Paleolithic technologies.
This brief description of an episode in which justice was administered
may give you some idea of how Paleolithic justice might have worked.
In languages of the Kalahari there are these cliques you may remember.
You'll see this printed as a slash so I'm going to try my best to imitate them.
So there's a man called Twee.
Twee had killed three other people.
And eventually the community in a rare move of unanimity writes Lee
ambushed and fatally wounded him in full daylight.
As he lay dying all the men fired at him with poisoned arrows
until in the words of one informant he looked like a porcupine.
Then after he was dead all the women as well as the men approached his body
and stabbed him with spears symbolically sharing the responsibility for this death.
The family is everything. The family does.
All the things that we expect states to do as well as the things we expect families to do.
Now I've suggested that these were simple societies
and I'm going to argue that eventually much more complicated societies are going to appear.
So I want to avoid any suspicion that I'm implying that these were unsophisticated societies
in their ways they were extraordinarily sophisticated.
Certainly by some criteria these were simpler than modern societies.
They had fewer people less social complexity
but it would be a mistake to assume that this means they were unsophisticated.
To survive using Stone Age technologies think about it.
You needed detailed scientific knowledge of your environments
incredibly detailed knowledge accumulated through millennia of collective learning.
So these were people who knew a fantastic amount about their environments
you needed to in order to survive with Paleolithic technologies.
Okay, let's move on.
We can find evidence of some of these extremely delicate adaptations
in sites such as Southwest Tasmania one of the most remote environments on Earth
in the Paleolithic era.
Studies of Kutikina Cave which was occupied from 35,000 years ago
to perhaps 13,000 years ago have revealed hundreds of stone tools,
ancient hards, delicate spear points of wallaby bone
and knives made from natural glass.
So we must think these are very, very sophisticated societies in their way
and a lot of that sophistication is not visible to us.
It was stored in knowledge.
What about their religious lives? Can we say anything about it?
We have little access of course to the spiritual world of our Paleolithic ancestors
yet Paleolithic art such as cave paintings
hints at a rich artistic and spiritual life.
It's a reasonable guess that Paleolithic religions were based
on the animistic assumption that the world is full of living beings
that rocks, stars, mountains, trees, animals, rivers are all living beings
and that the best way of explaining the world is to assume
that it's full of beings that make choices and do things because they want to.
In 2006 in a cave in Botswana archaeologists found evidence
dating back more than 70,000 years that delicate stone tools were presented
as gifts to a python god whose shape had been carved from a large boulder.
Now this sort of evidence and the cave paintings of later eras
or another example is incredibly frustrating.
We know we're dealing with people very like us.
We may often feel that we have at least a glimpse of what these symbols mean
but the truth is we don't really know.
We're so close to them yet we're also so far,
a feeling we often have in considering our Paleolithic ancestors.
Now let me talk about living standards a bit.
How well did they live?
The question matters because if Paleolithic lives were desperately hard
we may conclude that human history is a story of progress
but if their lives weren't too bad we may have to question that assumption.
So let's take the idea of progress.
It's the idea that at large scales life has got better throughout most of human history
and it's an idea that's been one of the great shaping myths of modern historical thinking.
Indeed it's so familiar we often take it for granted but we shouldn't.
It's one of those ideas we need to constantly test
and we'll see that if we test it the picture begins to look a bit more complicated.
Now to most people it may seem obvious that this was a harsh primitive and unpleasant world
in which people lived in a constant state of anxiety, poverty and perhaps starvation.
But maybe not.
In 1972 the American anthropologist Marshall Saylins wrote a famous article
The Original Affluent Society and he argued that in many ways this was not a bad world to live in.
Being nomadic people had little desire to accumulate goods
so they experienced a world in which everything you needed was around you.
This is what Saylins calls the Zen path to affluence.
He argues they experienced themselves as affluent.
Diets were often healthy and varied.
As a forager from the Kalahari Desert told a modern researcher
why would you want to take up farming when there were so many mongongo nuts around?
Food is all around you.
How hard do they work?
Modern studies of foraging societies suggest maybe
you could survive on three to six hours of work a day.
So what do you do for the rest of the time?
You sleep, you hang out, you talk, you tell stories, you dance.
Lots of free time.
Much more in fact than most people in modern societies.
And this is also a world in which communities are so small that disease
can't really get much of a purchase on them.
No jails, no states.
And no extreme inequalities.
All inequalities were personal.
Now that doesn't mean of course that they weren't experienced as painful.
They were not institutionalized.
On the other hand, it's also true that studies of paleolithic skeletons
suggest that most people died young usually from physical trauma of some kind.
So I don't want to overstate the case.
And salons may have overstated it in his article.
We can be sure that someone reared in modern societies would really struggle
if plonked down in the middle of a paleolithic society.
Nevertheless, the opposite's also true.
If you'd taken someone from that world and plonked them down in our society,
it's almost certain they would have suffered from terrible levels of stress
that they would have found very hard to cope with.
So taken on their own terms,
these could be societies in which many people probably had a sense of living both well
and abundantly and in salons terms affluently.
We should not assume that human history is a tale of endless betterment.
In this lecture, I've tried to sketch out some of the main features of life ways
in the paleolithic as if nothing has happened.
But in fact, we'll see a lot happened during the paleolithic.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
APPLAUSE
We've seen that chronologically speaking,
the paleolithic era took up most of human history.
It begins with the appearance of our species,
as we're defining the term in this course,
and it ends about 10 or 11,000 years ago.
Yet we've also seen it's largely neglected in historical scholarship and teaching.
The paleolithic era often gets dropped from textbooks,
even some textbooks in world history.
Why?
We've seen one reason which is that historians are mostly trained
to use written evidence.
So they tend to ignore those eras of history for which such evidence doesn't exist.
And that means basically every era of human history
before about 5,000 years ago
when we begin to get the first evidence of writing.
So if you rely on writing as a historian,
you have to exclude, or frankly,
95, 98% of human history chronologically speaking.
So that's why so many texts, even in world history,
but not all of them start with the appearance of the great civilizations
of Mesopotamia about 5,000 years ago.
But there's a second reason why the paleolithic is often ignored,
and that is that the paleolithic is often assumed to have been an era of stagnation.
Nothing happened.
There were no world wars, no international trade,
no great novels, no great symphonies.
Nothing much happened.
Now, this sense that if we can't date very specific events,
that means nothing much happened,
is something we've actually seen before in this course.
We've seen a tendency to assume that if we can't assign absolute dates
to events that happened in the past,
maybe there wasn't much change.
We've seen that before the discoveries of the 20th century,
it was widely assumed that the universe, for example, didn't have a history.
We couldn't put any dates on things that might have happened in the history of the universe,
nor did the earth, nor did biological species.
So biological species were assumed to be fixed, as the creator had made them.
But then gradually, we began to be able to assign absolute dates
to things that happened in the past,
and we began to see there was a story, there was change.
In fact, things happened.
There was history in all these domains.
Now, we're seeing the same assumption applied to the earliest phase of human history.
Too often, the Paleolithic has portrayed as a period of timelessness.
Now, we need to concede immediately
that people who lived in the Paleolithic may themselves have thought in this way.
And the reason for this was that change was indeed, by modern standards, extremely slow.
So slow that during a single lifetime,
it was very unlikely that you'd see really fundamental changes.
Of course, there were social changes.
People were born, people died, people grew up, there were conflicts within a group,
but not larger changes.
The universe, the landscape, everything, social structures seemed to be fixed.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that people at the time
probably experienced the world as more or less changeless,
and therefore thought of time as moving perhaps in cycles
