We've seen that it's in the nature of living organisms to explore their environment.
This is what life does.
As life slowly changes, it explores the environment in the search for the energy
and resources that organisms need to maintain themselves.
Now, humans do this as well as other species.
As individuals and as a species, humans look for resources
and they try to find the resources they need.
What's the difference?
This, I think, is the key difference.
With humans, the methods we use to exact resources and energy from our environment
are constantly changing.
In fact, our repertoire of ecological techniques
or techniques for extracting energy and resources is constantly increasing.
So, it's as if humans are simply adapting like all other species.
But unlike most species which develop a successful trick
and then live off it for the rest of their time on Earth as a species,
humans are adapting, that is to say they're learning new ecological tricks all the time.
Now, it's important to stress that this adaptability was apparent
even in the Paleolithic era, the oldest era of human history, the beginning era.
It begins with the appearance of our species.
And one of the best forms of evidence, I'll give more in the next lecture,
but one of the best forms of evidence is these migrations, we'll see,
that took our species into many different environments
and to all continents except Antarctica.
Remember, each time a species enters a new environment,
it has to adopt new techniques for controlling energy.
It has to deal with new species, new organisms.
Humans learnt a million new techniques
as they entered environments from the tropics to desert lands
to the tundra lands to the Arctic.
Think of Darwin's Finches.
For Darwin's Finches, each adaptation was genetic.
Humans seemed to be able to adapt in other ways.
No other species we know of in the history of the planet
has kept finding new ways of extracting energy from its environment throughout its career.
The basic rule of natural selection is that a new species evolves,
it has a new trick for getting energy.
If you're a Galapagos Finch, you have a beak that's good at getting seeds
from a particular type of tree on a particular island,
and you survive as long as you use that trick.
We're the only species that adapts constantly, is constantly seeking out
new forms of energy, new ways of dealing with its environment.
Even Homo ergaster, Homo erectus,
used the same basic toolkit for more than one million years.
Now, is this extraordinary adaptability,
this ability to adapt faster, more continuously
than any other living species that makes us very powerful?
All living species adapt, we've seen it's one of the basic descriptions
of living things. What makes us different is we adapt continuously and all the time.
Our astonishing control of the planet's resources is now so striking
that it's beginning to affect other species.
According to some estimates, we may be controlling,
that is to say our activities determine the use that is made
of anything from 25 to 40% of all the energy
that enters the biosphere through photosynthesis.
Now this leaves less energy to be controlled in the ways that other species need.
So it's hardly surprising that other species are now dying off
at a rate comparable to the five or six greatest extinction episodes
of the last billion years.
Our impact on the planet is very, very significant.
So our activity, this slow build up of control of resources
is something that makes us striking on the scale of planetary history
with the first species in the history of the planet to behave like this.
Now it's possible that we're strange even on cosmological scales.
For almost 50 years astronomers have searched without any success
for evidence of other organisms with a similar level of technological creativity.
They haven't found them and that's beginning to look a bit strange.
One possible conclusion about this is that we may be unique on galactic scales.
It may be that there's nothing in nearby parts of our galaxy,
no species, no organism that can adapt with the virtuosity of our species.
Okay, all of this is an attempt to pin down
as a first approximation what it is that makes us rather distinctive.
And I've argued that it's our unique ability to constantly find new ways
of getting energy and resources from our environment.
We adapt all the time.
Now, if that's true, the next task is to explain what it is about us
that explains our unique ability to adapt.
Why are we so ecologically creative?
Now I have to say straight away, there is no universally accepted answer to this.
Though there are lines of argument in several disciplines
from psychology to anthropology that seem to be converging on some good answers
and what follows is based on some of this scholarship.
Here's what I'll argue.
I'll argue that our species came onto this earth.
The threshold that was crossed when our species was formed
was that we came with a unique and extraordinarily powerful adaptive mechanism.
And I'm going to call that mechanism collective learning.
It's a term I'll use a lot.
So I need to try and explain very carefully what I mean by collective learning.
Adaptation by natural selection we've seen is slow.
Darwin thought it would always be slow.
Sometimes we now know it can be faster and slower, but basically it's slow.
It depends on genetic changes over many, many generations.
It can take hundreds or thousands of generations for changes to evolve and spread.
So the fundamental mechanism through which living organisms adapt
is certainly by the standards of a human lifetime quite slow.
Through random change an individual is lucky enough to be born
with a slightly different way of relating to its environment.
Say it's an eagle with slightly better eyesight.
That skill then may spread very slowly over many generations
and many thousands of years until eventually we might have a new species,
an eagle with much, much better eyesight.
That's what adaptation normally means.
But we need to remind ourselves at this point that that's not quite the only form of adaptation.
There are other ways of adapting.
Natural selection has been the dominant mechanism throughout the history of life on earth,
but it's not the only mechanism of adaptation.
Here's the second one.
Many multi-cell organisms such as ourselves have brains
and organisms with brains can change how they relate to their surroundings,
not by waiting many generations but within a single lifetime.
This is clearly a much faster adaptive mechanism.
You and I can do it all the time.
As adults we hope that we're better at dealing with our environment
than we were as babies or infants.
Now we can call this second adaptive mechanism individual learning.
It works much faster than natural selection,
but it has limitations which explain why it's had a limited role in the history of life on earth.
Here are the two crucial limitations.
The first is that it's costly.
Brains are complex energy-guzzling organisms
and if you want a brain you better be able to get hold of a lot of energy to feed it.
Now let me give you an illustration of a lovely story that illustrates this.
The Emperor Hirohito you may know was a biologist
and he once studied a species of sea slug that illustrates the point nicely.
This is the story of the sea slug that he studied.
When it's very young it makes an epic journey through the sea in search of a rock
and it's looking for a rock that it can sit on for the rest of its life
and simply skim food from the environment.
Now I hope you'll agree the journey itself is dangerous
and it's probably going to need a brain to survive
and it's going to need a brain to figure out whether it's found the perfect rock or not.
So early in its life this particular sea slug actually has a small brain.
It's not particularly impressive but it's enough to do the job.
Then it finds its rock.
So the question is it's now found a rock.
For the rest of its life it's not going to need a brain
but the brain is going to keep needing energy.
It's going to have to keep feeding that brain.
It's going to have to take in more energy than it might otherwise need
to feed an organ that is now no longer any use.
So what does the sea slug do?
The answer is it eats its brain.
It gets the energy out of its brain and now the brain is not going to take up any more energy.
Daniel Dennett whose book I first read that story
and has a delightful footnote at this point where he says
I shouldn't say this but I'm going to.
He says does this remind you of some academics when they get tenure?
Okay, so brains are costly.
That's the first drawback of individual learning.
But there's a second.
Individual learning is not cumulative.
Most of what an individual learns cannot be passed on to others.
So each individual has to start from scratch.
This is a bit like Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the hill each time until it rolls down again.
Individual learning doesn't accumulate.
Every individual has to start from scratch.
So that's why individual learning doesn't shape the long-term history of an entire species,
though it may affect the lives of individuals.
So we've got two adaptive mechanisms, natural selection, the genetic mechanism and individual learning.
Now, imagine a species in which individuals learned.
They had access to this very rapid adaptive mechanism of individual learning.
So individuals learn better during their lifetimes how to deal with their environment.
Now imagine that they can pass on everything they've learned to other members of their species,
presumably, first of all, those closest to them, their family.
If that was possible, we'd have a third and much more powerful way of adapting
because what each individual learned would then be stored within the entire community.
It wouldn't need to be learned again by each individual.
Individuals could learn it through the community without having to go through the difficult experience of learning it
and slowly information about how to deal with the environment would build up within the community.
Instead of figuring out how to make a car from scratch before commuting to work
and then putting in many hours building it,
you could count on the knowledge having been accumulated by others.
So you could make use of their knowledge and skills and use your time to get on with something else.
Now this, in fact, is the unique gift that humans acquire with human language.
And the evidences we'll see is quite powerful that they first acquired this gift
when our species first appeared something like 200 to 300,000 years ago.
Now you may respond, don't animals communicate? Why can't animals do collective learning?
Well, yes, animals can communicate. Many animals can communicate.
But to communicate in the way humans do requires forms of communication like a sort of broadband
that can transfer huge amounts of information very fast and with great precision.
So what is it that's different about human systems of communication?
Well, let's make a very broad distinction between two types of language.
Many animals have languages that involve one-to-one signals.
This is the simplest form of communication, a one-to-one correspondence,
like the warning call of a vervet monkey.
A bark-like call means a leopard while a sort of stutter means a snake.
Now such utterances can communicate information about as much as an ambulance siren.
But the language systems of most animals seem to take essentially this form.
And there's a severe limit to how much information you can communicate.
It can say leopard, leopard, leopard.
But can it say about 300 meters off behind the tall tree, there's a leopard,
it's heading this way and it's looking very hungry, look out.
No, you can communicate much less information.
Now humans are capable of what we call symbolic language
and as far as we know humans are the only organism that can do symbolic language really well.
Symbols are arbitrary signs that can group many observations or ideas within larger categories
and can therefore rearrange information in many new ways and classify it in new ways.
So while a vervet can say leopard, it can't say much about what the leopard's doing.
Now symbols can convey such information.
They can refer to things that are not present such as the leopard I saw yesterday
or even to things that may not exist, pink elephants or Santa Claus.
Human languages also have elaborate systems of grammar
that enable you to put those symbols together in very many different ways.
And this greatly enhances the efficiency and power of language.
Grammar lets us arrange symbols in almost infinite configurations but with great precision
so that humans can use word pictures to convey large amounts of complex information with great precision.
Unlike a vervet a human could explain, for example,
my cousin was killed by a cat-like predator at the waterhole one mile away to the south of the volcano.
A vervet can't do that.
What's the result of this?
The result is that individual humans exchange so much information with such precision
that more is transmitted than is lost.
And the result of this is that that information begins to accumulate within the community as a whole.
If chimps function mostly like standalone computers, we function like networked computers.
Each of us has access to information that resides in the entire network of our society.
Each of us has continuous access to a large and accumulating store of information about how to adapt to our environment.
That, I'll argue, is the key to our unique adaptive ability.
So the phrase I use for this unique form of adaptation which accumulates information
so much more rapidly than other forms of adaptation is collective learning.
If I'm right, and let me remind you that what I'm arguing here is not yet an orthodoxy,
though many researchers share similar views.
If I'm right, we can say that collective learning is what makes us unique.
It's the key to the distinctive features of human history.
And it explains why human history represents a new level of complexity.
It's what human history is about.
It explains how and why humans can accumulate more and more information about the environment.
So the stock of information about how to relate to the environment, how to get energy, builds up over time.
That's the explanation for our slow build-up of control over energy.
Now note, this does not necessarily imply that it's our intelligence that makes us so distinctive.
The truth is, as individuals, we're not really that much smarter than chimps.
The difference is that we're networked.
Chimps are very, very clever.
But chimps basically deal with their environment using their individual intelligence
and the knowledge they've accumulated in their lifetime, plus just a few tips from mum.
We deal with our environment equipped with all our intelligence as individuals,
plus ideas and information accumulated by literally millions of other humans throughout the course of human history.
We face the world as members of a large, extended community that reaches out in time and space
to include everyone who has contributed anything to our cultural heritage.
