so that everything returns to the way it was in the past on the model of the seasons,
this incidentally is the argument of a famous work by the Romanian historian of religion,
Mircea Eliade, in a book called The Myth of the Eternal Return.
Even if it's true that Paleolithic people thought of history as a sort of constant return, a cyclical,
we are now learning that actually a lot happened.
There was linear directional change in the Paleolithic, and there was plenty of it.
Now, it's not easy to see it, but the evidence is accumulating to show that a lot happened.
In other words, the astonishing creativity and changeability of our species
that I have identified as a crucial feature of our species is evident, even in the Paleolithic.
There was plenty of change.
It's hard to see just because it was slower than today.
On the other hand, we need to remember change was much faster than it was before the appearance of modern humans.
There's no change at all that we know of in chimp societies on this scale.
So, the Paleolithic was not an era of stagnation, not at all.
Now, what I want to do is try to describe three main types of long-term change in the Paleolithic.
They are, first, climatic change.
This is not a change caused by humans, but more a change that they had to react to.
Secondly, migrations into new environments, accompanied by population growth.
And third, new technologies that ensure the Paleolithic populations began to have increasing impacts on the natural environment.
Let's begin with the first, climate change.
So, the first thing we need to remember about the Paleolithic is that over 200,000 years or so,
climates changed, and they changed quite drastically,
and they forced humans in area after area to adapt to change.
The study of climate change has advanced very rapidly in recent decades.
It's been driven partly by fears of global warming.
But a bit like the techniques of radiometric dating that developed in the 60s,
climatologists have in recent decades discovered a whole series of techniques
for actually identifying climatic changes in the distant past.
I'll just give you one illustration of these, but there are now numerous techniques,
and what they're doing is they're giving us a much better picture of the history of global climates.
We're learning that here, too, there was a history, and we're beginning to be able to document that history
and to date it with some precision.
As you'll know, this work is immensely significant in our understanding of problems such as climate change and global warming.
Now, here's just one illustration of the sort of techniques that are used.
If you take ice cores from glaciers that have been around for a long time,
say from Antarctica or Greenland, you take huge tubes of ice,
and at the bottom of those tubes, you're in effect grabbing bits of ice that were formed, in some cases, maybe half a million years ago.
Within them, you'll find little bubbles of air,
and what those bubbles contain is samples of the air at the time that those bubbles were laid down.
So in these ice cores, we get samples of the air at different periods in the Earth's history
over the last several hundred thousand years.
Now, you can tell a lot from these bubbles.
Oxygen comes in different isotopes.
Let me remind you what an isotope is.
Oxygen always has eight protons in its center,
but also in the nucleus, they may be neutrons.
Neutrons, you'll remember, are electrically neutral,
but their number can vary slightly, unlike the protons.
And with each chemical, atoms which have slightly different numbers of neutrons are known as isotopes.
So every chemical can come in several isotopes, every chemical element,
and they may differ very, very slightly in their properties.
In the case of oxygen, you can find a different ratio of oxygen isotopes in these bubbles found in ice cores.
And the ratio of isotopes can tell you quite a lot about average temperatures,
and one of the reasons for this is that some isotopes tend to get locked up in glaciers rather than others.
So in periods of heavy glaciation, that's periods in which the Earth was undergoing ice ages,
you find the ratio of oxygen isotopes is different than in periods when there wasn't heavy glaciation.
This is just an illustration of the sort of technique that we can use now
to actually tell remarkably something about average temperatures,
sometimes many hundreds of thousands of years ago.
This whole range of techniques have revealed very clearly
that there were dramatic climatic changes in the past.
And the story very broadly goes roughly like this.
For the last 50 million years, it seems, global climates have been cooling, slowly cooling.
This may have something to do, we're not absolutely certain,
with changes in the configuration of the continents as Pangaea broke up
and the Earth acquired its present-day tectonic configuration.
These changes affected ocean currents and could have a considerable impact
on the formation of ice caps in the north and the south.
For 50 million years then, temperatures have cooled.
As they've cooled, this has reduced evaporation from the oceans and increased aridity.
So as a general rule, cooler climates tend to be associated with drier climates.
During the Pleistocene era, that's the last two million years,
ice sheets spread in polar regions and what this did was generate a series of ice ages.
And in the last million years, they seem to have followed a reasonably regular pattern
which goes something like this.
You get an ice age that lasts roughly 100,000 years
and then you get a so-called interglacial, a warmer period that may last about 10,000 years in between.
This pattern has repeated itself several times in the last million years
and what that means is that our species has already survived two ice ages.
Today, we're at the end of an interglacial that's already lasted 10,000 years.
And that's something worth thinking about.
One of the intriguing questions raised by recent climatic changes is this.
Are we overdue for an ice age or is human activity breaking up this traditional pattern
and sending temperatures in the opposite direction the direction of global warming?
Back to the impact of the ice age, at the coldest phases,
tundra-like steps and deserts spread, forests retreated,
glaciers covered much of North America and much of Northern Eurasia
and sea levels fell around the world as water was locked up in glaciers.
In general, plant growth tended to be less vigorous in middle and upper latitudes,
so less vegetation, less food for organisms that were largely vegetarian.
And it's possible that these changes had an impact on the evolution of our species
because our brain-y networked and ecologically creative ancestors were ideally suited to surviving
in a world where there was considerable climatic and environmental change.
So, when we talk about the Paleolithic era, we need to remember that what we're really talking about
is an era that was dominated by ice ages.
For most of the Paleolithic, climates were significantly colder than today
and glaciation covered much larger areas.
The differences were less marked in tropical regions,
but much more marked in regions at higher latitudes.
So, we know that our Paleolithic ancestors had to cope with these changes.
Now, that's the first major type of change, the ice ages.
Second, global migrations.
Perhaps the most striking historical change in the Paleolithic era
was the migration of modern humans around the entire world
until they settled all continents apart from Antarctica.
Now, we've seen that humans were good at adapting to new environments
because, through collective learning, they could keep accumulating
new information about their environment and generating new technologies
or tweaking existing technologies.
When we're talking about migrations in the Paleolithic,
what we're really talking about is groups that nudged slowly into neighboring regions
and, as they did so, tweaked their technologies
until, over time, they developed whole new technologies to deal with new environments.
We can imagine we're dealing with communities, remember, that travel a lot.
These are communities that are constantly exploring their environments.
Now, if small groups are expelled from one region by conflict
or by climate change or overpopulation,
they already knew something about regions at the edge of their terrain.
So, this sort of slow, slow creeping migration is the sort of mechanism that we could imagine.
And, eventually, it led humans to spread around the entire world.
As they did so, it's a reasonable assumption that human numbers rose.
As we find humans in more and more parts of the Earth,
we can assume that the total number of humans was rising,
so that migrations, roughly speaking, equal population growth for the species as a whole,
though not necessarily we'll see for any particular community.
The size of particular communities remained roughly the same.
Now, until about 100,000 years ago, all humans lived in Africa.
So, let's now get a rough chronology of these migrations.
So, this we can call the African era of human history.
It includes at least half of human history.
For half of human history, all humans seem to have lived in Africa.
But this doesn't mean there was no migration or nothing happening during that first period.
Within Africa, it's clear that humans were migrating,
and they were settling new environments.
Our species probably evolved in savanna lands of various types.
But, as Macbriety and Brooks have shown,
over time, they gradually adapted to desert regions, to more arid regions,
to tropical forests, and eventually to seashores, as Blombos Cave suggests.
We can trace this process very dimly.
The point here is to remind you that migrations of this sort,
the slow creeping migration into new territories,
has probably been characteristic of humans throughout their history.
Then, in the last 100,000 years, some humans left Africa.
Entering the southern parts of Eurasia was probably not hard.
We've seen already other species, including Ergasta, had made this migration.
These species included tigers, apes, elephants, and so on.
But migrating further afield required more ingenuity.
So, if humans turn up in southern Eurasia, we're not that impressed.
When do we start getting impressed?
Well, here's the first really impressive and striking migration of our species.
It is to Sahul.
Now, some of you won't have heard of Sahul.
Sahul is the Ice Age continent that included Australia, Tasmania, and Papua New Guinea.
At the height of the Ice Age, these three land masses were joined in a single continent.
And what we know is that humans appear on this continent from perhaps as early as 50,000 years ago.
Now, that is actually extremely impressive.
To reach the hole, you had to cross a significant body of water from what is today the archipelago of Indonesia.
So, what it means is here we have a species that has apparently quite considerable ability to use the sea, to navigate.
Migrants had to cross at least 40 miles of open water, so they must have had considerable maritime skills.
We're not talking about individuals just washed up on shore.
That's not enough to found a population.
We're probably talking about systematic, deliberate migrations.
And when they arrived, they encountered completely unknown environments.
Entirely new species of animals and plants, the whole range of marsupial animals and plants dominated by eucalypts.
No other species had made this crossing successfully.
It's likely that humans spread first around the coasts and only later began to develop techniques that enabled them to settle harsher environments such as Australia's central deserts.
But let me remind you, the crucial thing here is no other species had made this crossing.
Here is a very clear sign of our exceptional ecological creativity.
So, the migrations to Sahul are a very clear sign of the sort of change that's characteristic of our species.
Then another migration, equally impressive.
From 40 to 30,000 years ago, humans begin to appear in the tundra-like environments of ice age Ukraine, Russia and Siberia.
This too, in its way, is a very impressive migration because it too requires a whole suite of new technologies.
Plant life was a lot less abundant here.
So settlers had to learn to hunt large mammals such as mammoth.
They had to tailor well-fitting skin clothing and they had to manage fire.
Sites from this area give some idea of how they lived.
There's a wonderful site at Pushkary in Ukraine.
19,000 years ago, temperatures here could reach to minus 30 degrees centigrade in winter.
Yet, people lived there and they lived in round houses built using mammoth bones.
I'd like to quote Stephen Mithun's wonderful description from his book, After the Ice.
He writes, huts were built from mammoth bone and hide rather than blocks of ice.
Each has an imposing entrance formed by two tusks upended to form an arch.
The walls use massive leg bones as vertical supports between which jaw bones have been stacked chin down to create a thick barrier to the cold and wind.
Further tusks are used on the roof to weigh down hides and sods of turf that are supported on a framework of bones and branches.
And Mithun goes on to describe this world.
Villages hunted mammoth and other large tundra species in the summer and they stored them in pits in the ground.
They unfroze and roasted the carcasses by lighting fires above them when they needed them.
They tailored close-fitting clothing from fur-lined hides and they made containers of leather.
They made harpoons, knife handles, needles and art objects including instruments that look remarkably like flutes and they made them from bones, teeth and ivory.
They made bowls from wood and cords from ligaments and sinews.
They maintained hearts and they lit their dwellings with lamps using animal fat as fuel.
Now all of this is what I mean when I talk about our astonishing ecological creativity.
Incidentally, this description of life in Ice Age Ukraine is also a reminder that Marshall-Salin's description of Paleolithic lives may give an exaggerated impression of an idyllic world.
Life could be very tough indeed in the Paleolithic.
Now here's a third great migration and that's to the Americas.
We know that humans had entered the Americas from eastern Siberia.
Now to get there, of course, they had to learn to live very successfully in Ice Age eastern Siberia.
Very tough indeed.
But we know that humans had reached the Americas from Siberia by about 13,000 years ago.
There are tantalizing hints of earlier settlements.
Some claims have been made that humans were present as early as 30,000 years ago.
But at the moment, none of the evidence is conclusive.
There's a very interesting site in Chile called Monteverdi where a village that's been excavated seems to be about 13,000 years old.
Now there are questions about the dating and exactly what's happening here.
But if the dating is right, this is so far from Beringia that we have to assume that humans had been in the Americas for a bit longer than 13,000 years.
So, in summary, by 13,000 years ago the range of our species was already much wider than that of any other large land mammal species.
And this is clear evidence for ecological and technological prowess as a species.
As these dates suggest, the pace of innovation had accelerated during the last 50,000 years.
This is the archaeological reality behind the idea of an upper paleolithic revolution.
Now, as humans migrated, their numbers increased and so did the number of archaeological remains they left behind.
Estimates of paleolithic populations are, of course, largely guesswork.
But the Italian demographer Massimo Livibacci suggests that there were perhaps several hundred thousand humans 30,000 years ago.
And as they migrated, their numbers increased quite significantly in the latter part of the Paleolithic era,
rising to perhaps five or six millions at the end of the Paleolithic era about 10,000 years ago.
The dominant form of change in the era is typified by migration.
And we can describe it using the ugly word extensification to contrast with intensification, which may be more familiar.
We've already mentioned the difference between extensive and intensive technologies.
Extensive technologies use a large area.
Intensive technologies use a smaller area, but they work it much more intensively.
So they get more resources out of a given area.
Now, by and large, the foraging technologies of the Paleolithic era can be regarded as extensive.
So by extensification, I mean technological change that allowed migration to new environments
without permitting more intensive exploitation of existing territories.
And it's extensification that partly creates the illusion of stagnation in the Paleolithic
because it explains why the size and complexity of individual human communities did not increase during the Paleolithic era.
Technological change took the form of migration.
That's really what I mean by extensification.
So the total area occupied by humans did expand.
They kept exploiting these larger areas at a similar level of intensity partly
because throughout the Paleolithic expansion was still possible.
There were still empty lands to be filled up.
So though human numbers were increasing, human communities remained about the same size.
They were not becoming significantly more complex.
Now, finally, I want to talk about the third major type of change, and that is growing impacts on the environment.
If you doubt that Paleolithic societies underwent significant change
or experienced innovation or technologically creative, I hope these examples will change your mind.
We've seen that in the Paleolithic, humans were constantly developing new technologies
or they were tweaking existing foraging technologies.
And as a result, their ecological power, I've argued, was increasing.
