Remains.
The second comes from modern studies
of closely related species such as chimps and gorillas.
And that can teach us a lot about the social world,
the technologies of early hominins.
It can't tell us exactly how they lived,
but it can give us many ideas about how they possibly lived
from studying close relatives.
And the third type of evidence I'll look at,
I'll call genetic or molecular dating.
It's a recent technique.
One of the many recent techniques that I've talked about
that emerged in the last 50 years
that allows us to determine quite precisely
when different evolutionary lines split.
So those are the three large things I want to talk about.
Let's begin by talking about fossils and remains.
Probably the most important evidence of human evolution
comes from surviving remains of our ancestors
and the objects they left behind
and the living sites that they left behind.
These can tell us a lot about the physiology of our ancestors,
their basic structure, particularly their skeletons, of course,
but also they can give us many hints about what they ate
and how they lived.
They can tell us quite a lot about their life ways.
Some of the most exciting hominine remains
have come from the African Rift Valley,
as we saw in the last lecture.
This is this tectonic tear that runs from Mozambique
through Tanzania and Kenya to Ethiopia.
And like everywhere where you get a sort of tear in the earth,
it reveals, it reveals, very often reveals, many fossils
because you get a chance to sort of look
at what is beneath the surface.
I want to take as an example of the sort of things we can learn
from fossils and other remains.
The famous, perhaps the most famous hominine fossil of all,
Lucy.
In 1974, in Hadar, Ethiopia,
an American archaeologist, paleontologist, Don Johansson,
and his colleagues,
found almost 40% of the remains of a hominine individual
that was about three and a half feet tall.
This was a very, very exciting discovery.
And just to give you some feeling,
some feeling for what it's actually like to work as a paleontologist,
I'd like to quote from Johansson's own account
of the moment of discovery.
This is what he says.
This is November the 30th, 1974.
He's in Hadar, which is a quite arid and fairly remote region
of Ethiopia.
And now I'm quoting,
As always, I kept my eyes moving along the ground with every step.
I knew that the gully had been worked over a couple of times before,
so I wasn't surprised when it appeared to be empty of bones.
But just as I turned to leave,
I saw what appeared to be a fragment of an elbow joint
lying at the bottom of the slope above.
Tom Gray and I knelt down to examine the thing.
It was small, very small, but unquestionably a hominid.
Then I spotted a piece of skull next to Tom's hand,
and suddenly we seemed to be surrounded by hominid bones,
a femur, a piece of pelvis, ribs, some vertebrae.
For a while we just groped around from one bone to the next,
too stunned to speak.
It occurred to me right away that perhaps
all these bones might belong to a single individual.
But I was afraid to speak that thought out loud,
as if by doing so I would break the spell
and we would once again find ourselves standing in an unremarkable,
boneless little gully in the middle of nowhere.
Tom, on the other hand, could not hold in his excitement.
He let out a yell, and then I heard myself yelling too,
and we were hugging each other and dancing up and down in the heat.
I like that passage.
It gives you some sense of the extreme excitement
of finding 40% of a skeleton.
Paleontologists are used to meager rations.
They can get very excited if they find one tooth or one knuckle bone.
40% of a skeleton is magical.
It also gives you some sense of how tough life can be as a paleontologist.
You organise the expedition, you spend months planning it,
you raise the money, you go out there,
you go out looking for fossils,
maybe for weeks, maybe for months,
and there's always the possibility you'll find nothing.
The whole thing will have been wasted.
So all of that background explains the extreme excitement
that Johansson describes on finding Lucy.
Lucy is one of the most complete hominin skeletons ever found.
Johansson christened the remains of Lucy
because his team had been listening to the Beatles song Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.
This is, remember, 1974.
Now, how much information can a good physical anthropologist
or archaeologist extract from such a find?
Let me describe some of the information that you can get from Lucy.
Lucy illustrates very well some of the things that skeletal remains can tell us.
Radiometric dating of the materials around Lucy
determined that she lived about 3.2 million years ago.
Now, you remember radiometric dating?
It depends on measuring the breakdown of radioactive materials.
If you can measure how much they've broken down,
you know when the lump of stuff they're in was formed.
But note that what they had to date was not Lucy herself.
It's the stuff just around Lucy.
So this is one of the dangers of radiometric dating.
And one of the things that anthropologists, archaeologists have to be very, very careful of.
It's always possible the bones have actually shifted
and what you've dated is not exactly precise.
And there's another form of imprecision we need to be aware of.
Radiometric dates are always given as plus or minus a certain percentage.
This is because a radioactive breakdown is itself a statistical process.
So you give a band of dates.
You say 3.2 million years plus or minus a certain percentage.
So with those qualifications, we know that Lucy almost certainly lived
a bit more than 3 million years ago.
Study of the pelvis showed that Lucy was female.
Study of the teeth and other anatomical features suggested very clearly
that Lucy belonged to the genus of Australopithecines, which we discussed last time.
And the genus, I'll remind you, is the next taxonomic level above the species.
Close study of the bones also suggested that she died in her 20s.
So already we know a lot about Lucy.
Now study of the pelvis and the base of the skull suggested that she was bipedal.
Now it may seem obvious why the pelvis is relevant if you're studying bipedalism,
but how can you detect bipedalism from studying the skull?
Just think about this for a moment.
In fact, if you're listening to this in private, you might want to get down on four legs
and you'll find it easier to figure this out.
In quadruped species, the spine enters the skull from behind
because you have to lift your head up, not from below.
But if you're a bipedal species, you want the spine to come into the head from below,
and you'll get a very clear sense of that if you get down on hands and knees.
So that's how the skull can tell us whether this is a largely bipedal species.
Get her brain at about 450 cc was only slightly larger than that of a chimp.
This is one of the easiest measurements you can make, by the way.
You simply take the skull, you plug some of the holes temporarily,
you fill it with sand or some other medium like that,
then you figure out how much sand you've put into it.
So clearly, as we saw last time, bipedalism evolved before large brains.
This was simply proving something that anthropologists were already beginning to understand.
This has been one of the great discoveries of modern paleontology.
That the first thing that distinguished us from the Great Apes was not greater braininess.
It was not smartness. It was bipedalism.
And this cut across the old assumption that the first sign of humans would have to be cleverness.
As we'll see, cleverness in several forms came quite late in the story.
Now let's move beyond Lucy.
In 1978, Mary Leakey, Louis Leakey's wife, discovered fossilized footprints
left by three Australopithecines who'd walked through still warm lava in Lyotoli in Tanzania,
also in the Rift Valley.
These footprints could be dated to about 3.6 million years ago.
And once again, they confirmed that Australopithecines were bipedal.
I have to say, those prints I also find really rather moving.
It's like Lucy's skeleton. They seem to momentarily bring us very close to our ancestors.
We can all too easily empathize with them as they felt the warm soil beneath their feet,
and they're probably scurrying to get away from a nearby volcanic eruption.
There are even hints.
One of them was smaller, but one of them was holding a younger one by the hand.
So this is the sort of evidence that really helps us to kind of empathize with this world.
Skeletons can tell us much more.
For example, paleo dentists, people who study the teeth of skeletal remains,
can tell whether a tooth was used to eat plants or meat.
And knowing whether we're dealing with a vegetarian or a meat eater or something in between
can tell us a lot about their lifestyles.
If you know what they're eating, you can figure out how they got their food,
and that may tell you a lot about what they spent their days doing.
Louis Leakey.
Louis Leakey's dates, by the way, are 1903 to 1972.
He and his family made Aldervai Gorge on the Rift Valley,
one of the most famous of all sites for human paleoanthropology.
It's a bit like the South Dakota Badlands, which I visited recently,
an area where geological processes are kind of cracking open the crust of the earth for us.
And as they do so, they reveal fossil remains.
But in Aldervai, as we've seen, it's the process of tearing apart the African plate
that reveals the remains.
In the Badlands, the crucial process is the rapid erosion of a plateau.
In 1964, Leakey's son Jonathan found a 2.3 million-year-old skull
that was about half the size of a human skull, about 600 cc.
Despite the small size of the skull,
Louis Leakey classified it as a new species.
And this was the first discovery of what we now call Homo habilis,
the second of the three hominin species I described in the last lecture.
By calling it Homo, we've seen Leakey placed it within the same genus as us.
And this was immensely important symbolically, as well as scientifically.
Leakey, we've seen, was convinced the creature was human
because of the stone tools he found nearby.
And just by classifying it as Homo, he asserted that loud and clear.
And, of course, the label has stuck,
even though, as we've seen, many paleoanthropologists
are no longer convinced that it's very helpful to classify habilis as human.
Okay, let's move on.
Now, why was Leakey so insistent that habilis was a member of the same genus as us?
Mainly because of the tools.
So let's talk a bit about stone tools.
The tools that were found with habilis are known now as Aldoven, after the Aldovi Gorge.
I said they were crude.
They were made from pebbles of quartz or flint, or even sometimes obsidian.
Obsidian is a sort of volcanic glass,
one of the sharpest things available to prehistoric cultures.
And they were struck together to remove flakes that could be used as cutting edges, as knives,
some of them as razor sharp knives.
And the remains, the leftover cores, could have been used as crude hammers.
Now, Leakey was impressed because, as we saw,
he was expecting to find technological virtuosity.
That's how he defined humans.
He thought humans were tool makers.
And there was some reason to be impressed, because, though I've described these as crude by some standards,
nevertheless, a fair bit of skill was involved in their manufacture.
How do we know?
Well, one of the reasons is that some paleoanthropologists have tried to recreate them.
Nick Toff and Kathy Schick have been doing this for a long time.
They've been teaching themselves how to make stone tools.
Work of this kind is often known as experimental archaeology.
And they found that the first trick is to find the right types of stones.
So clearly, our homo habilis had to be quite good at picking the right types of stone to make their tools.
Flint, quartz, we've seen obsidian.
Stones that break in reasonably predictable ways.
So you don't just smash them and take the bits and pieces.
You have some idea of what's going to happen when you smash them together.
And ideally, of course, you're looking for stones that produce sharp edges.
Once you've got a sharp edge of some kind, you can use two main techniques to perfect the tool.
The first is percussion flaking.
You hit a stone tool in just the right way so that a sharp flake breaks off.
Now this, it's been shown from experimental archaeology, this is really quite a skillful technique.
You can get better and better and better at this as you practice this.
It takes a fair bit of skill.
And the second technique is pressure flaking.
You simply apply pressure to an edge to break off a fine flake.
And these you can use as razors to slice.
And of course, one of the uses we presume is to slice meat from a skin, to butcher.
It's also possible to learn about stone tool manufacture by reassembling the remains left behind by a stone tool napper.
Cocktail party question.
What's the technical term for making stone tools?
And the answer is napping with a K.
Napping without a K, of course, means sleeping.
Napping is making stone tools.
Okay, we can do more with stone tools.
If you study their edges through a microscope, you can often figure out what materials they were used on.
