much faster than non-farming communities
because once established, they could support larger populations
and their larger populations meant that whenever it came to a conflict
between farming and foraging communities,
the farming communities had many advantages,
both in resources and in sheer numbers.
In other words, this suggests that most people
who became agriculturalists were forced into it,
but the growing, the spread of agriculture
and the growth of its populations was really a matter of existing agricultural populations
just growing much, much faster than the populations of foragers.
Why is this true?
Well, even the simplest farming communities could support
perhaps 20 to 30 times as many people per square kilometer
as most foraging communities.
Agriculture we've seen is an intensive technology.
Unlike foraging, which is extensive,
you can support a lot more people from the same area.
So, as agriculture spread, it seems that world populations also rose.
Now, let me give you some figures,
but let me remind you that they are, of course, very, very tentative.
But these are the best guesses we have at the moment.
They are that world populations about 10,000 years ago
were perhaps five or six millions.
By 5,000 years ago, world populations may have risen to 50 millions.
Now, this is a very striking increase indeed.
The population of Southwest Asia alone
may have increased from 100,000 to 5 millions
between 10,000 and 6,000 years ago.
Remember what this really means.
It means for most of human history, for 200,000, 300,000 years,
human numbers have been perhaps a few hundred thousands,
perhaps a million, rising to 5 million just very recently,
and then, in the blink of an eye, in just 5,000 years,
they rise to perhaps 50 millions.
Now, we need to remember, of course, as I've said,
just how rough these figures are,
but the orders of magnitude are probably right,
and they make sense.
Agriculture, as we've seen, is much, much more dynamic
than foraging, demographically speaking.
Now, what this meant was that though agrarian
and foraging societies often traded and lived together peacefully,
as we've seen, when, if they came to conflict,
the agrarian societies had lots of advantages,
and most important, they could generate more wealth
and they contained more people.
So these seem to be some of the reasons why the agrarian frontier
slowly advanced at the expense of foragers.
As farmers spread into regions that were more suitable for farming,
because they had good, easily worked soils,
plenty of water and plenty of sunlight and rainfall,
slowly partly by demographic pressure,
partly perhaps by actual conflict,
they squeezed out local populations of foragers
who may have lived there for many thousands of years.
Agriculture and change.
Agriculture, we've seen, introduced a new technological dynamism
into human history, and it did so because it stimulated collective learning.
How?
How to introduce a modern term did growing populations stimulate innovation?
How do they accelerate what we can think of as the synergy of collective learning?
This is another way of asking why agriculture generates such dynamism,
not just demographic dynamism, but also intellectual and technological dynamism.
Well, I think there are several plausible general explanations for this.
First, with larger populations, you simply have more people
who are accumulating ideas and exchanging them within and between communities.
You have populations that are much larger, much, much denser than those of foraging communities.
So if collective learning, as I've argued, this distinctive ability of our species,
depends above all on the exchange of ideas between individuals,
we should expect that where you have a large number of individuals,
where populations are growing rapidly,
the synergy of intellectual exchanges is going to grow very rapidly indeed.
That's the first explanation.
Now here's a second.
As population grows,
some people inevitably find themselves at the margins of society.
So imagine a grey-in village.
It's growing, population grows, young couples may be forced to find new land
at the edge on land that's perhaps less attractive than land in the middle of the village,
or they may even be forced to migrate somewhere else.
In order to farm this marginal land,
they're going to have to tweak existing farming methods.
In other words, they're going to have to experiment with new techniques,
new crops, new patterns of sowing,
new techniques of hoeing and weeding and so on.
So population growth itself generated a constant series of many innovations in agricultural technique.
And thirdly, population growth generated conflicts over land and resources.
And warfare, that is to say, large-scale organized conflicts themselves eventually begin
to drive technological change and social change in new ways.
A considerable degree of technological dynamism is already apparent in the early agrarian era.
Agriculture itself emerged in many different variations,
each of them adapted to particular environments.
I've tended to talk of agriculture as if it were a single set of techniques,
but from some points of view, this is a mistake.
Like foraging techniques, agriculture adapted in many small ways
to different plants, landscapes, climates and environment.
So the evolution spread of agriculture is a very good example of our remarkable ability to adapt,
as was the spread of foraging lifeways during the Paleolithic era.
Though here, things are speeded up quite remarkably,
as agriculture spread around the world in just a few thousand years,
in contrast to the 200,000 years or so that it took foraging lifeways to make their way around the globe.
That, incidentally, is a very good illustration of what I mean
when I use a general phrase like the enhanced dynamism of agriculture.
Now, so that you don't get a sense of agriculture as a homogenous, uniform technology,
let me describe what were probably two of the most basic agrarian techniques
of the early agrarian era.
And I'm going to describe them as horticulture and swidden agriculture.
Each, in turn, will see could be found with many regional variations
using different plants and adapting to different environments.
So first, horticulture.
Anthropologists use the term horticulture to mean agriculture or farming
that is based purely on human labor power
and uses implements such as hose or digging sticks or mortars and sickles.
So the labor in horticulture is human.
If they turn over the soil, they do it with simple hose or sticks.
And many horticultural communities exist even today.
You can find many of them, for example, in the Amazon.
So if you want to think of a typical farming community in the early agrarian era,
don't think of plough agriculture.
Think rather of a village in the highlands of Papua New Guinea
where people will dig the land themselves using rudimentary hose or digging sticks.
And most of the energy for this type of agriculture comes from human beings,
rather than from animals.
That's horticulture.
And it's probably, it's probably a good,
it probably gives you a good general impression of what we mean by agriculture
for many of the people who lived in the early agrarian era.
But there's a second general type of technology that is really rather important
and also had its own dynamism, and that is swidden agriculture,
sometimes called slash and burn.
This is what swidden farmers do.
Swidden farming you'll find is, what's the best way of saying it?
It's a way of farming forested lands.
Swidden farmers use stone axes and fire to clear forested regions.
Often they'll scar trees, let them die, and then burn them down.
So they'll burn down an area of forest.
And then what they'll do, probably leaving the stumps there,
is they'll plant crops in the rich, ashy soil that's left behind.
Initially, you can get very, very good yields in the ash from burnt trees.
But fertility will probably decline quite rapidly within a few years.
So, swidden agriculture is a sort of semi-nomadic agriculture.
Often within, say, five or six years, the community will have to move on.
It'll have to burn a new patch of forest.
And in this way, swidden families may migrate around an area of forest
in perhaps migratory patterns of 50 or 60 years,
waiting until the forest has regrown in an area they were in before.
So, swidden farming is particularly adapted to forested regions.
And the result, the impact of swidden farming,
is to initiate the process of global deforestation.
It's swidden farmers who really began the process of significantly reducing forest cover.
Indeed, the striking recent evidence about the impact of swidden farming,
a climatologist, William Ruddiman, has recently argued
that there was a minor spike in the appearance of greenhouse gases in the early agrarian era.
And he suggests that this may have been caused in part by decline in forest cover
and in part by the burning of trees.
Now, if he's right, then the spread of swidden farming
is an early sign of humans in the early agrarian era
beginning to have a significant impact on global climates.
While we're on the subject, Ruddiman suggests that a second spike of this kind
can be observed from about 5,000 years ago,
that, he argues, was probably caused by the spread of paddy rice farming
in Southeast and Eastern Asia.
Paddy rice farming tends to generate significant amounts of methane, another greenhouse gas.
And it's even been argued that these changes
may have stopped global climates from cooling,
preserving the benign conditions that are so necessary for agriculture.
If so, humans, even in the early agrarian era,
are beginning to have a very significant impact on global climates,
enough of an impact, in fact, to break the traditional cycle of ice ages and interglace fields
that had lasted for at least a million years.
Okay, now what I'd like to do is look at the sort of communities people lived in.
I'd like to try and get some sense of how people lived in the early agrarian era.
Most early agrarian communities can be thought of as villages.
This is the typical kind of community of this era of human history.
But some may have been large enough that we should think of them as small towns.
Jericho may be the oldest known agrarian settlement.
It lies about 20 kilometers east of Jerusalem.
It's been excavated since the mid-19th century by archaeologists,
looking, of course, for its famous walls.
In the 1950s, Kathleen Kenyon found walls that turned out to be almost 11,000 years old,
way, way, way before Joshua.
As Jericho lies 800 feet below sea level,
it's probable that these walls were not military defenses.
On the contrary, they were intended to keep out floodwaters.
Jericho's first occupants were probably Natufians.
But by 11,000 years ago, just when agriculture was beginning,
about 1,000 people could be found living in 70 mud brick dwellings
and supporting themselves by farming.
This is one of the earliest large communities that we know of.
And again, think of this.
Few permanent communities this large had ever existed.
In the Paleolithic era, people had certainly gathered for brief periods,
perhaps two or three weeks, in gatherings of many hundreds of people.
But Paleolithic technologies simply couldn't support large numbers of people
living in the same area permanently.
So such communities as Jericho, 11,000 years ago, represent a new phenomenon in human history,
one of the many emergent properties generated by the appearance of agriculture.
Out of respect for their ancestors, the inhabitants of Jericho decorated their skulls.
This is a practice we find in modern, early agrarian villages in Papua New Guinea,
in the Papua New Guinea in Highlands.
And it's a very powerful reminder of the importance of kinship and of ancestors
in all early human communities.
Even more densely settled was Chattel-Huyuk in Anatolia,
southeast of the modern city of Cognia.
Chattel-Huyuk flourished 9,000 years ago.
It's an astonishing sight.
Here, mud brick houses were built with adjoining walls.
They are butted onto each other, a bit like the cells in a beehive.
So houses were entered from the roof.
Each house contained a hearth, a storage area, and exotic bull-headed statues.
And the inhabitants exported the tough volcanic glass known as obsidian,
which was the best way of making a hard, sharp edge before the appearance of metallurgy.
And most early agrarian villages were undoubtedly smaller.
Modern anthropological studies of regions such as the Papua New Guinea in Highlands
or the Amazon Basin today may give an impression of how most people lived
in the early agrarian era.
This was, as we've seen, above all, an era of villages.
The village was, for most people, the most complex community they would know.
The hub of power, the source of wealth, and the source of knowledge.
Perhaps these weren't quite hotspots,
but they were at least emerging warm spots dotted around the surface of the earth
in increasing numbers.
Now finally, let me ask about the question of progress,
something we touched on in dealing with the Paleolithic.
Is there any evidence that people lived better or worse in the early agrarian era?
This is an issue we've touched on slightly already.
We saw in lecture 22 that by some criteria, paleolithic foragers lived quite well.
What's the evidence on early farmers?
Well, it's mixed.
There's some evidence that the first generation or two probably lived well,
enjoying improved food supplies.
Incidentally, the evidence depends a lot on studies of the skeletal remains of early farmers.
However, within a few generations,
problems emerged that nomadic foragers had never faced,
as sedentism generated population explosions in settlement after settlement.
Now think about what these denser communities meant.
Sedentary villages attracted vermin and rubbish.
Diseases could spread more easily with a large pool of potential victims to infect.
