It may have appeared independently, but it may have appeared under the influence of agricultural regions in Mesoamerica.
So this is a brief outline chronology of the first appearance of agriculture
and that gives sort of beginning dates for the early agrarian era in three of the world zones.
Now, we need to define carefully what we mean by agriculture. What is agriculture?
This is one of those questions we've seen before that seems to have an obvious answer when you first ask it,
but once you try and pin it down to give a precise definition, it turns out to be subtler than it seems.
So defining agriculture is surprisingly tricky.
What we need, I think, in this course is a definition that's not just a dictionary definition,
but a definition that captures the essence of agriculture and also can convey something of its astonishing transformative capacity.
So now I'm going to try to define agriculture carefully as in an early lecture I tried to define collective learning precisely and carefully.
This is one of those areas where the multiple perspectives of big history can be very, very helpful indeed.
So let's look at agriculture from the perspective of a biologist.
From a biologist's point of view, agriculture can be regarded as an intense form of symbiosis.
Now, we've met symbiosis before. We've seen that in the biological realm, cooperation is in many ways as common as competition
and we've also seen that cooperation can take many different forms.
Essentially, what we mean is that two quite separate species start living close together in ways that advantage both species.
Now, let's describe different forms of symbiosis. Mutualism is a type of symbiosis involving relations between species that seem to benefit both species.
We can think of it, if you like, as a sort of fairly equal form of symbiosis.
For example, there's a type of ant known as a honeypot ant.
Honeypot ants keep herds of aphids. They protect them, they help them reproduce, and they also extract honeydew by stroking them with their antennae.
Now, it's clear what advantages the ants get from this. They get food, honeydew, just as we milk cattle.
But what benefit do the aphids get? Why should we call this mutualism?
Well, they lose a lot of freedom, but they're protected and they're helped to reproduce.
So the species as a whole does pretty well.
There are many other examples of mutualism, including, for example, one of the most important forms of mutualism that we know of,
the relationship between flowering plants and pollinators, such as bees and birds.
This is a fantastically important form of mutualism for modern agriculture.
Other forms of symbiosis, such as parasitism, seem to benefit one organism much more than the other.
Nevertheless, in all durable forms of symbiosis, both sides must get some benefit,
because if one side is seriously damaged, eventually it will cease to exist, and the relationship will collapse, harming both partners.
So we can think of symbiosis on a scale running from mutualism, a fairly equal relationship, to parasitism,
in which one side clearly seems to be getting more benefit than the other.
Okay, with those ideas in mind, here's a preliminary definition of agriculture.
Agriculture, I'll suggest, is a symbiotic relationship between humans and the species that we call domesticates,
and it's a relationship that benefits both sides.
So let me say that again.
Agriculture is a symbiotic relationship between humans and the species we call domesticates,
and it's a relationship from which both sides benefit.
So let's look at the cost-benefit analysis of agriculture.
How do the domesticates benefit?
Well, they benefit from human protection because humans look after them and protect them,
and humans do that because humans need them, and that's why their populations are so large.
Vatslav Smil proposes an interesting way of thinking about this.
He suggests a way of estimating the total biomass of domesticated and wild mammals to see which has benefited most.
In effect, what he does is he imagines that we take all these organisms, we boil them down until all we've got left is carbon,
so he reduces them notionally to a biomass in carbon.
Now, this is what happens when he calculates this out.
He estimates that the biomass of all domesticated mammals when reduced to carbon is now about 120 million tonnes.
The biomass of wild mammals on Earth today is only about 5 million tonnes.
Now, immediately that gives a very striking demonstration of the evolutionary benefits to domesticated animals of being domesticates.
Now, many domesticates could no longer survive without human help.
This relationship has become so close that it's a matter of life and death, certainly for the domesticates.
Maze can't seed itself.
A domestic sheep are now pretty helpless against predators without human protection.
How do humans benefit?
Humans benefit because humans receive food and other services from their domesticates.
If maize or sheep were to vanish overnight, millions of humans would suffer serious starvation.
We are very dependent on this relationship too.
Now, once you get species that are this dependent on each other,
what tends to happen is that they, in the language of the biologists, they co-evolve.
As one changes, so do the other.
So what's happened is that we and our domesticates have co-evolved.
We've slowly changed, sort of, in lockstep with each other.
But the co-evolution takes different forms for humans' domesticates.
Domesticates have mostly changed genetically.
Domestic cattle, for example, are smaller and more tractable than their wild ancestor, the fearsome aurochs.
Arochs survived until the 18th century, incidentally.
These were seriously fierce, dangerous animals.
Or compare another example.
Compare wild and domestic sheep.
The wild relatives of sheep, such as the thin horns of the northwestern United States,
are intelligent, athletic, cunning.
They're well able to defend themselves against or to escape at least from some pretty ferocious predators.
Frankly, they're pretty magnificent beasts.
Now, can we say the same of their domestic cousins?
I don't would be too hard on domestic sheep, but I don't think so.
They are, frankly, stupid, slow, fat, and more or less incapable of defending themselves.
Why?
Why should they evolve to become stupid, fat, and incapable of defending themselves?
And the answer is, because that makes them meatier, woollier, easier to manage,
and therefore more attractive to humans who protect them and look after them.
So both sides benefit.
But, while the domesticates have changed genetically, humans have mostly changed culturally.
In a sense, therefore, we can say that humans, too, have been domesticated.
Certainly, from the point of view of surviving foragers,
the life of farmers often seems little better than that of domestic cattle.
Farmers are genetically more or less identical to their Paleolithic ancestors,
but they have very different life ways.
They've evolved culturally rather than genetically.
However, I should add that even humans have undergone some genetic changes.
For example, genes allowing adult humans to digest raw milk seem to have spread very rapidly
amongst farmers that also depend quite heavily on the herding of livestock
and that milk their livestock.
So, in summary, we've been discussing what agriculture is,
and I've argued it's a symbiotic relationship
in which humans help favoured species to reproduce in return for food and other services.
The domesticates evolve genetically, humans evolve culturally.
Now let's ask why agriculture had such a transformative impact.
Why does it count as a fundamental threshold in this course?
Now here I'm going to offer a very general answer,
the more detailed answer we're going to see in the course of subsequent lectures.
Agriculture transformed human history above all by increasing human control of energy and resources.
Now we've seen that humans, by their very nature, are fantastically good
at finding new ways of getting energy and resources.
Agriculture marks a very sharp acceleration in this process.
It's a sort of energy bonanza.
It generated massive new energy flows.
How? What happens with that agriculture?
Well here's a way of describing agriculture that may convey this.
What farmers or agriculturalists do is this.
They clear away species that they can't use.
Now we call these species weeds or pests,
but of course in an objective sense they have as much right to exist as anyone else.
That's simply, we use those terms because we can't use them, we don't want them.
So you get rid of them, you remove them, you hunt them down, you move them from the soil.
And we do that to increase the production of those plants or animals that we can use,
which we call domesticates.
Now this activity, removing species we don't like, increasing production of those we like,
very often reduces total biological productivity.
But what it does for us is it channels more of the sun's energy,
captured through photosynthesis, into species that we can use.
The result is an increase in our species' share of biospheric resources.
I hope you see that agriculture seen like this counts as a successful grad for more energy by a single species.
We're increasing the amount of biospheric energy and resources that come our way.
Now another way of putting this is to say that agriculture implies intensification.
I described the extensive technologies of the Paleolithic era
and how they allowed human populations to spread to new regions
without ever increasing the density of human populations.
The intensive technologies of the agrarian era work in a very different way.
What they do is they allow more humans to live in a given area.
This is how agriculture increased the social pressure within early human communities.
It brought people together in larger and denser communities
where they encountered each other more frequently
and like atoms in those early solar nebulae collided with each other more frequently.
It's as if the social temperature began to rise as the social pressure rose.
Larger, denser communities then began to pose new problems,
but they also created new opportunities.
Human populations supplied with more energy began to grow rapidly.
Human population really begins to take off with the appearance of agriculture.
So humans get more energy and resources and that supports population growth.
Our species along with the domesticates that we're supporting begins to grow in numbers.
Human populations become larger.
Even the earliest forms of farming could support something like 50 to 100 times as many people
as foraging technologies could from the same area.
So this is a massive increase in the number of people that can be supported from a given area of land.
Larger, denser communities in turn generate new forms of power and hierarchy
and they stimulate collective learning and innovation.
After all, living in a permanent community of 10,000 people is a very different thing
from living in a mobile community of just 10 or 20 people.
More ideas are being exchanged.
This increases the synergy of collective learning,
but also in the larger community it was impossible just to relate on personal terms now
because you don't know most people.
So new rules are necessary to govern relationships between people who barely knew each other.
People had to be classified in new ways so that strangers knew how to deal with each other.
So in these large communities all the rules begin to change
and these changes accelerated social change and they began to transform human societies.
Niles Eldridge, Stephen J. Gould's colleague and one of the pioneers of the theory of punctuated evolution,
rights of agriculture,
agriculture represents the single most profound ecological change in the entire 3.5 billion year history of life.
This is a biologist speaking, not a historian.
Now I'll leave you to decide whether this is too much of an exaggeration,
but I quote him to suggest just how striking this change may appear
in the eyes of a biologist who spent a lot of their career studying the evolution of life on Earth.
Now in summary, we've seen that agriculture is a symbiotic relationship between humans and animal and plant domesticates
whose effect is to increase the resources available to both sides of the relationship.
By doing so, by supplying humans suddenly with a very considerable increase in energy,
it allowed greater complexity, certainly among humans who after all played the dominant role in this relationship.
In this lecture I've discussed what agriculture is and why its impact was so revolutionary.
Now, with a very clear understanding of what agriculture is and why it counts as such an important threshold,
we can ask the question, why?
Why did agriculture appear in so many different parts of the world from about 10,000 years ago?
Thank you.
In the previous lecture, I took time out to try and define agriculture,
and we saw that defining it is quite a subtle problem.
So it was worth taking a fair bit of time to explain what precisely the nature of that threshold was,
because only once we've defined it clearly and we understand the nature of the threshold,
can we really explain it and then understand its impact.
We also talked in general terms about why agriculture had such a revolutionary impact.
We saw that the appearance of agriculture counts as one of our great thresholds of complexity,
and it'll generate new emergent properties that are going to transform human history, absolutely transform it.
We also saw that there are some intriguing similarities between this threshold and other thresholds,
including the creation of the first stars.
Now what I want to do in this lecture is begin or try to explain to offer an explanation of agriculture.
We begin by discussing the evidence that we can use to trace the origins of agriculture,
and then I'm going to try and explain or offer an explanation for this revolutionary turning point.
Why did humans, in so many different parts of the world, some of them completely disconnected from each other,
suddenly start getting their food and energy in entirely new ways in a series of different parts of the world?
When I say sudden, I mean sudden in comparison to the 200,000 years or so of the Paleolithic era,
we'll see that agriculture pops up quite independently in several quite distinct regions.
Evidence.
We have to ask the question again.
How can we know about events that occurred many thousands of years ago, long before the appearance of writing?
Agriculture appeared at least 6,000 years before there were written records of any kind anywhere in the world.
So this is a topic once more that we must study through archaeology.
How?
Rather than discussing the evidence abstractly, we can get a feeling for the sort of evidence that archaeologists use
in handling this issue by looking at the so-called Natufian people and a closely related group, the Kebaran people.
And here I'm making a lot of use of the work of Stephen Mitham, whose book, After the Ice,
offers a sort of imaginary tour of life since the last 20,000 years
by a fictional character that he calls Lubbock after the 19th century British archaeologist of the same name.
So what happens is we follow Lubbock, who's a sort of time traveler.
We follow him right around the world to a number of archaeological sites.
And what he does is he visits them in real time, so we actually see through Lubbock's eyes what people were doing.
It's a lovely way for a non-archaeologist to get a feeling for the relationship between
what archaeologists actually find, which often doesn't look terribly exciting to a non-archaeologist,
and the real lives that the archaeologists can construct from that evidence.
So Lubbock watches these people as they go about their daily lives,
and it's a very vivid and powerful way of getting a sense of how archaeologists reconstruct the past.
The Natufian people, back to the Natufians.
The Natufian people lived in the fertile crescent in modern Jordan and Israel from approximately,
and all dates for this period I always have to say approximately,
from approximately 14,000 to about 12,000 years ago.
Let me just try and describe what I mean by the fertile crescent.
It runs north from the Nile along the eastern edge of the Mediterranean shore
through Israel, Palestine and Lebanon to southern Turkey, then curves east
and curves down along the border between modern Iraq and Iran and down to the Persian Gulf.
Natufian sites illustrate some of the techniques and the challenges of the sort of research archaeologists do
when they're trying to study early agriculture.
Now here are some of the distinctive features of Natufian sites.
First, Natufian sites are strikingly different from those of most of the sort of foraging populations
you find if you're studying the Paleolithic world.
Their dwellings in general were more substantial.
They were often built into the ground for warmth,
and they were built with well-built dry stone walls.
So these are sort of dwellings that are much more substantial than the sort of dwellings
that were built by foragers throughout most of the Paleolithic era.
Secondly, they seem to have been sedentary.
By sedentary, I mean they seem to have stayed in one place most of the year,
which is something that farmers conventionally do.
Now they may have left for a few weeks, but they're there.
They're in one place for most of the year.
How do we know this?
Well, Natufian's hunted gazelle.
So you find lots of gazelle bones at these sites,
and this is an illustration of some of the things that archaeologists can do with bones.
You can tell from the growth bands on the gazelle teeth what age they were
and what time of year they were hunted.
And what this evidence shows is that they were hunting gazelle all year round from the same place.
