Lecture 18, Hominins
Where do we fit into all of this?
Well, it's taken us 18 lectures.
Humans have made guest appearances,
maybe in the form of scientists,
but now at last humans are waiting in the wings,
though I'm afraid you're going to have to still wait two more lectures
before they make a full entrance with Trumpet's blaring.
But perhaps this long delay is actually helpful,
and it can tell us something about the nature of big history.
It's a reminder that the story is not all about us,
and that fact raises the question of how important we really are in this story.
Most of what's been said so far in this course suggests,
or may seem to suggest, that we're extremely unimportant.
We're small, we appeared very, very recently,
just in the last 53 minutes,
if you collapse the 13-billion-year timescale of the universe into just 13 years,
and we're just one of hundreds of millions of species that share this planet.
The rest of this course, though,
is for some reasons for thinking that perhaps we really do deserve a large place in this story.
I think from now on, the significance of humans, I hope, is going to become clearer and clearer.
The last two lectures described evolution in general,
and we were focusing on those evolutionary lines
that would eventually lead towards our own species.
Now we're ready to ask how our ancestors evolved from the primates.
But first, let's take a bit of time out to be clear about our place in the biological world,
and we're going to go back to taxonomy.
We've seen taxonomy already, we've referred to it several times.
Taxonomy, let me remind you, is the system used to classify living organisms,
and it goes back to the work of Carl Linnaeus in the 18th century.
And we saw in the last lecture that modern taxonomy has multiple levels,
they're sort of nested levels.
So in principle, you can find the exact position of every organism,
and that should tell you a lot about its relationship to other organisms on the huge family tree of life,
which ultimately, of course, goes back to a single, notional organism that appeared about 3.8 billion years ago.
So let's be clear about our position in modern taxonomy.
I'm going to go through the levels.
You and I belong to the super kingdom of eukaryotes.
That is to say, we're made from eukaryotic cells.
Now I said last time, lots of prokaryotic cells are crawling around us and inside us,
but basically we're made from eukaryotic cells, we're eukaryotic organisms.
Within multi-celled organisms, we belong to the kingdom of animals.
We're not single-celled, nor are we plants or fungi.
And this, of course, really does matter.
Plants, perhaps the crucial distinguishing feature of plants is that they can do photosynthesis, which we can't.
They can extract energy directly from sunlight if there's carbon dioxide and water available.
We can't do that.
Because plants can do it, what they can do is just stand there and suck up energy.
They don't need to go looking for it.
Because we can't just suck up energy like that.
We, like all other animals, have to go looking for food.
We have to be mobile and probably we have to be a bit more thoughtful and a bit more intelligent.
So many of the crucial differences between plants and animals arise from this simple but fundamental difference.
They can photosynthesize, we can't.
So, we are animals.
We belong to the phylum, the phylum of vertebrates or cordata.
That is to say we have backbones.
And that means we have a front and a back end, like all vertebrates.
Most of our nervous system and many of our sensors, or many of our sensory systems, I should say rather,
are concentrated at the front end, the pointy end of this piece.
That's the end that's going to move into the world first.
That's where you want vision, you want smell and so on.
The nervous system tends to be distributed along the spine.
We belong to the class of mammals.
That is to say we're furry, warm-blooded, and our young develop not in an egg, but within the womb.
As we've seen, being a mammal was good news 65 million years ago when the asteroid hit at the end of the Cretaceous period.
Remember one thing about that asteroid strike.
If that asteroid had been on an orbit just a tiny bit earlier or later, just a few minutes later or earlier,
it wouldn't have hit the earth, the dinosaurs would have survived,
and mammals would probably still be a small, nocturnal, scurrying class of animals of little significance on the planet.
As it was, the dinosaurs were cleared out of the way and the mammals could now fill their niches in a massive adaptive radiation,
so that suddenly a whole range of new mammal species appear in this radiation.
And many of them are big because they began to fill some of the big animal niches filled by dinosaurs.
So the asteroid is very, very important in this story.
To put it bluntly, no asteroid or an asteroid on a slightly different trajectory and no you and me.
Okay, we belong to the class of animals. We belong to the order of primates.
The order of primates includes lemurs and monkeys.
Yes, despite all the jokes, we really are monkeys.
And I have to say that personally, I've never found that particularly offensive.
I love monkeys. I think they're clever, interesting organisms.
I really don't mind the thought that I'm closely related to them.
We belong to the family of hominoids.
The hominoids are great apes.
They're large, quite intelligent, tailless apes, monkeys.
At the same point, I've never been offended at the thought of being closely related to chimps or gorillas.
I think they're beautiful creatures.
And as we'll see, recent studies of how they live in the wild, pioneered by researchers such as Jane Goodall and Diane Fosse,
have shown how interesting and clever they are.
They're much more interesting when you see them in the wild than when you see them in captivity,
which is how most of us have seen them.
Let's keep going. We go to the subfamily of hominins, bipedal apes.
We belong to the genus, homo, which sort of means human being.
The genus is the last category before the lowest category of all, the simplest category of all, the species.
We are homo sapiens. That's our species name.
Now, having said all of that, note that classification systems sometimes differ in detail,
so if you find slightly different classifications, don't worry too much.
But I hope you see how this nested system helps us get a sense of how we fit in to the large evolutionary story of life on Earth.
So in short, we are eukaryotic, multi-celled mammals from the order of primates.
If you want to get a sense of the chronology, you might want to check timelines three and four in the written materials that go with this course,
and they'll remind us when each of these distinctive features evolved.
So the history of living things that we surveyed in the last two lectures is, from one point of view,
a history of the evolution of many of the qualities that make us as we are.
Now I'd like to look at the order of primates.
The primates appeared about 65 million years ago at about the time of the Cretaceous asteroid impact.
They include, as we've seen, all monkeys and lemurs.
They include tarsias, they include gorillas, they include all marmosets,
they include all the American species of monkeys as well, as well as humans.
We are primates.
Now all primates share some distinctive features,
and a lot of these features seem to derive from the fact that the earliest primates almost certainly spent a lot of their time,
perhaps most of their time, living in trees.
They were tree dwellers.
In fact, if you, I remember, I used to love climbing trees myself as a kid,
and watch a young kid near a tree that's good for climbing,
and you won't have any trouble imagining that we are descended from organisms that lived in trees.
But living in trees has certain consequences, and they help explain some features of us.
First, if you live in trees, you need stereoscopic vision.
If you're leaping for a branch, you really want to be able to know exactly how far away that branch is,
otherwise you fall to the forest floor.
So you need stereoscopic vision.
So that means your eyes are going to move around to the front of your head.
You also need grasping limbs.
So primates have very good limbs.
They have good system of fingers.
It's under good control.
So both these qualities probably have a lot to do with living in trees.
Primates as a whole also have surprisingly large brains compared to their body size.
Now, this may be because visual information requires a lot of processing.
Remember, if you're living in trees, vision is very important, particularly stereoscopic vision.
And visual information requires a lot of computing power.
This is true in computers.
It's also true in brains.
So that may be one of the reasons why they have disproportionately large brains for their size.
I need to make one clarification here.
Elephants, of course, have huge brains, much, much bigger than ours.
But the crucial point is that their bodies are so much bigger
that their bodies take up a lot of computing capacity.
So the real, the best measure of intelligence, intrinsic cleverness, really,
is brain size relative to body size.
That's what really counts.
And here, primates are rather unusual.
Primates also tend to have longer lives.
This too may be related to larger brains.
Larger brains, brains as we'll see, are costly.
You have to feed them.
They take a lot of energy.
So you need more energy if you're going to support these very, very complex organs.
And they have to justify their existence.
One way they do that is by allowing you to learn.
In other words, to get better at doing things during your lifetime.
But learning, of course, is a slow process.
So the payoff may take some time.
So learning makes a bit more sense with longer-lived organisms.
That may be one of the reasons why primates live longer.
I should say now, and I may have to repeat this later on,
that very often we guess in retrospect what was the adaptive advantage
of a particular change in natural selection.
It's always hard to be sure that we've absolutely got it right.
But so these are, to some extent, these depend on guesswork.
Another feature.
We have flat faces.
We have a diminished snout and flatter faces.
Well, this too may have some link with living in trees.
Fast sense of smell is less important.
So most primates have small snouts and flatter faces.
If you want to get a strong sense of this, compare us to dogs.
Dogs are often described as noses on legs.
For dogs, a vast amount of information comes from the sense of smell.
So the nose is very well developed.
And to put it crudely, it sticks out in front.
Dogs, I suspect, find us kind of disappointingly flat-faced.
Okay, that's primates.
And I hope you can see that many of our features clearly derive from our primate heritage.
Now I want to move on to the great apes, the family of hominoids.
The great apes are a family within the order of primates.
They are large, intelligent, tail-less primates.
The family includes chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, gibbons, and humans.
And it also includes many extinct species.
The hominoids evolved in Africa, were an African species, about 18 million years ago.
Though some would eventually migrate to other parts of Eurasia, such as the orangs.
Only in recent decades, by the way, have we begun to realize quite how complex their social lives are
through the pioneering work of researchers such as Jane Goodall,
who I mentioned last time, who worked with chimpanzees in the wild,
and Diane Fosse, who worked mainly with gorillas.
They showed the great apes as much more than mere animals.
They showed them as organisms with complex social and political lives,
a lot of technical ability, a great diversity of personalities,
and also a rich emotional life.
Both of them resisted the traditional researchers' taboo on empathizing
with the subject you're researching.
And that, I think, allowed them a sort of insight into the lives of these creatures
that other researchers hadn't had.
They allowed themselves to empathize with the creatures they were studying.
And that may explain why they saw so much more
than researchers who refused to see them as anything but highly mobile objects.
Now, it was the striking similarities between us and the great apes,
the persuaded Darwin that we were closely related
and that we might be descended from ape-like creatures.
Of course, we're not descended from apes.
Apes have evolved, so have we.
But we may have descended.
In fact, as we'll see, we certainly did descend from a common ancestor.
This, I think, is one more sign of Darwin's perceptiveness.
He, unlike most of his contemporaries,
could see beyond the prejudices and assumptions of his time
about human uniqueness and had little difficulty in seeing the similarities
between us and apes.
He could see us as part of a unified world of living organisms,
rather than, as a lot of scholarship did,
seeing human beings as somehow separate from the natural world.
We belong to the sub-family of hominins.
You'll sometimes find the word hominids, by the way,
used as a synonym for hominins.
The two mean exactly the same.
The hominins are a group of apes that walked upright.
They evolved seven million years ago.
This date is based on comparisons of the genetic material of modern great apes,
because we have very few fossils from this era.
Here's an area where very recent dating techniques
have critically rearranged our ideas about the human past.
It used to be thought on the basis of very limited fossil evidence,
which was also very difficult to interpret.
The humans and the great ape lines had diverged perhaps 15 or even 30 million years ago.
We'll look more closely at the basis of these genetic dating techniques in the next lecture.
But genetic evidence suggests that the human line split from the chimp line
about 7 million years ago and from the gorilla line about 8 to 10 million years ago.
And let me be clear about exactly what that means.
It means that about 7 million years ago there was a creature
which was the ancestor to us, but also the ancestor to modern chimps.
It was not the same as either of us because both groups have evolved,
but it was the ancestor of both of us.
And once the hominins appeared about something like 7 million years ago,
they diverged rapidly in a new adaptive radiation
of which we today are the only survivors.
We don't know exactly how many hominin species there have been over these 7 million years,
but it could have been as many as 20 or 30, quite a lot of species.
All of them have gone extinct except for us.
In recent decades, many hominin fossils have turned up.
And these allow us to learn something more about the nature of the first hominins.
