There was enough rainfall for simple forms of farming.
But eventually, some of them began to migrate down into the arid lowlands.
By 9,000 years ago, you have some farming communities already beginning to descend
for the highlands of the Zagros Mountains, east of modern Iraq,
and settling the arid plains, but as yet only in regions where there's enough water for crops.
Then they begin to push further into the arid lands,
and some begin to develop very simple forms of irrigation.
By 8,000 years ago, there were many villages of irrigation farmers
settled along the major rivers and tributaries north of modern Baghdad.
Some of them are already beginning to build substantial canal systems,
but they still rely largely on semi-natural forms of irrigation.
The site of Chogarmami to the east of modern Baghdad is a good illustration of this.
The village lies between two tributaries,
so that you could divert water to flood the fields and then drain it away again.
And the village may have had 1,000 people living in it.
And then things began to speed up.
By 7,000 years ago, villages are multiplying, particularly along the Euphrates,
even in the lands to the south of Baghdad now, in the lands of what would later be known as Sumer.
Villages of the so-called Ubaid culture appear.
Sometimes in small clusters near larger settlements,
some of which have as many as 4,000 people, and we can think of these as small towns.
They dug canals, sometimes several kilometers long.
They grew barley and dates, and they kept cattle and sheep.
They also fished and caught water birds.
As the archaeologist Brian Fagan points out,
these settlements must have depended on organized communal efforts.
There must have been quite a lot of politics going on and quite a lot of leadership.
You needed to get raw materials to build houses,
from the plentiful supplies of sand, clay, palm trees and reeds between the rivers.
But digging even tiny canals required a lot of effort.
The back-breaking task of clearing silt from clogged rivers
was hard work and took a lot of organization.
So we see larger communities appearing, more elaborate irrigation, more organization.
And eventually, rising productivity is going to encourage population growth
and the emergence of more and more of these medium-sized towns.
And as population increases throughout Mesopotamia,
particularly in the arid lands watered by the Tigris and Euphrates,
you start finding more integration between these towns and communities.
We find trade goods being moved over large areas.
Obsidian from Çatal Huyuk in southern Turkey appears throughout much of Mesopotamia.
You find also that clay apotry types of particular kinds,
such as Halafian, where appear over very large areas traded over 600 miles or more.
Now, all of these processes mesh together.
Populations are growing. They're becoming more interdependent.
The technologies are becoming more productive.
And it's all of these processes together that will eventually lay the foundation
for the quite rapid appearance in Sumer towards the end of the 4th millennium BC,
just over 5,000 years ago of the first agrarian civilizations.
And we'll discuss that in the next lecture. Thank you.
One of the curious features of big history is that agrarian civilizations seem to arrive so late.
I've had colleagues who've been shocked at how late they arrive in my big history course.
We're now up to lecture 30, and finally we get to agrarian civilizations.
But I do hope that you're getting a sense of how the much wider perspective of big history
can help put very familiar subjects in new contexts.
What we're really seeing is how the familiar topics of history,
and particularly of world history, are not just given.
The big history perspective forces us to see that very clearly.
They too had a history, and the history had a history, and the history had a history, and so on.
So what we're really doing is setting them in a context
consisting of all these multiple scales that we deal with in big history.
Now, in a sense, in a minor way, that's what we've been doing in the last few lectures.
Now, we look at the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations.
And we focus on southern Mesopotamia, where the process has been studied with peculiar thoroughness,
which means that we can see the process probably more clearly than anywhere else in the world.
So, how did the buildup of human and material resources that I described in the last lecture
generate the first tribute-taking states, the first agrarian civilizations, and the first real cities?
All of these developments occurred with surprising suddenness just before 3000 BCE,
in the last few centuries before the turn of the millennium in Sumer at the southern edge of Mesopotamia.
Now, I'm afraid that here we have one more threshold.
Many components are suddenly arranged into something new.
This is something that happens each time we get a new level of complexity.
The first cities, the first tribute-taking states, and the first agrarian civilizations.
Now, we're going to focus on Sumer for the present, but we'll look at other areas in the next lecture.
So, back to Sumer, although there's just one more bit of business I must deal with before we actually go to Sumer.
And that concerns chronology and the labels we use for chronology.
So far, it's usually been enough if I give a date to describe dates as before the present.
And I've used the archaeologists' terminology of BP before present.
We saw that this is how radiometric dates are conventionally given.
Technically, it means before 1950, but that's not going to worry us most of the time.
There's a sort of intuitive logic to such dates, but once we get into an era where we have documents,
it makes much more sense to start using a more familiar way of dating events.
And that is the convention that used to use the terminology of BC and AD.
Now, of course, that comes ultimately from the Christian calendar.
BC means before Christ, AD means Anno Domini, or Year of the Lord.
And what I'm going to use is a slightly modified terminology, BCE or CE.
BCE means before the common era, CE means in the common era.
The system is essentially identical, of course, to the older system.
The only reason for using it, and I'm not making a very strong argument for this,
is that it's become the convention in writing on world history,
and it is just slightly less tightly tied to the traditions of a particular culture, European, Christian culture.
So that's the terminology I'm going to use from now on, dates BCE and CE.
And just remember the simple rule, to convert from dates BP into the system we'll use from now on,
you deduct 2,000 years.
So 4,000 BCE is 6,000 BP, OK?
That's more or less where we're going to start.
So let's now imagine ourselves transported to Sumer, southern Mesopotamia, near the Persian Gulf,
about 6,000 years ago.
So we're in Sumer, 6,000 years ago, in 4,000 BCE, remember?
Sumer before this period was a swampy region, it was a delta region,
it was the delta of the Tigris and Euphrates.
Andrew Sherrod described it as a backwater, as just an area of mud.
People, he writes, did live there in grass huts and using clay sickles,
but it was not the most lively spot on earth.
However, that would begin to change from about 4,000 BCE,
and the fact that trade networks passed through the region may have been a crucial part of it.
As Andrew Sherrod has argued, the fact that there were abundant trades far to the north
and probably in lands to the south meant this was a region that traders passed through.
That may have encouraged the growth of communities in this region.
And so did another thing, the fact that beneath those swamps there were very rich soils.
And eventually the region started to dry out, so climate change plays a crucial role in the story.
As the swamp lands of southern Sumer begin to dry out,
this turns into a region that can potentially support large numbers of people,
and it begins to attract immigrants.
So during the next thousand years, from 4,000 to 3,000 BCE,
and again that's from 6,000 to 5,000 years ago,
climates became drier.
This made it easier to farm the land as swamp lands began to dry out.
But eventually, when the drying process went too far,
it began to force more and more people to settle in the regions rapidly growing towns,
as region after region became not just dry, but positively arid.
And so gradually you find that people are forced into towns,
into towns that control scarce water supplies and irrigation systems.
Another thing that may have forced them into towns may have been conflict over resources as the land dried.
So what the drying did was first attract a lot of immigrants to the south,
and then force more and more of them into towns that controlled water supplies.
So what the archaeologists see in Sumer between 4,000 BCE and 3,000 BCE
is a very rapid buildup of population,
and then quite suddenly these populations seem to move out of villages and into a series of towns.
Then 10 to 20 powerful cities appear quite quickly late in the fourth millennium,
in the centuries before 3,000 BCE.
They include Ur, Abraham's home city according to biblical tradition.
They include Oruk, Nippur, Lagash and Eridu.
Most of these towns, we can still identify them.
There are still some remains that can be excavated today.
By 3,000 BCE, the city of Oruk may have had 20 to 50,000 inhabitants.
By modern standards, 20 to 50,000 inhabitants is not a particularly impressive town.
It's a sort of medium sized, small to medium sized town.
But remember the context.
In 3,000 BCE, a town of 20 to 50,000 inhabitants
had to count as one of the densest, largest communities that had ever existed in human history.
And probably Oruk, or maybe one of its rival cities,
were almost certainly the largest communities on earth at the time.
How did people live in Oruk?
They lived in whitewashed, mudbrick houses along narrow streets.
At the centre of Oruk, on a huge artificial mound, 12 metres high,
which must have taken a lot of labour to build, stood the so-called White Temple.
This was dedicated to the goddess Inana, a goddess of both love and war.
She has some interesting similarities to the Egyptian goddess Isis and the Hindu goddess Kali.
And it's always tempting in these situations to think there may have been some cultural diffusion
between these different regions.
Inana is also associated with the planet Venus.
Around the main part of the city, there was a massive wall, sometimes more than 7 metres tall.
The Epic of Gilgamesh is probably the world's oldest recorded epic.
And what it describes is the epic adventures of a king of Oruk
who probably, if he really existed, reigned from about 2750 BCE.
The versions we have today were written down only in 1200 BCE.
But it still may capture something of the city's appearance in the reign of King Gilgamesh.
This is early in the third millennium BCE.
I have to say, actually I have to take a moment just to say,
we've, in this course, we've had to work from indirect evidence so long
that it's really fun to be able to use documentary descriptions at last.
So, here we go.
Now at last, written sources give us the sort of sharp focus that historians are used to.
And we can begin to actually name people and name places
and we can actually begin to sort of think our way into an entire world.
Here's the description from Gilgamesh of the city.
Gilgamesh had restored the Holy Aeana Temple and the massive wall of Oruk,
which no city on earth can equal.
See how its ramparts gleam like copper in the sun.
Climb the stone staircase, more ancient than the mind can imagine.
Approach the Temple of Inanna, sacred to Ishtar, that's another name to Inanna.
A temple that no king has equaled in size or beauty.
Walk on the wall of Oruk, says the poem.
Follow its course around the city, inspect its mighty foundations, examine its brickwork,
how masterfully it is built.
Observe the land it encloses, the palm trees, the gardens, the orchards,
the glorious palaces and temples, the shops and marketplaces, the houses, the public squares.
This is one of the oldest literary texts we have and I hope you'll agree,
it at least creates the illusion of quite a vivid picture of a place.
The modern description is a description in general of a number of Sumerian cities
and it comes from the writing of an archaeologist, Susan Pollock.
Now she has a long description of these cities and I'm going to just cherry pick some of the nicer parts.
She writes, the area inside a city's wall was densely built up, but not in a uniform manner.
She gives a wonderful sense of the sort of chaos of some of these early cities.
There's only occasional evidence in Sumer for systematic city planning
and most areas of cities probably grew organically, in other words, ad hoc, higgledy-piggledy.
Streets varied from narrow lanes to broader routes two to three meters wide
and served not only as passageways but also as convenient places in which to dump garbage.
Abandoned buildings were used as receptacles for garbage disposal along with cleared areas where no buildings stood.
In general, we're going to see this over and over again.
Early cities, the problem of waste disposal was very rarely handled well.
She writes that large quantities of waste material were discarded at the edge of the city
perhaps in an attempt to organize refuse disposal.
Open space, occupied houses as well as abandoned ones and garbage dumps were also used sometimes
and this actually to a modern ear is quite shocking as places to dispose of the dead,
sometimes casually and sometimes informal burials.
The description goes on to describe how these cities to some extent had a slightly rural feel in them.
For example, you could find small livestock, you could find some pigs, you could find gardens.
She also describes, gives a nice description of the sort of vibrant, noisy quality of these cities.
The dense architecture, narrow lanes and wide range of activities in diverse population
must have made these cities vibrant, noisy, smelly, sometimes bewildering and dangerous,
but also exciting places.
Houses actually goes on to describe the architecture.
We usually constructed a butting one another over time as the composition and fortunes of a family changed.
Walls might be knocked down or erected, doors blocked or created, additions constructed or portions sold.
In many ways the houses she describes also could be recognized today.
She writes many of them had flat roofs with access to them by staircase or ladder.
Just as today in the Near East, inhabitants of ancient Mesopotamian communities may have used roofs
for a variety of activities including sleeping in summer, drying items and other tasks that required a large layout space.
And one more detail that actually strikes a very modern ring.
Around the edge of these cities, archaeologists have found evidence of sort of shanty towns
as immigrants from the countryside tried to make a living often without great success in the big cities.
So I hope that gives you some sort of feeling for the quality of life in these early cities.
Now these, we even have a map by the way of one of these cities, Nippur.
The map dates from about 1500 but it is the first street map we have in world history.
It shows the city's walls, its gardens, its canals as well as a large temple complex.
Now these early cities that appear quite suddenly in Sumer were the densest
and most complex communities that had ever existed.
Uruk's 20 to 50,000 people lived in just 2.5 square kilometers.
That's an area that would have supported, it could barely have supported a single individual
using the foraging technologies of the Paleolithic era.
So this is an astonishingly dense congregation of people.
Unlike the foraging communities or the villages of the early agrarian era,
these dense communities are not self-sufficient.
Cities have never been self-sufficient and they couldn't support themselves.
Many of their inhabitants were simply not farmers.
They depended for getting food and other resources on relations of control and exchange with nearby peasants.
So though some of the population could have been farmers travelling outside the city during the day to farm their lands,
for the most part these cities had to control nearby hinterlands.
So a city almost by definition is a seat of power.
And what this meant was forcing the peasants of nearby villages to supply them with goods,
sometimes in return for a degree of protection or help with the maintenance of irrigation systems,
often simply by force.
These cities also traded along Mesopotamia's great rivers and across the seas,
partly because this was indeed an arid land by now and many resources including stone were in quite short supply and wood.
Now, I've talked a lot about complexity in emergent properties,
so let's try and look at some of the emergent properties that appeared quite quickly as the first agrarian civilizations evolved.
First cities and institutionalized power.
The inhabitants of the first cities had many needs that could only be met by appointing powerful rulers.
