associated with agriculture,
and on the ability of agriculture to extract more resources from the environment
and therefore to support larger and denser communities.
So, what this means is that most of the people in agrarian civilizations
were peasants,
and most of the resources that sustained agrarian civilizations
were generated by peasant households.
So, we need to remind ourselves,
if you do a sort of quick association test,
and you think of civilization,
I'm betting you'll start thinking of grand monuments,
of pyramids, of palaces and so on.
We need to remind ourselves that despite these great monuments,
this was really a world of peasants.
In fact, there's a sort of very rough rule of thumb
when thinking about agrarian civilizations,
and it's this.
Given the levels of productivity of most pre-modern forms of agriculture,
it normally took, roughly speaking,
and this is just a rule of thumb,
nine peasants to support one city-dweller.
So, what this implies, I hope, is obvious.
In most regions of agrarian civilization,
we're talking about a world in which perhaps 90% of the population
were peasants or small farmers.
So, that's the second crucial ingredient of agrarian civilizations.
First, they're huge.
Secondly, they're based on agriculture,
and that means most of their population is peasants,
and that means that throughout this era,
most people lived as peasants.
If you and I were to be transported randomly
into the era of agrarian civilizations,
randomly put somewhere in that society
the odds are that we'd be peasants.
Third, agrarian civilizations also contained cities,
and tribute-taking states.
They are all shaped by the presence of institutionalized power
on large scales in the form of tribute-taking states,
and they were also shaped by the presence within them
of these demographic hotspots that we call cities.
Okay, so those are three very general features.
Later on, we're going to look at some of the other important
emergent properties that arise once agrarian civilization appears.
Now, world history courses often focus on the differences
between different agrarian civilizations.
Eventually, we're going to do the same thing.
We're going to look at some of these critical differences.
They're shaped by geography, by cultural traditions, and so on.
But initially, we're going to focus on some of the remarkable similarities between them.
Indeed, the notion of agrarian civilizations is useful
precisely because all agrarian civilizations shared
a remarkable amount of common features.
They seem to contain the same basic components.
So from the wider perspective of big history,
what stands out about this era is not so much the variations
between distinct civilizations.
The variations say between Chinese civilization and Muslim civilization
as the idea of agrarian civilization as a distinctive type of community,
a distinctive phenomenon within human history.
Okay, we've seen that their major components are peasants
and peasant farms whose work supports cities, states,
and the various institutions associated with them,
from organized armies to literate bureaucracies and organized markets.
It's the fact that all these components seem to appear together
that encourages us to think of these as a single type of human community.
Now, let's talk in very general terms about chronology.
When did the first agrarian civilizations appear?
Here's a very broad global chronology of the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations.
Like agriculture, as we've seen,
agrarian civilizations evolved differently in different parts of the world.
But because they depended so much on agriculture,
you could more or less predict where they were going to appear.
They appeared precisely in those regions where agriculture was well established.
Let's begin 5,000 years ago, roughly speaking 5,000 years ago.
The first agrarian civilizations appeared about 5,000 years ago in Mesopotamia,
in the southern part of modern Iraq, in the area.
The largest city today is probably Basra in this area.
But also they appeared along the Nile.
Agrarian civilizations appear in both these two zones at about the same time.
About 500 years later, that's to say about 4,500 years ago,
the first agrarian civilizations appeared in the northern parts of the Indian subcontinent
along the Indus River in what is today Pakistan.
That's the second area.
And in that area, almost certainly there were some contacts with Mesopotamia.
So there may have been an element of diffusion here.
How independent the appearance of civilization was in the Indus Valley region
is still not absolutely certain.
We move forward another 500 years.
About 4,000 years ago, we get the first evidence of agrarian civilizations appearing
in northern China along the Yellow River.
Then about 2,500 years ago, the first agrarian civilizations appeared in Southeast Asia,
sub-Saharan Africa, around the Mediterranean,
and also for the first time in a second world zone, the Americas.
And they appear in Mesoamerica and also in the Andes region
during the first millennium BCE, that is to say, about 2,500 years ago.
And here's a final date.
During the last 1,500 years, states appeared in one or two regions of the Pacific zone,
in regions such as Hawaii.
This, you'll remember, is a third of our four world zones.
But the communities that appeared in these regions
were probably too small to count as fully developed agrarian civilizations.
So you can decide whether you want to call them agrarian civilizations or not.
Now, if you follow this chronology on a map,
and you can remember the chronology of the spread of agriculture,
you'll see straight away that the map of early state formation matches the map of agrarian origins,
because it was agriculture that generated the raw materials for civilizations
just as clouds solar nebulae generated the raw material for stars.
Now, what I want to do is turn to one particular region
and try and see if we can pan in on this process of agrarian civilization appearing.
And that region is Mesopotamia.
I want to see if we can trace some of the processes that led to the appearance
of agrarian civilization in that one region.
Now, here, as elsewhere, the emergence of agrarian civilizations depends on this buildup of agrarian resources.
In other words, it depends on the process by which agriculture generates larger and larger populations,
denser populations, more communities.
And it depends on improvements in the technology and productivity of agriculture.
In Mesopotamia, and also in several other parts of Afro-Eurasia,
in which agrarian civilizations would emerge,
two large clusters of innovations would play a particularly important role.
They would stimulate agriculture and they would boost this process of increasing populations
and increasing the resources available in society.
And these processes are, these innovations are the secondary products revolution and irrigation.
So I'm going to talk about each of these innovations.
We saw earlier that agriculture began with fairly simple technologies,
but slowly, slowly those technologies were tweaked and improved as people moved to different areas.
And these two innovations can count as large-scale examples of this process of slow, continuous improvement
in the technology of agriculture.
Let's begin with the secondary products revolution.
The idea is associated with the work of an archaeologist, Andrew Sherret, who died in 2006.
Andrew Sherret identified a cluster of innovations that he called the secondary products revolution.
Let me explain what he meant by this.
Sherret pointed out that when they were first domesticated, animals were used mainly for their meat and hides.
Now what this meant was you had to slaughter them in order to exploit them.
And that meant that early farmers who had domesticated animals were keeping these animals more or less
simply keeping them in reserve until they were slaughtered.
So they were protecting them, they were putting work into protecting them,
they were feeding them, they were looking after them, but sometimes for many years until they slaughtered them
without getting much benefit from them.
Now that may be great for the animal, but from a modern economist's point of view, this is just not very efficient.
What Sherret points out is that from about five or six thousand years ago,
throughout quite an area from Mesopotamia into parts of the Eurasian steppes,
the borderlands between modern Russia and Europe for example, a whole series of new technologies appear
and they have this common feature, that they all allow you to exploit animals while they're still alive.
They allow you to exploit the animals' secondary products.
Those are products that you can use without killing the animal.
Now here are some of the secondary products that could be used by these techniques.
They include the use of milk for food.
Milking is, I mean we take it for granted, but it's actually a reasonably sophisticated technology
and humans couldn't really use milk until they developed ways of digesting it.
Sometimes this involves genetic changes.
It's clear that some communities that use milk a lot, that use dairy produce a lot,
have undergone minor genetic changes which allow them to process milk throughout their life,
rather than just in childhood, which is normal.
But milking itself as a technology is quite complicated.
So this emerges, the earliest evidence is about five or six thousand years old.
And the second secondary product is wool cloth making,
using the fibers of sheep, camel, other large domestic mammals,
for cloth making, for making clothes, for making shoes,
eventually for making tents, for making carpets.
So milk and wool.
But a third whole group of secondary products includes energy.
Remember we're talking about large mammals here.
We're talking about horses, camels, oxen, and slightly smaller organisms such as goats,
but it's the large ones that are crucial here.
People learnt to use their energy.
This is very important, it's immensely important,
because it constitutes in effect a sort of energy revolution that took place
towards the end of the early agrarian era.
An ox or a horse can deliver up to four times as much power as a human being.
So if you can harness that power, you suddenly have access to a lot more energy than before.
What did they use this energy for?
Well, animal power allowed farmers to plow soils more deeply.
If you have an ox or a horse pulling a plow, you can cut much deeper into soils,
you can cut your way through really tough soils.
And what this meant is that you can turn over the soils more deeply,
and also you can bring into cultivation areas that simply couldn't be cultivated
using traditional hose or digging sticks of some kind.
So plow agriculture greatly expanded the area that could be brought into cultivation
and generally probably increased the productivity of agriculture.
Using horses, camels and oxen for their traction power
also revolutionized transportation in both commerce and warfare.
In arid steppe regions, these innovations were of really revolutionary importance
because they laid the foundations for pastoral nomadism.
These are communities that rely almost entirely on domesticated animals,
rather than domesticated plants, and they tend to be nomadic
because one of the most efficient ways of using these domesticated animals
is to let them graze over a wide area.
And to do that, you have to travel with them.
It's often being supposed that pastoral nomadism developed in parallel with agriculture
and at the same time, but evidence that's accumulated in recent decades
makes it very clear that this is not true.
Pastoral nomadism evolved later as farmers in regions well adapted to grazing
but less well adapted to crop growing began to introduce the new technologies
of the Secondary Products Revolution.
It became possible to extract more resources, more energy to get more value
out of domesticated livestock,
and eventually this made it possible to build an entire life way
around the exploitation of domesticated livestock.
And it seems that what happened is livestock farmers in sort of marginal farming lands,
perhaps on the border between modern Russia and Kazakhstan,
began grazing their animals over large areas, developing larger herds,
and eventually becoming more or less nomadic.
And think what this means.
Humans can't digest grass, but these domesticated animals can.
So suddenly you have a technology that allows you to extract the energy
in the grass, in the great steplands of Eurasia,
and all the way down into the Savannah lands of East Africa.
So pastoral nomadism opens up vast new terrain for exploitation.
And we can detect the presence of pastoral nomads in the Eurasian steppes
in part by the appearance of burial mounds or kurgans.
You don't find villages, what you find is burial mounds.
And the earliest clear evidence of pastoral nomadism comes from the steppes
on the border between Russia and Kazakhstan, and dates to about 5,000 to 6,000 years ago.
Okay, this innovation would lay the basis, eventually,
for the great pastoral nomadic empire such as those of Genghis Khan.
Now, I've spent too much time on pastoral nomadism because it fascinates me so much.
So let's talk briefly about irrigation. It's simpler to understand.
This is the second great group of innovations.
Irrigation means artificially introducing water to regions with limited natural rainfall,
but fertile soils and plenty of sunlight.
You find such regions particularly in hot climates,
arid climates with alluvial plains,
that is to say regions that are regularly flooded by large rivers
that bring fertile silts down with them.
And Mesopotamia is such a region.
In fact, literally Mesopotamia means the land between the rivers,
the rivers being the Tigris and Euphrates.
So irrigation, once it's introduced, can have a huge impact on populations.
Suddenly, you have these fertile soils, but no water to farm with.
Now, if you introduce irrigation, suddenly you can farm them
and you can get huge yields and sudden increases in population.
And that's why irrigation has been crucial to the emergence of agrarian civilizations.
Now, how did these innovations prepare the way for the evolution of agrarian civilization in Mesopotamia?
Archaeologists have lavished a lot of attention on Mesopotamia,
so here we can track this process probably more clearly than anywhere else.
We saw that the first farming communities appeared in the fertile crescent,
a ring of highland around Mesopotamia, around the edges of Mesopotamia,
and here they could use rainfall.
