divided into nobles and commoners
and headed by a chieftain known as the Great Sun,
whose members lived in a village of nine houses
and a temple built on the summit of an earthen mound.
Pratz witnessed the funeral of the Great Sun.
His wives, relatives and servants were drugged,
then clubbed to accompany him in death.
So as Fagan points out, this is a unique description
because very soon these societies would be destroyed
by the arrival of European diseases.
Okay, in summary,
we've seen that institutionalized power must begin with power from below.
We've seen how significant forms of power
could be built largely on support from below.
But how is it possible to take the next step,
to build forms of power that are much more institutionalized,
much more bureaucratized,
much less dependent on sort of constant personal negotiation
between the ruler and their followers?
How do you get in short to the level of tribute-taking states
which will introduce the next mini-threshold,
the era of agrarian civilizations?
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
We've traveled a long distance in this course,
and we've accomplished a lot.
Let me just remind you of some of the things we've done.
In just 28 lectures, we've created a universe.
We've created stars.
We've allowed the stars to create chemical elements.
Using those chemical elements,
we've created entire solar systems,
including our Earth.
We've created life.
We've created human beings.
And we've allowed those human beings to develop agriculture,
a much more productive technology
than the earlier technologies they used.
So now what we're going to do
is to set up the appearance
of the large, exotic communities
known as agrarian civilizations.
These have been one of the central subjects
investigated by historians.
And we'll find that a lot of things change
once we cross this mini-threshold
with the appearance of agrarian civilizations.
The previous group of lectures
described the origins of agriculture,
some features of the earliest agrarian societies,
and we looked at the emergence
of simple forms of power and hierarchy.
We looked at how power slowly built up
and how populations grew up and built up
and as agriculture spread.
We've seen how during the earlier agrarian era,
as populations rose,
larger, denser, and eventually more complex communities
began to appear.
And as they got more complex,
they began to need power structures.
And at the same time,
the resources for leaders began to build up.
The possibilities for larger forms of power began to expand.
And eventually, this build-up
in types of power and in the scale of power
led to the crossing of what are called a new mini-threshold.
And that's associated with the appearance
of the first tribute-taking states
and the first agrarian civilizations.
And that mini-threshold we saw was crossed
about 5,000 years ago.
Crossing this threshold
takes us into the second major subdivision
of the agrarian era.
And I'm going to call that the era of agrarian civilizations,
or sometimes I'll call it the later agrarian era.
Those two terms are more or less interchangeable.
What we'll see in the era of agrarian civilizations
is remarkable new forms
of social, technological, and cultural complexity.
These, if you like, are the new emergent properties
associated with this new level of complexity
associated with agrarian civilizations.
But there's one more distinctive feature of this threshold.
This is the era in which writing and written documents
appear for the first time in human history.
So that, for the first time in this course,
we can look at the past using written documents.
At last, we enter what many historians
may be tempted to call the domain of real history.
And a lot does indeed change
as we enter the last 5,000 years of human history.
This is the era of human history
on which historians, professional historians,
have lavished by far the most attention
precisely because written records are available.
So, at last, for this period,
we have masses of scholarship
and we have masses of information.
In fact, suddenly, you'll be aware of this,
that for a long time we've asked questions
for which there was very, very slender data.
We had to work really hard to scrabble around
and find data to answer some of the big questions.
Now, suddenly, the situation's very different.
We're drowning in information.
So, for earlier periods, we had to really work hard
for our data.
Now, increasingly, the problem's going to be rather different.
We're going to have to find a way,
if we're going to maintain the big history perspective,
we're going to have to find a way to navigate
through a sort of blizzard of information.
In this course, I want to alert you
to the strategies we're going to adopt to do that.
We're going to try to capture the main lines
of development of human society throughout the world.
And that will mean letting go
of many of the details of that history
and trying to see human history at large scales,
trying to see the very large shapes.
This is like the ant trying to see the whole elephant,
rather than just the wrinkles.
So, we're trying to see the very large patterns
without getting too bogged down in the details.
Now, that is not always easy.
And I want to alert you to one more change
that occurs at this point.
You'll understand that there is a huge amount of room
for debate over the interpretation
of some of the large trends in human history.
And this is particularly because, for the most part,
historians have tended not to look at the past
on very large scales.
So, before we go any further,
I must alert you to the fact that here,
more than in most earlier parts of this course,
I've often had to try to distill a clear story
from scholarship that allows plenty of wriggle room for debate.
In the parts of the course dealing with the sciences,
I could often summarize a consensus position.
There was almost universal agreement amongst the scientists,
and I could just summarize that position.
Within the discipline of history by and large,
there is, for the most part, much less consensus,
particularly about the very large patterns.
So, much of the rest of this course
accounts as a slightly more tentative attempt
to identify amongst the massive information
the very large patterns and the main lines of development.
So, there's more room for controversy here
than in any earlier part of this course.
Okay, that's a way of introducing some of the changes
we're going to encounter as we cross this divide
into the era of agrarian civilizations
about 5,000 years ago.
Lecture 29 to 37, the next group of lectures,
surveys the 5,000 years or so
during which agrarian civilizations
dominated the history of most people on Earth.
This is the largest single group of lectures in this course,
and it has to be admitted that we lavish so much attention on it
in part simply because we do have more information
than for earlier eras.
Now, let me be clear about definitions,
particularly about this phrase I've used,
agrarian civilizations.
I've already defined tribute-taking states,
which are one of the central components
of agrarian civilizations,
but I need to be clear how I'm using this phrase
agrarian civilizations.
What were agrarian civilizations?
In this lecture, I'll offer a careful definition
of agrarian civilizations.
Then I'm going to offer a brief chronology
of the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations.
And we'll see that, like agriculture,
agrarian civilizations appeared quite independently
in several different parts of the world.
It's an odd phenomenon, but it's not quite as odd
as the independent appearance of agriculture
because as we've seen,
there is clearly a close link between the appearance of agriculture
and the eventual appearance of agrarian civilizations.
So if we've solved the problem of agriculture to some extent,
we've solved the problem of the independent appearance
of agrarian civilizations.
Agriculture, as it were, littered fumes
that ignited agrarian civilizations several millennia later.
Now, after a brief chronology,
I want to turn to one particular region,
to Mesopotamia in modern Iraq.
This is the region in which the first agrarian civilizations appeared,
and we'll describe how increasing productivity
in the lands of modern Iraq created the foundations
for the first agrarian civilizations,
which emerged about 5,000 years ago.
Okay, definitions. Let's clarify what we mean by agrarian civilizations.
Agrarian civilization is a label that can be used in distinct ways,
so I need to be very clear about how we're using the phrase in this course.
I'll use the term agrarian civilization to refer to the large communities
that emerged around the first tribute-taking states.
Agrarian civilization is therefore a broader term
than state or even tribute-taking state.
At tribute-taking states are merely one component of agrarian civilizations.
Now, the word civilization itself is slippery.
In the 19th century, it was often taken for granted
that when you said civilization,
you were referring to a type of society that was distinctly superior
to most of the smaller-scale societies that existed at their edges.
So I need to be clear straight away that I'm not using the word civilization
in a judgmental sense.
It does not imply superiority or inferiority.
I'm simply using it to refer to a very specific type of human community.
I imply no value judgments.
However, I will make some judgments about degrees of complexity.
Though, as we've seen already, there's nothing intrinsically good about complexity or bad.
Complexity is just complexity.
So, by agrarian civilizations, I mean, first,
large human communities of many, hundreds of thousands,
and maybe many millions of people.
This is the first distinguishing feature.
They were huge.
They were huge compared with the two other main types of human communities
that we've looked at so far.
The first being the kinship groups of the Paleolithic,
these small family-sized nomadic groups that dominated in the Paleolithic era.
And the second being the village communities.
Several hundred people, maybe a thousand or two,
care more or less permanently that dominated the early agrarian era.
So, agrarian civilizations are a new type of community,
and they are vast.
They include millions of people.
The second feature, main feature,
most of their resources came from agriculture,
and that meant that most of their inhabitants were small farmers or peasants.
Agrarian civilizations were founded firmly on the technological breakthroughs
