And by 1,000 CE, agrarian civilizations, according to Ryan Targapera's calculations, covered about 16 square megameters.
Now, that's still only about 13% of the area controlled by modern states, but it's about 80 times the area controlled by the very first states just 4,000 years before.
So that gives us a very rough way of measuring this process of expansion, measuring the area controlled by agrarian civilizations.
Now, on the assumption that these figures are not too wildly inaccurate, what do they mean? Let's try and summarize what they're telling us.
One thing they clearly mean is population growth.
Agrarian civilizations included the most flourishing and the most productive regions of agriculture on Earth.
So these were the regions in which we should expect populations to be growing most rapidly.
And the growth of populations is therefore a key ingredient in the growth of agrarian civilizations.
Now, unfortunately we can't measure precisely the growth of populations within agrarian civilizations.
So we're going to have to use a sort of surrogate, and that is plausible estimates of world populations.
As the agrarian civilizations of Afro-Eurasia incorporated probably an increasing proportion of world populations,
this may give us some very rough idea of how the spread of agriculture continued to sustain population growth
and how the spread of agrarian civilizations parallels growth in populations.
So here are some figures for world populations.
Again, of course, they're very rough estimates. They're probably the best we can do at the moment.
But this is the story they tell.
Ten thousand years ago, world populations are estimated to have been about five or six millions.
By three thousand years ago, by five thousand years ago, I should say, by three thousand BCE,
there were probably about fifty million people on Earth.
And what this means is that in the early agrarian era, human populations had multiplied by about ten times.
Then by one thousand years ago, at the end of the later agrarian era, there may have been about two hundred and fifty million people on Earth.
So let's just think about those figures for a moment.
What that means is that populations had multiplied by five times in four thousand years.
They've multiplied by ten times in five thousand years in the early agrarian era.
What's this telling us?
Well, I suppose we can say these rates of growth are roughly comparable.
If anything, they suggest that rates of population growth may have been slightly slower in the later agrarian era.
And that's slightly surprising.
It suggests that population growth was not more rapid in this era than in the early agrarian era.
It's curious and it's a fact that we're going to pick up later on,
because it may be telling us some quite important things about the nature of agrarian civilizations.
Okay.
Tiger Paras figures also remind us of the limits of agrarian civilizations.
They remind us that until quite recently, many, many people in Afro-Eurasia still lived outside agrarian civilizations in small communities of pastoralists, foragers, or independent peasants.
We must not let ourselves get so dazzled by them that we lose sight of these many communities.
But what they do do is chart a fundamental transformation in human society.
Five thousand years ago, most humans in Afro-Eurasia lived outside of agrarian civilizations.
Three thousand years later, it's probable that most humans lived within them.
This is at the time of the Roman and Han empires.
And by two thousand years ago, agrarian civilizations had become the normal type of community for human beings in Afro-Eurasia and probably throughout the world.
The role and significance of agrarian civilizations in human history had been transformed in this three to four thousand year period.
From a new but rare and atypical type of community, they had become, by one thousand years ago, the most important, powerful and numerous of all human communities.
And most humans on earth almost certainly lived within the borders of one of them.
Now I want to look at the second major change in the later agrarian era.
And that is the increasing power of states.
States lie at the hub of agrarian civilizations.
They're the crucial organizing structures of agrarian civilizations.
The area under agrarian civilizations expanded at least in part.
One of the factors was because tributary rulers learned to control larger areas.
So what I want to look at now is as it were this evolution in statecraft.
As tributary states became, on a long trend, more efficient at doing what they did best, which was control large areas and exact tributes.
In three thousand BCE, tributary states were new phenomena.
They were novelties and their rulers were still unsure of the best ways of managing such vast and complex communities.
But over the next four thousand years, a lot of political, military and economic skills accumulate.
And as a result, so the reach and power of tributary states expanded.
The basic challenge was to maximize the resources rulers extracted from populations that consisted mainly of small, holding peasants.
And we've seen that we call resources that are extracted in this way always with the threat of coercion in the background.
Though often through claims that states have the right to exact them, we call them tributes.
And we do that to contrast them with two other ways of moving resources.
One is gifts.
That is a situation in which someone freely and willingly gives resources to someone else.
And the second is profits. Profits are transfers of wealth that are generated through exchanges on competitive markets.
And profits are going to become a very important form of wealth generation in the modern era.
Tributes could be exacted through the crudest of coercive methods, but we'll see that states like disease parasites in general
found that they could actually extract resources more efficiently and for much longer periods if they use subtler methods where possible.
And these methods included claims to legitimacy, the blessing of the gods for example, and claims to provide services such as protection from foreign invaders.
One reason why rulers so often portray themselves on monumental architecture as killing the soldiers of foreign armies is presumably to inspire confidence that they can do this, that they can protect you.
It's a way of encouraging people to join their team rather than the other one in return for tributes.
Now the trick of being a successful tributary ruler is to maximise resource-exaction without exhausting the capacity of peasants to keep paying.
That's the general trick.
Now Rhine Targapera has tried to estimate roughly changes in the areas controlled by particular states.
Now we're no longer looking at agrarian civilisations as a whole, we're looking at the areas controlled by particular states.
So let's look at his calculations.
His calculations highlight four main eras in the expansion of state power.
The first city states covered tiny areas.
Uruk covered about 2.5 square kilometres.
That's a tiny fraction of a square megameter, though its rulers also controlled nearby villages.
The first Mesopotamian state to include several city states that have Sagan of Akkad may have controlled 0.6 square megameters.
So these are rather small states.
Sagan's state is significantly bigger than that of, say, Uruk.
It includes several city states.
In the 2nd millennium BCE, the very largest states, those of Egypt at its height and Shang China, probably controlled a maximum of about 1 square megameter of territory.
That, let me remind you, is about the size of modern Egypt, and most states controlled much less.
So 1 square megameter seems to have been a sort of upper limit for empires formed before about 1000 BCE.
Then we get a huge leap forward, and it seems to be associated with the Achaemenid Empire, which was founded by Cyrus II in Persia, 2500 years after the appearance of the first states.
It was founded in 560 BCE, and it was then overthrown by Alexander the Great in 330 BCE.
The Achaemenid Empire covered at its height about 5.5 square megameters.
For the next 1500 years, the larger states that appeared would range from about 4 square megameters.
That was probably the size of the Roman Empire, up to about 10 square megameters, the size of some of the earliest Islamic empires.
In the last 1500 years, much bigger empires have appeared, starting with the Mongol Empire, which briefly controlled about 24 square megameters.
Now again, this is a sketch. These are very large trends.
And what these figures hide is eras of collapse and decline, such as the decline of Mesopotamian states early in the second millennium, which we've talked about already.
And we need to remind ourselves that contemporaries almost certainly did not experience history as a prolonged expansion of agrarian civilizations.
They were much more likely to be aware of the slow rise and fall of dynasties and empires.
And that's a phenomenon we'll look at in Lecter 35, when we look at factors that checked growth in the era of agrarian civilizations.
Nevertheless, with the benefit of hindsight and Targapera's calculations, the long trend towards increasing state power seems unmistakable.
Now what was going on? What was it that states did that increased their reach and power?
Clearly there was a slow learning process going on, as each ruler learned new techniques of rule, and as these techniques slowly diffused between different states.
Let me just look at some of what seemed to be in the critical changes here.
One is simply improved military techniques. These are states that do rely to a considerable degree on coercion.
They seem to have been engaged in warfare of some kind almost continuously.
So military improvements may be part of this. Rulers learned to recruit and equip larger armies.
They learned to use auxiliaries such as pastoral nomads from the Eurasian steppes.
They introduced increasingly sophisticated weapons such as chariots and siege weapons.
Some of the more important innovations in this area actually came from the inner Asian steppes, a region dominated by pastoral nomads.
Where mobile cavalry warfare was practiced with great efficiency by nomads such as the Scythians.
Chariots with solid wheels were drawn by oxen are depicted in Mesopotamia as early as 3000 BCE.
But the first evidence of light, rapid and highly mobile war chariots drawn by horses and with spoked wheels appears in tombs in the steppes of modern Kazakhstan about 2000 BCE.
That technology spread rapidly both east and west. It spread to China and it spread to Mesopotamia and to the Indian subcontinent.
In the Indian Rig Veda we learn that chariots were used either for the hurling of spears or in ritual races.
They become both symbolically and in real terms crucial to warfare.
Improved communications are also part of it.
The most powerful and the most successful rulers often spent a lot of effort road building in establishing large roads along which armies and messengers could be sent.
And they also established courier systems or post horse systems which allowed probably the most rapid transmission of information of anywhere in the world.
Let me briefly describe one of the most famous of these roads. It's known as the Royal Persian Road and we have a wonderful description of it from the Greek writer Herodotus.
It was built between 550 and 486 BCE by Cyrus II and his successor Darius I and it was about 1500 miles long.
It ran from Sousa in southern Persia through Babylon and Nineveh to Izmir and Ephesus on the Aegean coast of modern Turkey.
It probably followed the path of an earlier road which was really a track that may have existed as early as 3500 BCE.
In 475 BCE Herodotus said that it normally took about 90 days to travel the entire route, though royal post riders could travel it in as little as 20 days.
It was guarded along its entire length and Herodotus writes in book 5 of his history is that,
Royal stations exist along its whole length and excellent caravanserize, stations where you could stay overnight restaurants, hotels, motels we'd call them today.
And throughout he continues, it traverses an inhabited tract and is free from danger.
In chapter 898 of his histories he describes how the system of roads and post houses was used to transmit royal messages.
Let me quote this passage.
Nothing he writes, nothing mortal travels so fast as these Persian messengers.
The entire plan is a Persian invention and this is the method of it.
Along the whole line of road there are men stationed with horses in number equal to the number of days which the journey takes, allowing a man and horse to each day.
And these men will not be hindered from accomplishing at their best speed the distance which they have to go either by snow or rain or heat or by the darkness of night.
The first rider delivers his dispatch to the second and the second passes it to the third and so it is born from hand to hand along the whole line like the light in the torch race which the Greeks celebrate to Vulcan.
A wonderful description and it shows that the most intelligent and farsighted rulers could do a lot of work on what today we might call infrastructure.
There are also improved systems for collecting tributes.
In all agrarian civilizations, tributes seem to have been collected through chains of intermediaries with local power brokers extracting local taxes and then passing them on to regional governors.
Regional authorities governors or satraps they were called in Achaemenid Persia who passed them on to the central ruler.
Once again from Achaemenid Persia we have a wonderful literary and visual description of the system by which tributes were exacted under the rule of Darius.
In 518 Darius created 20 distinct provinces each headed by a governor, a satrap and a separate military commander.
And Herodotus in his histories lists the amount of tributes paid by each province.
For example Babylon and Syria two of the core provinces in the empire both in Mesopotamia and probably the richest of the provinces each paid a thousand talents the equivalent of about 30 tons of silver.
And the trading provinces of Phoenicia, Palestine and Cyprus paid about 350.
Some of this wealth was turned into coins which was the first to circulate in central Asia.
And the empire as a whole was run from a central bureaucracy in Sousa.
There were subtler methods of skimming off taxes also developed.
As their reach increased states created large zones of relative stability within which peasants and merchants flourished so that both populations and available resources increased.
And in such times the interests of rulers, peasants and merchants probably came closer together than ever before.
And the most skillful rulers recognized the fact that if they looked after their people it might eventually benefit them like the most intelligent disease parasites.
Here's a nice quote from an 11th century Persian prince writing to his son.
He says, Make it your constant endeavor to improve cultivation and to govern well for understand this truth.
The kingdom can be held by the army and the army by gold and gold is acquired through agricultural development and agricultural development through justice and equity.
Therefore be just and equitable.
And finally rulers often use their wealth to enhance their power in other ways.
Today we might call this propaganda.
They bound ruling elites together through distributing wealth.
They overwrote their subjects by displays of religious monuments or other monuments.
In an age before newspapers these were powerful forms of propaganda.
And once again there's a wonderful example from the Achaemenid Empire.
It's the Behi Stooning inscriptions carved by the Achaemenid Emperor Darius in 515 BCE on a cliff face in Kermanshar province in Iran.
Darius proclaims on these inscriptions high upon a cliff, I am Darius, the great king, king of kings, the king of Persia, the king of countries, the son of Hestaspes, the grandson of Asames, the Achaemenid.
And accompanying the inscriptions are wonderful vivid bar relief depictions of ten captured subordinate rulers.
Wearing the appropriate dress, they're tied, they're tied, they're clearly captives, they wear the appropriate dress of peoples from different regions.
These inscriptions incidentally were the key eventually to deciphering ancient Persian, ancient Elamite and ancient Babylonian.
Okay, we've seen therefore, we've seen a lot of ways in which agrarian civilizations expanded and spread and we've seen also how tributary states became more powerful and better at their job over a period of 4,000 years.
Now the next lecture is going to ask a slightly different question.
Is this growth that we're looking at, to what extent is it dependent on innovation?
Did agrarian civilizations encourage or discourage the capacity for innovation that is such a distinctive feature of our species?
That's our next question. Thank you.
Lecture 34 Long Trends, Rates of Innovation
Growth and constant innovation are often thought to be quite distinctive features of the modern world.
And in consequence, all earlier ages of human history are all too easily thought of as eras of stagnation.
This is a phenomenon we've seen, we've encountered several times before.
In comparison with today, this is certainly true. Growth and innovation both occurred extremely slowly in all earlier eras of human history.
Yet we've seen that even in the Paleolithic and the earlier agrarian eras, plenty happened and there was indeed plenty of change.
And plenty of that change took forms that we can describe as growth, either a spreading of humans into new areas or an increase in human populations.
Indeed, we've also seen that growth in some sense, the capacity to get more resources which allows population growth, is intrinsic to our species.
It's built into the very idea of collective learning.
And that's why change, and in some sense we can call it growth, was always more rapid in human history than it is in the animal world.
Nevertheless, it is also true that rates of growth and innovation have varied significantly in different eras of human history.
At the most spectacular example is, of course, modern society. Today, growth and innovation are much, much faster than ever before.
And this we'll see as one of the defining features of modern society.
So now I'd like to ask, what's the difference?
To understand these differences, we need to ask the sort of questions economists ask.
We need to ask, what are the drivers of growth?
I've argued in very general terms that collective learning is a sort of general driver of growth throughout human history.
But in different epochs, collective learning may take different forms.
So we need to ask, what specific drivers shaped innovation and growth in particular periods?
And here we look at the later agrarian era.
We ask, did agrarian civilizations accelerate the pace of change?
Did they tend to stifle change?
Were they moving in their structures that had a tendency to increase or retard patterns of growth and innovation?
And we'll in fact find both.
But in this lecture, I'm going to focus on structural features of agrarian civilizations that tended to stimulate growth.
And we'll see, there were quite a few of them.
So the previous lecture described the long-term expansion of agrarian civilizations and states.
And what we're doing here is we're trying to look at some of the drivers that lay behind that long-term process of expansion.
So we'll see that several structural features of agrarian civilizations did clearly encourage growth and innovation.
This is not an era of stagnation at all.
What were they?
This lecture discusses four features of agrarian civilizations that could stimulate innovation.
This is not, of course, a complete list.
One can imagine many other factors that might have stimulated innovation, including, for example, the extent and scale of educational systems,
which are generally very limited in agrarian civilizations,
or government investment in innovation, also extremely rare,
with some remarkable exceptions, such as the famous Library of Alexandria, which was founded about 300 BC,
with the support of a Roman Egyptian ruler Ptolemy II.
But with these exceptions, the factors I'm going to describe probably counter some of the main structural features of agrarian civilizations that tended to encourage innovation.
So let's look at them.
The first is population growth.
Could population growth itself drive innovation?
The second is expanding networks of exchange and increase in the area over which humans and different societies exchanged information.
The third is increasing market activity, and the fourth is the role of states.
So let's look at each of these possible drivers in turn.
First, population growth as a source of innovation.
In previous lectures, we've taken population growth as a sort of indicator of growth,
but it's also possible to treat it as a possible driver of growth.
This idea is associated often with the work of a Danish economist Esther Bozerup, whose dates are 1910 to 1999.
She argued famously that population growth, particularly in agrarian societies, can itself stimulate innovation,
as those at the edges of society are forced to seek new ways of feeding and supporting themselves.
Now, this is a mechanism we've already touched on in looking at the early agrarian era.
During the 4,000 years of the later agrarian era, human populations multiplied a lot by about five times we've seen from about 50 million to about 250 million people.
Clearly, this meant a growing need to feed larger and larger numbers of people,
and that implies that there had to be innovations to do it.
Now, to what extent did population growth itself drive these innovations?
It almost certainly drove at least some innovation.
We know that throughout this era, peasants or their masters were seeking out new lands to farm.
There's plenty of evidence in the spread of agriculture of farmers, peasants, sometimes with the help of overlords,
incorporating new land into their farms, settling new regions and so on.
That meant always tiny bits of innovation.
It meant adapting to new soils.
It meant getting used to new rainfall regimes.
It meant dealing with new types of pests, new types of predators.
So always settling new areas meant innovation of some kind.
We can imagine villages where populations grew so that younger people wanting to set up a household no longer could do so in the village.
They had to spread to a neighbouring region, and that too might involve tiny modifications of traditional techniques.
Now, this is micro-innovation, but it's going on over a huge area and millions of people are involved in the process,
and it may have been one of the key dynamics of agrarian civilisations.
A lot of their expansion may have been driven by this steady, constant trickle of micro-innovation,
similar to but much more rapid than the micro-innovations that sustained migrations in the Paleolithic era.
Now, if this is true, if this idea is right, it suggests that in this era a lot of innovation was coming from peasant farmers.
Occasionally, of course, their overlords may have helped them with projects such as the building of dams,
or helping them to migrate to new regions.
Examples of such innovations might include new strains of crops.
