And one of the best illustrations of this is that they began to have an increasing impact on their environments.
And I want to describe two forms.
I'll give two striking examples of what I'm talking about.
The first of these, the first of these examples is firestick farming.
And the second is what I'll call megafaunal extinctions.
So let's begin with firestick farming, firing the land.
Humans transformed the environments of entire continents by systematically firing the land.
The Australian archaeologist Reese Jones, who died in 2001, coined the phrase firestick farming
because Australian Aboriginal communities often keep lighted firesticks to keep fire alive.
And he used the phrase to describe how Australian Aboriginal communities used fire to manage their environments.
What they did was they regularly fired the land. What did this do?
Well, first, it prevented uncontrolled fires by making sure that fuel didn't build up in an uncontrolled way.
So that meant they could control the fires.
Secondly, by firing the land, you stimulate new plant growth.
That attracts prey species such as kangaroo.
So that in effect, it brings more food into your territory.
It's sort of a form of intensification. It's bringing more of the stuff you want into your territory.
And we know that similar practices were used in other parts of the world, including North America.
And they could be extremely sophisticated.
Here's a description from work by an archaeologist, environmental historian rather, Ian Simmons,
on firestick farming in North America.
The Beaver Indians of Northern Alberta, he writes, had a sophisticated and delicately tuned approach to creating fire.
Certain patches of vegetation were burned deliberately in order to maximize their value as resources.
Openings or clearings, known as yards, were created within a forest area and maintained by burning.
Grass fringes of streams, wetlands, trails, and ridges or corridors were similarly created and maintained.
For they were both areas where hunted species of animal would either collect or traverse, or both.
Fires were also set along trap lines around lakes and ponds and within large areas of dead fallen trees,
which otherwise had no resource value.
And so on. So this is a very, very sophisticated technology.
And it transformed entire landscapes in Australia.
It encouraged the spread of fire-resistant species such as eucalypts.
So that the landscape that Europeans encountered, in fact, was much more dominated by eucalypts than it had before.
It was a landscape created by human beings almost in the same sense as the manicured gardens of 18th century Europe.
Now, the final example of change impacting the environment is megafaunal extinctions.
Let me talk about this very briefly, far more briefly than it deserves.
In the last 50,000 years, many large mammal species have become extinct.
They include mammoths, giant kangaroos, saber-toothed tigers, giant sloths, North American horses.
Most extinctions occurred in newly colonized lands such as Australia and the Americas.
In Australia, we know that 70% of mammals over 44 kilograms in weight may have vanished. That's about 60 species.
Now, the question is, why do these large fauna vanish?
And the dates of these extinctions in different regions coincide remarkably closely with the appearance of humans.
And that suggests that humans, particularly as they were developing improved forms of hunting,
may have played a crucial role in these megafaunal extinctions.
The dates coincide very well for the arrival in Australia, in the Americas and even in Siberia.
Now, I should warn you briefly, not everyone agrees with this interpretation.
There are those who argue that climate change plays a crucial role in this.
And the debate may be eventually decided as our dates get more precise.
But at the moment, there's quite persuasive evidence to suggest that humans had a massive impact on these megafaunal extinctions,
in effect changing the fauna of entire continents.
And amongst the earliest victims of our increasing ecological power were our closest relatives,
Homo Ergasta and Homo Neanderthalis, both of which vanish about 20 to 30,000 years ago.
One of the saddest signs of our ability to drive other species to extinction, even those very close to us.
And it's a reminder that our astonishing creativity carried dangers as well as advantages.
We're certainly very, very dangerous for other species.
Indeed, today we may be driving our surviving close relatives, the great apes, to extinction as well.
In summary, we've seen that a lot did indeed happen in the Paleolithic era.
This was not an era of stagnation.
Our astonishing creativity is already evident in this era.
Humans spread around the world and as they did so, they began to transform both the plants and the animals they lived with,
as they did so.
Now by the end of the last ice age, 10,000 years ago, humans have occupied all parts of the world.
And this means there's no room left for further extensification.
There's no more unoccupied territory.
And that is going to be quite critical in the next crucial change,
which takes us to the next threshold in our course, the appearance of agriculture.
Thank you.
It's the seventh of the eight thresholds in this course.
And what I want to do in this lecture, as I did with the previous threshold,
the threshold on the borderline between non-human and human,
is to define the nature of that threshold very, very clearly indeed.
And the threshold, of course, is the appearance of agriculture about 10,000 years ago.
But I want to remind you that there are some striking parallels between all of these thresholds
and in fact some particularly striking parallels between this threshold
and an earlier threshold, that of star formation.
Do you remember how we got from the early universe to stars?
We had an expanding universe within which all the basic units of matter were fairly similar.
Matter consisted basically of hydrogen and helium atoms.
Then gravity began to draw these clumps of matter into denser communities
within which pressure began to rise and then temperature.
And then eventually, at the critical temperature of 10 million degrees,
fusion reactions began at the center of these clouds and stars lit up.
And suddenly, you had the universe arranged in a very different way
with powerful hotspots dotted throughout it, a new form of complexity.
Now, I want to sort of explore some of the parallels with human history.
Polylythic communities with their astonishing ability to adapt to new environments
through the capacity for collective learning, as I described in the last lecture,
provide the equivalent of the Big Bang as their range expanded to reach across most of the Earth.
Now, of course, polylythic communities were nothing like as simple as those primeval clouds of hydrogen and helium.
As humans spread through the smaller universe of our planet,
they were developing more diverse and in some cases more powerful ways of dealing with their environments.
Nevertheless, their basic units, these small kin-based nomadic groups
into which humans were organized throughout the polylythic, seem not to have changed fundamentally.
Then, from about 11,000 years ago, a series of new technologies that we will label agriculture
began to bring humans together into larger and denser communities
just as gravity had once drawn huge clouds of hydrogen and helium together.
As agriculture increased the population density of human communities,
they began to draw in other communities through a social equivalent of gravity,
just as towns suck in rural migrants today.
And in this way, agriculture increased the pressure within human communities
and the number and even sometimes the violence of encounters that occurred between individuals
until eventually, in a parallel to fusion reactions, towns and cities appear quite suddenly,
as we'll see, in a striking parallel with the lighting up of stars.
In this way, agriculture began to create regions of greater density across the surface of the Earth
and was in and around these hotspots using the energy flows that they generated
that new forms of complexity would eventually arise in human history.
And eventually these emerging hotspots would create a more complicated and diverse geography of complexity
within human history.
Now we start describing the build-up of these new forms of social complexity.
The early stage is a bit like the collapse of a solar nebula.
Now, having mentioned this parallel, let me say immediately,
I don't want to make too much of such parallels.
In the present state of knowledge, it would be a mistake to do so.
But I cannot resist the temptation to think that the similarities are not entirely accidental
and they may arise from the very nature of complexity itself.
And meanwhile, of course, they're exactly the sort of thing that you expect to see in a course like this,
which compares change across many, many disciplines.
And they may, if nothing else, help us to think about how these thresholds occurred.
If so, they will have fulfilled a useful function within this course.
Okay, back to agriculture.
Threshold 7 introduces a new type of technology, agriculture,
or rather a whole suite of new technologies.
Why did the appearance of agriculture set human history off in entirely new directions?
It did so by increasing human control of food, energy, and other resources.
So, like gravity, it generated denser communities and larger energy flows.
And that is why it provided the foundation for new forms of complexity.
And that's why we regard the emergence of agriculture as a major transition in this course.
So, in this lecture, I want to define the nature of agriculture,
give a very brief chronology for the appearance of agricultural societies,
and discuss the impact of agriculture on human history.
Let's begin with some chronology and periodization again.
I want to define the early agrarian era.
The appearance of agriculture marks the appearance of what I'll call the early agrarian era.
This is the first of two subdivisions of the agrarian era.
And we've seen the agrarian era is one of the great divisions in this course.
The second subdivision of the agrarian era I'll call the later agrarian era.
And it begins, at least in some parts of the world, about 5,000 years ago,
with the appearance of the first large cities and states.
Now, the early agrarian era begins with the appearance of agriculture.
So, we can define it as the first era in which there were communities
that supported themselves, mainly from agriculture.
The first era of human history in which such communities existed.
Now, let's look at some dates.
Seen globally, seen across the entire world,
the early agrarian era lasted from the appearance of agriculture more than 10,000 years ago
until the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations,
until cities and states appeared just over 5,000 years ago.
However, in many parts of the world, agriculture appeared later,
and so did agrarian civilizations.
So dates for the era vary significantly in different regions.
And to explain this, it might be helpful to introduce an idea
that we're going to make a lot of use of later on.
And that is the idea of world zones.
To understand the agrarian era,
it'll help to think of the entire world as divided into four major world zones,
whose histories were so different that they might as well have taken place on different planets.
They were zones in which history played itself out
without any significant exchange between them.
Now, we could have used the idea of world zones in the Paleolithic era,
but we'll see it's much more useful in discussing the agrarian era.
What were the four zones?
They were, first, the largest and oldest, the Afro-Eurasian zone.
It includes the Eurasian landmass and Africa,
because, of course, the two continents were joined.
The second in size is the American world zone.
That includes both North and South America,
because these two, in recent, in the last few million years,
have been joined into a single landmass.
The third world zone is, I'll call, Australasia.
It includes Papua New Guinea for most of the last Ice Age.
And the fourth is the Pacific.
The vast archipelago of islands spread out throughout the Pacific.
A world zone that is occupied only in recent millennia.
So here are four world zones.
And to understand the chronology of early agriculture,
we'll need this concept.
So let's go back to the chronology.
Agriculture evolved independently in at least six separate parts of the world
that were scattered through three of these world zones.
The dates I give represent current estimates.
But I should remind you that work on early agriculture is flourishing.
And some of these estimates could change slightly in the near future.
But at present, there seems to be a reasonably clear picture.
But you should note that all the dates are approximate.
And one more thing about dates.
I'm going to give these dates as dates BP.
That means before the present.
This is a terminology that archaeologists use,
and it's associated closely with radiometric dating.
To be strict, a date BP means a date before 1950.
As that was the benchmark date used when Carbon-14 dating was first introduced.
But for most purposes, we can ignore this wrinkle.
So a date BP essentially means a date before the present.
Now the crucial thing to note is that agriculture appeared within a few thousand years
in parts of the world that had little or no, or in some cases, no connection with each other.
That's one of the most remarkable things about it.
One of the great oddities of the early history of agriculture.
The earliest evidence for agriculture comes from the fertile crescent.
This is a semi-circle of land that begins along the Nile.
It runs up the eastern seaboard of the Mediterranean through Israel and Lebanon,
up to the southern borders of Turkey, turns east,
then runs down along the borders between Iraq and Iran.
Here, agricultural villages appeared as early as 11,000 years BP.
That's 11,000 years ago.
Their main domesticates were wheat, barley, peas, lentils,
and a few animal domesticates, sheep, goat, pig, and cattle.
Agriculture may also have appeared this early in parts of the Sahara,
which was then wetter than today.
So that's our first date, about 11,000 years ago, for the first appearance,
the first clear evidence of agriculture.
By 9,000, somewhere between 9,000 and 6,000 years ago,
there's evidence that agriculture was being practiced in Papua New Guinea.
Now, this, let me remind you, is in the Australasian world zone.
So the second, one of the second areas in which agriculture appears
is within the Australasian world zone.
It was based on taro, a root crop, on sugarcane and banana.
Agriculture will see, never appeared in the other parts of the Australasian world zone,
only in Papua New Guinea.
By 9,000 BP, some form of agriculture had almost certainly appeared
also in East Asia, in China.
Agriculture based on rice towards the south, on millet further north,
and pigs and poultry were important in both regions.
So by 9,000 BP, agriculture has appeared also in China.
And by the same time, it's probably also appeared in parts of the Indian subcontinent.
By 9,000 years ago, agriculture was probably well established along the Indus River
in modern Pakistan.
Perhaps, we're not sure about this, as a result of diffusion from Mesopotamia.
And then from Pakistan, it seems to have spread to much of the rest of the Indian subcontinent.
Now the next crucial date is somewhere between 5,000 and 4,000 years ago
when we start to get evidence of agriculture based on millet and yams
and African rice and cattle appearing in sub-Saharan Africa.
It may also have appeared earlier in the Sahara and Sudan.
At about the same time, this is about 5,000 to 4,000 years ago,
agriculture appears in Mesoamerica.
Now here's the first evidence of agriculture in the American world zone.
Agriculture based on maize, beans, squashes, manioc and tubers such as potatoes
as well as small animals such as guinea pig was present in central Mexico
and in parts of the Andes region in the American world zone by 4,000 to 5,000 years ago.
Then, one or 2,000 years after that, evidence appears of agriculture in parts of North America.
Agriculture here is based on squashes and local crops such as sumpweed.
