A disease bacteria can't get much purchase on a small, foraging nomadic community.
But in a village, it can keep travelling around the population creating endemic diseases.
Furthermore, living close to animals meant a lot of pathogens
could pass from humans to animals and back and forth.
So studies of human bones from early agrarian communities
hint at new types of problems that foragers didn't have to deal with.
New forms of stress, for example,
caused perhaps by the intense labour of harvest times
or perhaps by periodic crop failures.
This is one of the great ironies of agriculture.
Farmers relied on a smaller range of foodstuffs than foragers,
and that meant that if one of them didn't succeed in a given year,
they were in real trouble.
So famine enters human history with the appearance of farming.
Overpopulation caused periodic shortages,
which may explain why skeletons in this era seem to get shorter.
And the historian John Coatsworth writes,
bioarchaeologists have linked the agricultural transition
to a significant decline in nutrition,
and to increases in disease, mortality,
overwork and violence in areas where skeletal remains
make it possible to compare human welfare before and after the change.
These results seem to hold whether the transition occurred gradually over a long time
or was forced by conquest as in parts of the New World.
Civilisation, he writes,
we now know stunted growth, spread disease, shortened lifespans,
and set people to killing and maiming each other on an unprecedented scale.
Maybe he's overdoing it,
but let's not assume that agriculture meant progress.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Power in institutionalised forms.
That is to say, the story of states and emperors of kings and queens of armies and wars
has been one of the central themes of much historical scholarship and teaching.
Perhaps this is in part because states have been traditionally great generators of records.
They've generated a huge amount of written evidence.
So if you study the past using written records,
what you're very likely to encounter very soon is the power of states and empires.
So the history of these immense power structures
has been one of the central themes of modern historical scholarship and teaching,
and in fact not just modern historical scholarship,
but of historical scholarship from ancient times to the present day
and in all literate traditions.
A huge amount of history writing has actually been about states and rulers and what they did.
And some of the earliest of all written texts, such as the Great Epic of Gilgamesh,
which we'll refer to quite soon,
which describes events that occurred almost 5,000 years ago,
or the earliest written records to be found in China or the Mayan regions of Mesoamerica,
or the Great Epic, such as those of Homer,
are also about the doings of kings and warriors.
Yet so far, we've not talked much about such things,
and there is of course a very good reason for this.
In the small societies that most humans lived in, for most of human history,
relationships we've seen were essentially personal or familial.
If you want to understand them, you think about the relations within your own family,
not your relations with the police or the state or the law.
Power was certainly there.
It was certainly there in the Paleolithic,
but it was personal or familial rather than institutionalized.
It was embodied in customs of kinship
and in the personal relations of individuals,
and it was exercised within these small groups.
It was not sustained and supported, as power relations are today,
by large institutional structures.
It was not built into large-scale institutions.
So, here's the question I want to start tackling now.
When did institutionalized forms of power,
these forms of power that have dominated historical thinking,
when did they begin to emerge?
When, to put it slightly differently,
did power and hierarchy become more than a matter of family or clan politics?
Institutionalized power we will see as one of the most important,
emergent properties that would appear
as agriculture drove human societies towards new forms of complexity.
Now tackling this question,
trying to explain the origins of institutionalized power,
takes us across not quite one of our major thresholds,
but what we could certainly regard as a mini-threshold in this course.
It's the central question we tackle in this and the next few lectures.
As we'll see, institutionalized power begins to play
an increasingly important role during the early agrarian era.
But to appreciate how and why these new forms of power
begin to play such a central role in human history,
we need to begin by thinking very clearly about
the nature and role of power in human societies.
One of the first things we'll see is that there's a very close relationship
between the spread and development of agricultural societies,
which we looked at in the last lecture,
and the emergence of institutionalized power.
So as agriculture spread during the early agrarian era,
new forms of power and hierarchy began to appear within human societies.
Why and how?
Before we can get far with this question,
we need to take time out to be very clear about the nature of institutionalized power.
We've done this before when looking at life itself,
when looking at agriculture.
We've seen that to understand the origins of a phenomenon,
we need to take time out to be very clear about what it is.
Power, like life itself, seems obvious when we think about it,
but if you try rigorous definition,
we need to take time out to be quite as slippery as the idea of life.
So we need to define it rigorously.
Now, to clarify the nature of the problem,
what I'm going to do is similar to what we did in considering the appearance of life.
I'm going to move forward in time.
From the appearance of agriculture,
I'm going to move forward about 5,000 years
to a period in which states were beginning to appear
so that we can see the results of this mini-threshold.
So I'm going to look at the beginnings and the ends of the early agrarian period
and look at the contrast between the two.
Then, when we've seen what happens over that long period,
we'll return to consider how we get from A,
that is the simple village societies of the early agrarian era,
about 10,000 to 11,000 years ago,
to B, the great agrarian civilizations
that began to appear from about 5,000 years ago.
Now, the appearance of states, I've said,
from about 5,000 years ago marks a very important sub-threshold
within the history of our species.
It's a sub-threshold whose significance is captured rather well
in the following deliberately provocative and vivid quotation
from one of the great American anthropologists of the 20th century, Marvin Harris.
So this is what Marvin Harris says about the appearance of states.
For the first time, he writes,
there appeared on earth kings, dictators, high priests, emperors,
prime ministers, presidents, governors, mayors, generals, admirals,
police chiefs, judges, lawyers, and jailers,
along with dungeons, jails, penitentiaries, and concentration camps.
Under the tutelage of the state, writes Marvin Harris,
human beings learned for the first time how to bow, grovel, kneel, and kowtow.
In many ways, the rise of the state was the descent of the world from freedom to slavery.
This is, of course, a peculiarly bleak view of states,
and it may well underestimate the extent of personal violence, personal coercion,
similar to domestic violence today that undoubtedly occurred within paleolithic societies.
Nevertheless, it captures well the new scale on which power relations were constructed
after the appearance of states.
So states have dominated the history of the last 5,000 years.
Following Eric Wolf, who uses this terminology in a wonderful but difficult book
on modern world history, Europe and the People Without History,
I'm going to use the terminology of tribute-taking states.
The word tribute is used here to mean resources extracted through the threat of organized force.
This is the forcible taking of labor or resources, or even people,
from one group of people by another group of people, who I'll refer to as the state.
Tribute-taking states...
Now, having given this definition, I don't want to give the impression we're talking ever about pure coercion.
Pure coercion simply doesn't exist.
Tribute-taking states often enjoy the genuine support of many of their subjects,
because though they can coerce, they can also, like the mafia, provide real services,
just as farmers provide valuable services to their domestic crops and animals.
My father-in-law briefly ran a business in New York,
and he once told me that he contributed to the benevolent funds of the local police,
and he also paid another group for protection.
Now, he knew exactly who he was being protected against,
but he said to me it was still a worthwhile deal.
If he hadn't paid, his business might have suffered, but because he paid, it never did.
He was paying for real services.
So we'll see in dealing with states, there's always a sort of complex symbiosis to use a word I've earlier used,
between populations who pay taxes and supply resources,
and the states who exact those resources partly by force and partly in return for services.
The great world historian William McNeil,
one of the crucial founders of modern world history in the USA,
has captured this ambiguous relationship really well.
He wrote a wonderful book about the history of disease in the last 2,000 years called Plagues and Peoples,
and in that book, and in another related book about states,
he describes the state and the relationship between states and populations as a sort of unbalanced symbiosis,
or, in his word, as a form of parasitism.
He said it was similar to the relationship between a disease organism and its prey.
If the relationship is to be stable, in other words, if the state is to survive,
if the relationship is to be useful to the parasite, it's vital that the prey survive well as well,
which is why parasites that are too lethal never last.
Most end up hurting, but not killing their hosts.
McNeil accordingly describes states as macro-parasites,
as opposed to the micro-parasites of the disease world.
States like parasites have to offer genuine protection of some kind,
and that is why many of their subjects may value the services they provide.
So this idea of macro-parasitism may help us get a sense of this complex and ambiguous relationship
that emerges when states appear.
Nevertheless, despite this element of mutuality, the defining quality of tribute-taking states
is the ability, when necessary, to impose their will by force, to coerce.
So our question can be rephrased.
Our question about institutionalized forms of power can be rephrased.
How and why did such structures evolve?
The ability to coerce, after all, requires quite complex structures.
It depends on the construction of fairly elaborate systems of enforcement.
The appearance of the first tribute-taking states also clearly marks a new level of social complexity.
Indeed, though I've not classified this as one of our eight major thresholds,
one could make a case for doing so, and in fact, I've already described this as a mini-threshold.
But when preparing this course, I considered seriously the possibility of describing it as one of our major thresholds.
Now, I rejected that partly because I didn't want to introduce too many thresholds within human history.
It would make the story too elaborate.
But we still need to treat it as a very significant turning point in human history.
And it's analogous in many ways to the major thresholds we've seen already in this course.
And that's why we'll treat it as an important chronological marker.
The appearance of the first tribute-taking states marks the end of the early agrarian era
and the beginning of what I'll call the later agrarian era of human history.
We've already compared this threshold in an earlier lecture to star formation,
but it's worth noting an interesting comparison also with another threshold we've seen,
and that's the threshold leading to multicellular organisms.
Remember what happened?
With that threshold, we saw how large numbers of individual, independent organisms
find themselves slowly incorporated within larger structures
within which they were much more interdependent and in some respects had less freedom
than they had had as independent entities.
Yet collectively, within these large multicellular organisms such as ourselves,
cells were of course much more powerful than they'd been before.
So, how does the appearance of states and institutionalized forms of power
make human societies more complex?
Let's be clear about this. Do you remember our four key features of complexity?
They were new structures appear, new existing components are organized within a new structure.
Secondly, there's a degree of stability.
These new structures don't just vanish overnight, they survive for some time.
Third, there are new energy flows and new emergent properties.
So, let's examine states with this idea of complexity in mind.
They clearly had complex structures.
States are larger, they have more internal differentiation,
and in that sense they're clearly much more complex than the village communities
of the early agrarian era or even more so of the small kin-based communities of the Paleolithic era.
That's the first thing, they're more complex, clearly more complex.
Secondly, they had some stability.
All states that are worth talking about, all states that leave significant records,
survived for a certain period of time before eventually breaking down.
Third, new energy flows.
To maintain their complex internal structures including their mechanisms of coercion, for example,
they had to mobilize resources and energy on a huge scale.
They controlled populations of many thousands and sometimes of many millions of people.
And remember that in early human societies, human beings themselves were one of the most important sources of energy.
So it's clear if I use the word labor, states control people and that means controlling energy.
Large projects such as the building of pyramids or the formation of armies
demonstrate their power to mobilize huge amounts of energy, resources and people.
So there are large energy flows associated with states.
In fact, a significant increase in the energy flows that compared with those that existed with earlier human communities.
And fourth, states display many new emergent properties.
And I'll be looking at these in much more detail in later lectures.
Some of them include organized warfare and the building of monumental architecture.
This we'll see over and over again.
Huge buildings such as the pyramids of Egypt or the pyramids built by the Maya in Mesoamerica
designed as tombs or for religious ceremonies that represented the awe and might of the rulers.
Monumental architecture counts as a very clear sign of the appearance of tribute taking states
