And one of the most important single things that we've learned in recent decades
is that the early hominins, in other words,
the line of evolution that was leading in our direction
was not characterized first and foremost by braininess,
but by bipedalism, the ability to walk on two legs.
Their brains, in fact, were about the size of chimp brains, as we'll see.
Now, why bipedalism?
What was the advantage of walking on two legs
rather than doing something like what chimps or gorillas do,
which is walk most of the time on four or knuckle walk?
Now, we have no conclusive answers to this.
Once again, there's a bit of guesswork here.
One possible theory was argued by a French researcher, Yves Copain.
About 15 million years ago, the African Rift Valley began to be created.
It's a sort of tectonic tear that runs from South Africa right through to Ethiopia.
It's a tear in the African Plate.
And what it did was it raised mountains that left much of East Africa in a rain shadow,
and as a result, it reduced forest cover.
And what Copain suggested was that bipedal apes
would have found it much easier to travel through the resulting grasslands.
Remember what's happening is that monkeys, which are forest-dwelling, tree-dwelling species,
are suddenly being faced in East Africa with an environment that has fewer trees
and is much more like Savannah land.
So his argument is that in this environment, bipedalism was favored.
If you're standing up, you can probably travel faster.
You can see dangers and opportunities as you're traveling as well.
It's a nice theory.
Unfortunately, the recent discovery of hominine species in environments
that were clearly forested has undermined this promising idea.
So at the moment, we're not really sure what the main advantage of bipedalism was,
but it must have come with some advantages.
And we say this because of the rapid appearance of a number of new species of bipedal, great apes,
in what we can call as a hominine adaptive radiation.
In what follows, I'd like to describe some of the main lines of this radiation,
and I'll focus on just three major groups of hominines,
but always remember there were many more types of hominines that I'm going to describe.
The first type are known as Australopithecines, which stands for Southern apes.
The Australopithecines were a large and quite varied group, or genus of hominines,
and they lived from about four to about one million years ago.
They include Lucy, whose remains I'll describe in the next lecture.
Australopithecines were bipedal.
They were clearly bipedal, but if you study them closely,
it looks as if the bipedalism was somehow not yet quite complete.
They may have used trees as refuges.
They may occasionally have resorted to knuckle walking of some kind,
but they were certainly bipedal.
They were shorter than modern humans.
The tallest Australopithecines were probably less than five feet tall.
At about 400 to 500 cc, their brains were slightly larger than those of chimps.
Chimp brains averaged 300 to 400 cc,
but they were about one third the size of human brains, which averaged about 1,350 cc.
Now, while I'm talking about brain size, I should actually suggest a warning.
Don't start looking around at the heads of your friends and relatives.
Tiny differences in the size of human heads does not correlate automatically
with differences in intelligence.
Einstein, I'm told, had a very, very small brain indeed.
So it's the large differences that matter.
There is a difference between a creature with a brain of 500 cc and one of 1,350 cc,
but smaller differences don't matter too much.
Don't check out your friends too carefully.
Now, how clever were the Australopithecines?
It's just possible that some made stone tools,
but at the moment there's no definite evidence that this was true.
We have no indications of any striking technological breakthroughs,
nor any clear indications that they had advanced linguistic ability.
These are the sort of things we're going to look for when we look for human features.
So no real signs of Australopithecines marking some sort of technological breakthrough.
We are probably descended from one branch of the Australopithecines.
But nevertheless, if you or I were transported to Ethiopia four million years ago
and we saw an Australopithecine or a group of Australopithecines,
we probably wouldn't be thinking human.
We'd probably be thinking chimp.
They'd probably look to us like a species of chimps.
Okay, the second species of hominines, Homo habilis.
Homo habilis loosely translated means handyman, skillful man, if you like.
The species appeared about 2.3 million years ago.
Homo habilis were probably just under 5 feet tall.
Their brains range from about 600 to about 800 cc.
Louis Leakey, who is one of the great figures in the study of human evolution,
he and his family excavated for many decades along the African Rift Valley
for a long time, for example, in Aldervai Gorge.
Louis Leakey regarded Homo habilis as the first real humans
because they made stone tools.
When you find habilis, you often find crude stone tools associated with them.
The fact that Leakey regarded them as human
explains why he insisted on giving them the genus name Homo.
And what that did was label them as a type of human being.
The paleontologist who first finds the skull has a lot of power
to classify them and determine how we think about them.
And Leakey was determined that Homo habilis should be regarded really as a sort of human being
because they made tools.
A tool used clearly implies considerable intellectual ability.
We see signs of more technological creativity than we see amongst the Australopithecines.
And if they had good, better tools, they may have had better diets
because that might have made it easier to at least scavenge for meat.
But today, few paleontologists or anthropologists share Leakey's view
that habilis should be regarded as the first true humans.
And what this means is that if this is true,
we can't say that human history really begins two or three million years ago.
Why?
This is partly because habilis had smallish brains by human standards.
But it's also partly because other species have been shown to use tools.
Tool use is not now regarded as the critical dividing line
between humans and other species, as it once was,
and as it was, for the most part, in Leakey's day.
If you doubt, by the way, that other species use tools,
here's a remarkable example from Japan.
In Japan, crows, I should say we're learning slowly
that birds are often very, very clever indeed,
and crows are peculiarly clever.
Crows have been observed that they'll take walnuts at traffic lights,
they'll put them under the tires of cars,
and then they'll fly up and wait,
and they'll wait till the lights turn green.
The cars run over the walnuts.
When traffic's passed, they fly down, voila,
the walnuts are cracked and they can pick up the nuts.
If the cars miss the nuts, they swear,
well, they don't actually swear,
but they do the crow equivalent of that,
and then they take the nuts and they simply place them in a slightly different position.
Now this is clever, and this is using cars as tools.
So we now know that lots of animals can use tools.
So tool use is not quite enough to define homo habilis as a human species,
and that's why I will suggest that we don't do that,
that we argue that humans have not yet arrived.
So let's look at the next group of hominins.
Homo ergaster or erectus.
There's still argument about the paleontologists,
about the exact classification.
I'll call them ergaster, you may find them called erectus
from some texts.
They evolved about 1.8 million years ago,
we have remains of them from the Caucasus
that have been dated reliably to about 1.8 million years ago.
They were as tall as us,
their brains at 1,000 cc were almost as large as ours.
They made more sophisticated tools.
The tools made by habilis were sophisticated in their way,
crude by comparison with those made by ergaster.
The tools for ergaster are known as ashulian stone tools.
You may have seen them probably in the form of quite carefully manufactured stone axes.
They're often really very beautiful, they're carefully constructed,
and they're clearly constructed according to a plan
that the designer has in their mind.
Egaster was also the first species of hominins,
some of whom migrated out of Africa,
most stayed in Africa, but some migrated,
and some of them travelled around through the Middle East,
through India and to China,
and you can find much evidence of ergaster
just outside Beijing in a famous site called Zhukudian.
They may have learnt to use fire.
In fact, Beijing 500,000 years ago was a very cold environment,
so they almost certainly had to be able to use fire to survive there.
Nevertheless, I'm going to argue that ergaster too
shouldn't be regarded as fully human.
Their stone tools changed very little over one million years,
which suggests that they too lack the technological creativity
that distinguishes modern humans.
These are very, very clever organisms,
but they don't have the revolutionary capacity
for technological change and ecological change
that characterises our species.
So by one million years ago,
most of the features that define us as a species were already present,
but there was no sign yet of the technological
and ecological creativity that makes us different.
You've got organisms that really look pretty like us,
but you don't yet have the sort of behaviour that makes us different.
Why not?
There was very clearly a threshold of some kind
that had to be crossed before human history could really begin.
What was it?
Now, I'm going to keep you in suspense
because in the next lecture,
we're going to discuss the evidence
on which the story of human evolution is based,
and then what I'm going to do is bring humans onto the stage
by defining the threshold that was crossed
when our species first appeared on this beautiful planet.
Thank you.
The story of human evolution is personal.
It's very close to us, it's therefore very sensitive.
It really matters to us to get this story right,
to know how we were formed.
And that means the question we've asked many times
in this course about evidence becomes really crucial here.
And that's why I want to spend this lecture
looking at the evidence used to construct the story
of how our species evolved.
So, like many parts of this course,
we've seen that over and over again
that parts of this big story we're telling
came together very, very recently.
Many of them within the last 50 years
partly as new dating techniques appeared.
Even 50 years ago, we had far less information
about human evolution than we have now.
And we had far less confidence in what we knew.
So, the picture of human evolution has got much more precise,
much more detailed, much richer in just the last 50 years.
And we can expect it to get more precise in the near future.
So, I want to look at the sort of evidence.
This goes back to a question we asked
at the very beginning of the course.
This course offers scientific answers
to questions about the past
and scientific answers we've seen always offer evidence.
So, what's the evidence?
Can we possibly know about ancestors
that lived several million years ago?
It would have seemed completely impossible
just a few centuries ago.
And the other question,
why should we trust this story?
Why should we trust the story that I've just told?
This discussion is particularly important
because new evidence has accumulated
as we've seen at a tremendous rate
in just the last 50 years or no, or so.
So, now we can tell the history of human evolution
with much more detail and precision.
Okay.
What is the crucial evidence?
The last lecture described the evolution
of our hominin species over,
actually, since the time of the emergence of primates.
I'm going to focus here on the recent part of that story.
So, what's the evidence?
I'm going to talk about three main groups of evidence.
The first is, let's call it the fossil evidence.
Fossils and remains.
The sort of things you can dig up.
Skeletal remains.
The things that were left behind by early humans
or hominins.
The types of sites that they lived in.
That's the first type of evidence.
