Lecture 18, Hominins
Where do we fit into all of this?
Well, it's taken us 18 lectures.
Humans have made guest appearances,
maybe in the form of scientists,
but now at last humans are waiting in the wings,
though I'm afraid you're going to have to still wait two more lectures
before they make a full entrance with Trumpet's blaring.
But perhaps this long delay is actually helpful,
and it can tell us something about the nature of big history.
It's a reminder that the story is not all about us,
and that fact raises the question of how important we really are in this story.
Most of what's been said so far in this course suggests,
or may seem to suggest, that we're extremely unimportant.
We're small, we appeared very, very recently,
just in the last 53 minutes,
if you collapse the 13-billion-year timescale of the universe into just 13 years,
and we're just one of hundreds of millions of species that share this planet.
The rest of this course, though,
is for some reasons for thinking that perhaps we really do deserve a large place in this story.
I think from now on, the significance of humans, I hope, is going to become clearer and clearer.
The last two lectures described evolution in general,
and we were focusing on those evolutionary lines
that would eventually lead towards our own species.
Now we're ready to ask how our ancestors evolved from the primates.
But first, let's take a bit of time out to be clear about our place in the biological world,
and we're going to go back to taxonomy.
We've seen taxonomy already, we've referred to it several times.
Taxonomy, let me remind you, is the system used to classify living organisms,
and it goes back to the work of Carl Linnaeus in the 18th century.
And we saw in the last lecture that modern taxonomy has multiple levels,
they're sort of nested levels.
So in principle, you can find the exact position of every organism,
and that should tell you a lot about its relationship to other organisms on the huge family tree of life,
which ultimately, of course, goes back to a single, notional organism that appeared about 3.8 billion years ago.
So let's be clear about our position in modern taxonomy.
I'm going to go through the levels.
You and I belong to the super kingdom of eukaryotes.
That is to say, we're made from eukaryotic cells.
Now I said last time, lots of prokaryotic cells are crawling around us and inside us,
but basically we're made from eukaryotic cells, we're eukaryotic organisms.
Within multi-celled organisms, we belong to the kingdom of animals.
We're not single-celled, nor are we plants or fungi.
And this, of course, really does matter.
Plants, perhaps the crucial distinguishing feature of plants is that they can do photosynthesis, which we can't.
They can extract energy directly from sunlight if there's carbon dioxide and water available.
We can't do that.
Because plants can do it, what they can do is just stand there and suck up energy.
They don't need to go looking for it.
Because we can't just suck up energy like that.
We, like all other animals, have to go looking for food.
We have to be mobile and probably we have to be a bit more thoughtful and a bit more intelligent.
So many of the crucial differences between plants and animals arise from this simple but fundamental difference.
They can photosynthesize, we can't.
So, we are animals.
We belong to the phylum, the phylum of vertebrates or cordata.
That is to say we have backbones.
And that means we have a front and a back end, like all vertebrates.
Most of our nervous system and many of our sensors, or many of our sensory systems, I should say rather,
are concentrated at the front end, the pointy end of this piece.
That's the end that's going to move into the world first.
That's where you want vision, you want smell and so on.
The nervous system tends to be distributed along the spine.
We belong to the class of mammals.
That is to say we're furry, warm-blooded, and our young develop not in an egg, but within the womb.
As we've seen, being a mammal was good news 65 million years ago when the asteroid hit at the end of the Cretaceous period.
Remember one thing about that asteroid strike.
If that asteroid had been on an orbit just a tiny bit earlier or later, just a few minutes later or earlier,
it wouldn't have hit the earth, the dinosaurs would have survived,
and mammals would probably still be a small, nocturnal, scurrying class of animals of little significance on the planet.
As it was, the dinosaurs were cleared out of the way and the mammals could now fill their niches in a massive adaptive radiation,
so that suddenly a whole range of new mammal species appear in this radiation.
And many of them are big because they began to fill some of the big animal niches filled by dinosaurs.
So the asteroid is very, very important in this story.
To put it bluntly, no asteroid or an asteroid on a slightly different trajectory and no you and me.
Okay, we belong to the class of animals. We belong to the order of primates.
The order of primates includes lemurs and monkeys.
Yes, despite all the jokes, we really are monkeys.
And I have to say that personally, I've never found that particularly offensive.
I love monkeys. I think they're clever, interesting organisms.
I really don't mind the thought that I'm closely related to them.
We belong to the family of hominoids.
The hominoids are great apes.
They're large, quite intelligent, tailless apes, monkeys.
At the same point, I've never been offended at the thought of being closely related to chimps or gorillas.
I think they're beautiful creatures.
And as we'll see, recent studies of how they live in the wild, pioneered by researchers such as Jane Goodall and Diane Fosse,
have shown how interesting and clever they are.
They're much more interesting when you see them in the wild than when you see them in captivity,
which is how most of us have seen them.
Let's keep going. We go to the subfamily of hominins, bipedal apes.
We belong to the genus, homo, which sort of means human being.
The genus is the last category before the lowest category of all, the simplest category of all, the species.
We are homo sapiens. That's our species name.
Now, having said all of that, note that classification systems sometimes differ in detail,
so if you find slightly different classifications, don't worry too much.
But I hope you see how this nested system helps us get a sense of how we fit in to the large evolutionary story of life on Earth.
So in short, we are eukaryotic, multi-celled mammals from the order of primates.
If you want to get a sense of the chronology, you might want to check timelines three and four in the written materials that go with this course,
and they'll remind us when each of these distinctive features evolved.
So the history of living things that we surveyed in the last two lectures is, from one point of view,
a history of the evolution of many of the qualities that make us as we are.
Now I'd like to look at the order of primates.
The primates appeared about 65 million years ago at about the time of the Cretaceous asteroid impact.
They include, as we've seen, all monkeys and lemurs.
They include tarsias, they include gorillas, they include all marmosets,
they include all the American species of monkeys as well, as well as humans.
We are primates.
Now all primates share some distinctive features,
and a lot of these features seem to derive from the fact that the earliest primates almost certainly spent a lot of their time,
perhaps most of their time, living in trees.
They were tree dwellers.
In fact, if you, I remember, I used to love climbing trees myself as a kid,
and watch a young kid near a tree that's good for climbing,
and you won't have any trouble imagining that we are descended from organisms that lived in trees.
But living in trees has certain consequences, and they help explain some features of us.
First, if you live in trees, you need stereoscopic vision.
If you're leaping for a branch, you really want to be able to know exactly how far away that branch is,
otherwise you fall to the forest floor.
So you need stereoscopic vision.
So that means your eyes are going to move around to the front of your head.
You also need grasping limbs.
So primates have very good limbs.
They have good system of fingers.
It's under good control.
So both these qualities probably have a lot to do with living in trees.
Primates as a whole also have surprisingly large brains compared to their body size.
Now, this may be because visual information requires a lot of processing.
Remember, if you're living in trees, vision is very important, particularly stereoscopic vision.
And visual information requires a lot of computing power.
This is true in computers.
It's also true in brains.
So that may be one of the reasons why they have disproportionately large brains for their size.
I need to make one clarification here.
Elephants, of course, have huge brains, much, much bigger than ours.
But the crucial point is that their bodies are so much bigger
that their bodies take up a lot of computing capacity.
So the real, the best measure of intelligence, intrinsic cleverness, really,
is brain size relative to body size.
That's what really counts.
And here, primates are rather unusual.
Primates also tend to have longer lives.
This too may be related to larger brains.
Larger brains, brains as we'll see, are costly.
You have to feed them.
They take a lot of energy.
So you need more energy if you're going to support these very, very complex organs.
And they have to justify their existence.
One way they do that is by allowing you to learn.
In other words, to get better at doing things during your lifetime.
But learning, of course, is a slow process.
So the payoff may take some time.
So learning makes a bit more sense with longer-lived organisms.
That may be one of the reasons why primates live longer.
I should say now, and I may have to repeat this later on,
that very often we guess in retrospect what was the adaptive advantage
of a particular change in natural selection.
It's always hard to be sure that we've absolutely got it right.
But so these are, to some extent, these depend on guesswork.
Another feature.
We have flat faces.
We have a diminished snout and flatter faces.
Well, this too may have some link with living in trees.
Fast sense of smell is less important.
So most primates have small snouts and flatter faces.
If you want to get a strong sense of this, compare us to dogs.
Dogs are often described as noses on legs.
For dogs, a vast amount of information comes from the sense of smell.
So the nose is very well developed.
And to put it crudely, it sticks out in front.
Dogs, I suspect, find us kind of disappointingly flat-faced.
Okay, that's primates.
And I hope you can see that many of our features clearly derive from our primate heritage.
Now I want to move on to the great apes, the family of hominoids.
The great apes are a family within the order of primates.
They are large, intelligent, tail-less primates.
The family includes chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, gibbons, and humans.
And it also includes many extinct species.
The hominoids evolved in Africa, were an African species, about 18 million years ago.
Though some would eventually migrate to other parts of Eurasia, such as the orangs.
Only in recent decades, by the way, have we begun to realize quite how complex their social lives are
through the pioneering work of researchers such as Jane Goodall,
who I mentioned last time, who worked with chimpanzees in the wild,
and Diane Fosse, who worked mainly with gorillas.
They showed the great apes as much more than mere animals.
They showed them as organisms with complex social and political lives,
a lot of technical ability, a great diversity of personalities,
and also a rich emotional life.
Both of them resisted the traditional researchers' taboo on empathizing
with the subject you're researching.
And that, I think, allowed them a sort of insight into the lives of these creatures
that other researchers hadn't had.
They allowed themselves to empathize with the creatures they were studying.
And that may explain why they saw so much more
than researchers who refused to see them as anything but highly mobile objects.
Now, it was the striking similarities between us and the great apes,
the persuaded Darwin that we were closely related
and that we might be descended from ape-like creatures.
Of course, we're not descended from apes.
Apes have evolved, so have we.
But we may have descended.
In fact, as we'll see, we certainly did descend from a common ancestor.
This, I think, is one more sign of Darwin's perceptiveness.
He, unlike most of his contemporaries,
could see beyond the prejudices and assumptions of his time
about human uniqueness and had little difficulty in seeing the similarities
between us and apes.
He could see us as part of a unified world of living organisms,
rather than, as a lot of scholarship did,
seeing human beings as somehow separate from the natural world.
We belong to the sub-family of hominins.
You'll sometimes find the word hominids, by the way,
used as a synonym for hominins.
The two mean exactly the same.
The hominins are a group of apes that walked upright.
They evolved seven million years ago.
This date is based on comparisons of the genetic material of modern great apes,
because we have very few fossils from this era.
Here's an area where very recent dating techniques
have critically rearranged our ideas about the human past.
It used to be thought on the basis of very limited fossil evidence,
which was also very difficult to interpret.
The humans and the great ape lines had diverged perhaps 15 or even 30 million years ago.
We'll look more closely at the basis of these genetic dating techniques in the next lecture.
But genetic evidence suggests that the human line split from the chimp line
about 7 million years ago and from the gorilla line about 8 to 10 million years ago.
And let me be clear about exactly what that means.
It means that about 7 million years ago there was a creature
which was the ancestor to us, but also the ancestor to modern chimps.
It was not the same as either of us because both groups have evolved,
but it was the ancestor of both of us.
And once the hominins appeared about something like 7 million years ago,
they diverged rapidly in a new adaptive radiation
of which we today are the only survivors.
We don't know exactly how many hominin species there have been over these 7 million years,
but it could have been as many as 20 or 30, quite a lot of species.
All of them have gone extinct except for us.
In recent decades, many hominin fossils have turned up.
And these allow us to learn something more about the nature of the first hominins.
And one of the most important single things that we've learned in recent decades
is that the early hominins, in other words,
the line of evolution that was leading in our direction
was not characterized first and foremost by braininess,
but by bipedalism, the ability to walk on two legs.
Their brains, in fact, were about the size of chimp brains, as we'll see.
Now, why bipedalism?
What was the advantage of walking on two legs
rather than doing something like what chimps or gorillas do,
which is walk most of the time on four or knuckle walk?
Now, we have no conclusive answers to this.
Once again, there's a bit of guesswork here.
One possible theory was argued by a French researcher, Yves Copain.
About 15 million years ago, the African Rift Valley began to be created.
It's a sort of tectonic tear that runs from South Africa right through to Ethiopia.
It's a tear in the African Plate.
And what it did was it raised mountains that left much of East Africa in a rain shadow,
and as a result, it reduced forest cover.
And what Copain suggested was that bipedal apes
would have found it much easier to travel through the resulting grasslands.
Remember what's happening is that monkeys, which are forest-dwelling, tree-dwelling species,
are suddenly being faced in East Africa with an environment that has fewer trees
and is much more like Savannah land.
So his argument is that in this environment, bipedalism was favored.
If you're standing up, you can probably travel faster.
You can see dangers and opportunities as you're traveling as well.
It's a nice theory.
Unfortunately, the recent discovery of hominine species in environments
that were clearly forested has undermined this promising idea.
So at the moment, we're not really sure what the main advantage of bipedalism was,
but it must have come with some advantages.
And we say this because of the rapid appearance of a number of new species of bipedal, great apes,
in what we can call as a hominine adaptive radiation.
In what follows, I'd like to describe some of the main lines of this radiation,
and I'll focus on just three major groups of hominines,
but always remember there were many more types of hominines that I'm going to describe.
The first type are known as Australopithecines, which stands for Southern apes.
The Australopithecines were a large and quite varied group, or genus of hominines,
and they lived from about four to about one million years ago.
They include Lucy, whose remains I'll describe in the next lecture.
Australopithecines were bipedal.
They were clearly bipedal, but if you study them closely,
it looks as if the bipedalism was somehow not yet quite complete.
They may have used trees as refuges.
They may occasionally have resorted to knuckle walking of some kind,
but they were certainly bipedal.
They were shorter than modern humans.
The tallest Australopithecines were probably less than five feet tall.
At about 400 to 500 cc, their brains were slightly larger than those of chimps.
Chimp brains averaged 300 to 400 cc,
but they were about one third the size of human brains, which averaged about 1,350 cc.
Now, while I'm talking about brain size, I should actually suggest a warning.
Don't start looking around at the heads of your friends and relatives.
Tiny differences in the size of human heads does not correlate automatically
with differences in intelligence.
Einstein, I'm told, had a very, very small brain indeed.
So it's the large differences that matter.
There is a difference between a creature with a brain of 500 cc and one of 1,350 cc,
but smaller differences don't matter too much.
Don't check out your friends too carefully.
Now, how clever were the Australopithecines?
It's just possible that some made stone tools,
but at the moment there's no definite evidence that this was true.
We have no indications of any striking technological breakthroughs,
nor any clear indications that they had advanced linguistic ability.
These are the sort of things we're going to look for when we look for human features.
So no real signs of Australopithecines marking some sort of technological breakthrough.
We are probably descended from one branch of the Australopithecines.
But nevertheless, if you or I were transported to Ethiopia four million years ago
and we saw an Australopithecine or a group of Australopithecines,
we probably wouldn't be thinking human.
We'd probably be thinking chimp.
They'd probably look to us like a species of chimps.
Okay, the second species of hominines, Homo habilis.
Homo habilis loosely translated means handyman, skillful man, if you like.
The species appeared about 2.3 million years ago.
Homo habilis were probably just under 5 feet tall.
Their brains range from about 600 to about 800 cc.
Louis Leakey, who is one of the great figures in the study of human evolution,
he and his family excavated for many decades along the African Rift Valley
for a long time, for example, in Aldervai Gorge.
Louis Leakey regarded Homo habilis as the first real humans
because they made stone tools.
When you find habilis, you often find crude stone tools associated with them.
The fact that Leakey regarded them as human
explains why he insisted on giving them the genus name Homo.
And what that did was label them as a type of human being.
The paleontologist who first finds the skull has a lot of power
to classify them and determine how we think about them.
And Leakey was determined that Homo habilis should be regarded really as a sort of human being
because they made tools.
A tool used clearly implies considerable intellectual ability.
We see signs of more technological creativity than we see amongst the Australopithecines.
And if they had good, better tools, they may have had better diets
because that might have made it easier to at least scavenge for meat.
But today, few paleontologists or anthropologists share Leakey's view
that habilis should be regarded as the first true humans.
And what this means is that if this is true,
we can't say that human history really begins two or three million years ago.
Why?
This is partly because habilis had smallish brains by human standards.
But it's also partly because other species have been shown to use tools.
Tool use is not now regarded as the critical dividing line
between humans and other species, as it once was,
and as it was, for the most part, in Leakey's day.
If you doubt, by the way, that other species use tools,
here's a remarkable example from Japan.
In Japan, crows, I should say we're learning slowly
that birds are often very, very clever indeed,
and crows are peculiarly clever.
Crows have been observed that they'll take walnuts at traffic lights,
they'll put them under the tires of cars,
and then they'll fly up and wait,
and they'll wait till the lights turn green.
The cars run over the walnuts.
When traffic's passed, they fly down, voila,
the walnuts are cracked and they can pick up the nuts.
If the cars miss the nuts, they swear,
well, they don't actually swear,
but they do the crow equivalent of that,
and then they take the nuts and they simply place them in a slightly different position.
Now this is clever, and this is using cars as tools.
So we now know that lots of animals can use tools.
So tool use is not quite enough to define homo habilis as a human species,
and that's why I will suggest that we don't do that,
that we argue that humans have not yet arrived.
So let's look at the next group of hominins.
Homo ergaster or erectus.
There's still argument about the paleontologists,
about the exact classification.
I'll call them ergaster, you may find them called erectus
from some texts.
They evolved about 1.8 million years ago,
we have remains of them from the Caucasus
that have been dated reliably to about 1.8 million years ago.
They were as tall as us,
their brains at 1,000 cc were almost as large as ours.
They made more sophisticated tools.
The tools made by habilis were sophisticated in their way,
crude by comparison with those made by ergaster.
The tools for ergaster are known as ashulian stone tools.
You may have seen them probably in the form of quite carefully manufactured stone axes.
They're often really very beautiful, they're carefully constructed,
and they're clearly constructed according to a plan
that the designer has in their mind.
Egaster was also the first species of hominins,
some of whom migrated out of Africa,
most stayed in Africa, but some migrated,
and some of them travelled around through the Middle East,
through India and to China,
and you can find much evidence of ergaster
just outside Beijing in a famous site called Zhukudian.
They may have learnt to use fire.
In fact, Beijing 500,000 years ago was a very cold environment,
so they almost certainly had to be able to use fire to survive there.
Nevertheless, I'm going to argue that ergaster too
shouldn't be regarded as fully human.
Their stone tools changed very little over one million years,
which suggests that they too lack the technological creativity
that distinguishes modern humans.
These are very, very clever organisms,
but they don't have the revolutionary capacity
for technological change and ecological change
that characterises our species.
So by one million years ago,
most of the features that define us as a species were already present,
but there was no sign yet of the technological
and ecological creativity that makes us different.
You've got organisms that really look pretty like us,
but you don't yet have the sort of behaviour that makes us different.
Why not?
There was very clearly a threshold of some kind
that had to be crossed before human history could really begin.
What was it?
Now, I'm going to keep you in suspense
because in the next lecture,
we're going to discuss the evidence
on which the story of human evolution is based,
and then what I'm going to do is bring humans onto the stage
by defining the threshold that was crossed
when our species first appeared on this beautiful planet.
Thank you.
The story of human evolution is personal.
It's very close to us, it's therefore very sensitive.
It really matters to us to get this story right,
to know how we were formed.
And that means the question we've asked many times
in this course about evidence becomes really crucial here.
And that's why I want to spend this lecture
looking at the evidence used to construct the story
of how our species evolved.
So, like many parts of this course,
we've seen that over and over again
that parts of this big story we're telling
came together very, very recently.
Many of them within the last 50 years
partly as new dating techniques appeared.
Even 50 years ago, we had far less information
about human evolution than we have now.
And we had far less confidence in what we knew.
So, the picture of human evolution has got much more precise,
much more detailed, much richer in just the last 50 years.
And we can expect it to get more precise in the near future.
So, I want to look at the sort of evidence.
This goes back to a question we asked
at the very beginning of the course.
This course offers scientific answers
to questions about the past
and scientific answers we've seen always offer evidence.
So, what's the evidence?
Can we possibly know about ancestors
that lived several million years ago?
It would have seemed completely impossible
just a few centuries ago.
And the other question,
why should we trust this story?
Why should we trust the story that I've just told?
This discussion is particularly important
because new evidence has accumulated
as we've seen at a tremendous rate
in just the last 50 years or no, or so.
So, now we can tell the history of human evolution
with much more detail and precision.
Okay.
What is the crucial evidence?
The last lecture described the evolution
of our hominin species over,
actually, since the time of the emergence of primates.
I'm going to focus here on the recent part of that story.
So, what's the evidence?
I'm going to talk about three main groups of evidence.
The first is, let's call it the fossil evidence.
Fossils and remains.
The sort of things you can dig up.
Skeletal remains.
The things that were left behind by early humans
or hominins.
The types of sites that they lived in.
That's the first type of evidence.
Remains.
The second comes from modern studies
of closely related species such as chimps and gorillas.
And that can teach us a lot about the social world,
the technologies of early hominins.
It can't tell us exactly how they lived,
but it can give us many ideas about how they possibly lived
from studying close relatives.
And the third type of evidence I'll look at,
I'll call genetic or molecular dating.
It's a recent technique.
One of the many recent techniques that I've talked about
that emerged in the last 50 years
that allows us to determine quite precisely
when different evolutionary lines split.
So those are the three large things I want to talk about.
Let's begin by talking about fossils and remains.
Probably the most important evidence of human evolution
comes from surviving remains of our ancestors
and the objects they left behind
and the living sites that they left behind.
These can tell us a lot about the physiology of our ancestors,
their basic structure, particularly their skeletons, of course,
but also they can give us many hints about what they ate
and how they lived.
They can tell us quite a lot about their life ways.
Some of the most exciting hominine remains
have come from the African Rift Valley,
as we saw in the last lecture.
This is this tectonic tear that runs from Mozambique
through Tanzania and Kenya to Ethiopia.
And like everywhere where you get a sort of tear in the earth,
it reveals, it reveals, very often reveals, many fossils
because you get a chance to sort of look
at what is beneath the surface.
I want to take as an example of the sort of things we can learn
from fossils and other remains.
The famous, perhaps the most famous hominine fossil of all,
Lucy.
In 1974, in Hadar, Ethiopia,
an American archaeologist, paleontologist, Don Johansson,
and his colleagues,
found almost 40% of the remains of a hominine individual
that was about three and a half feet tall.
This was a very, very exciting discovery.
And just to give you some feeling,
some feeling for what it's actually like to work as a paleontologist,
I'd like to quote from Johansson's own account
of the moment of discovery.
This is what he says.
This is November the 30th, 1974.
He's in Hadar, which is a quite arid and fairly remote region
of Ethiopia.
And now I'm quoting,
As always, I kept my eyes moving along the ground with every step.
I knew that the gully had been worked over a couple of times before,
so I wasn't surprised when it appeared to be empty of bones.
But just as I turned to leave,
I saw what appeared to be a fragment of an elbow joint
lying at the bottom of the slope above.
Tom Gray and I knelt down to examine the thing.
It was small, very small, but unquestionably a hominid.
Then I spotted a piece of skull next to Tom's hand,
and suddenly we seemed to be surrounded by hominid bones,
a femur, a piece of pelvis, ribs, some vertebrae.
For a while we just groped around from one bone to the next,
too stunned to speak.
It occurred to me right away that perhaps
all these bones might belong to a single individual.
But I was afraid to speak that thought out loud,
as if by doing so I would break the spell
and we would once again find ourselves standing in an unremarkable,
boneless little gully in the middle of nowhere.
Tom, on the other hand, could not hold in his excitement.
He let out a yell, and then I heard myself yelling too,
and we were hugging each other and dancing up and down in the heat.
I like that passage.
It gives you some sense of the extreme excitement
of finding 40% of a skeleton.
Paleontologists are used to meager rations.
They can get very excited if they find one tooth or one knuckle bone.
40% of a skeleton is magical.
It also gives you some sense of how tough life can be as a paleontologist.
You organise the expedition, you spend months planning it,
you raise the money, you go out there,
you go out looking for fossils,
maybe for weeks, maybe for months,
and there's always the possibility you'll find nothing.
The whole thing will have been wasted.
So all of that background explains the extreme excitement
that Johansson describes on finding Lucy.
Lucy is one of the most complete hominin skeletons ever found.
Johansson christened the remains of Lucy
because his team had been listening to the Beatles song Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.
This is, remember, 1974.
Now, how much information can a good physical anthropologist
or archaeologist extract from such a find?
Let me describe some of the information that you can get from Lucy.
Lucy illustrates very well some of the things that skeletal remains can tell us.
Radiometric dating of the materials around Lucy
determined that she lived about 3.2 million years ago.
Now, you remember radiometric dating?
It depends on measuring the breakdown of radioactive materials.
If you can measure how much they've broken down,
you know when the lump of stuff they're in was formed.
But note that what they had to date was not Lucy herself.
It's the stuff just around Lucy.
So this is one of the dangers of radiometric dating.
And one of the things that anthropologists, archaeologists have to be very, very careful of.
It's always possible the bones have actually shifted
and what you've dated is not exactly precise.
And there's another form of imprecision we need to be aware of.
Radiometric dates are always given as plus or minus a certain percentage.
This is because a radioactive breakdown is itself a statistical process.
So you give a band of dates.
You say 3.2 million years plus or minus a certain percentage.
So with those qualifications, we know that Lucy almost certainly lived
a bit more than 3 million years ago.
Study of the pelvis showed that Lucy was female.
Study of the teeth and other anatomical features suggested very clearly
that Lucy belonged to the genus of Australopithecines, which we discussed last time.
And the genus, I'll remind you, is the next taxonomic level above the species.
Close study of the bones also suggested that she died in her 20s.
So already we know a lot about Lucy.
Now study of the pelvis and the base of the skull suggested that she was bipedal.
Now it may seem obvious why the pelvis is relevant if you're studying bipedalism,
but how can you detect bipedalism from studying the skull?
Just think about this for a moment.
In fact, if you're listening to this in private, you might want to get down on four legs
and you'll find it easier to figure this out.
In quadruped species, the spine enters the skull from behind
because you have to lift your head up, not from below.
But if you're a bipedal species, you want the spine to come into the head from below,
and you'll get a very clear sense of that if you get down on hands and knees.
So that's how the skull can tell us whether this is a largely bipedal species.
Get her brain at about 450 cc was only slightly larger than that of a chimp.
This is one of the easiest measurements you can make, by the way.
You simply take the skull, you plug some of the holes temporarily,
you fill it with sand or some other medium like that,
then you figure out how much sand you've put into it.
So clearly, as we saw last time, bipedalism evolved before large brains.
This was simply proving something that anthropologists were already beginning to understand.
This has been one of the great discoveries of modern paleontology.
That the first thing that distinguished us from the Great Apes was not greater braininess.
It was not smartness. It was bipedalism.
And this cut across the old assumption that the first sign of humans would have to be cleverness.
As we'll see, cleverness in several forms came quite late in the story.
Now let's move beyond Lucy.
In 1978, Mary Leakey, Louis Leakey's wife, discovered fossilized footprints
left by three Australopithecines who'd walked through still warm lava in Lyotoli in Tanzania,
also in the Rift Valley.
These footprints could be dated to about 3.6 million years ago.
And once again, they confirmed that Australopithecines were bipedal.
I have to say, those prints I also find really rather moving.
It's like Lucy's skeleton. They seem to momentarily bring us very close to our ancestors.
We can all too easily empathize with them as they felt the warm soil beneath their feet,
and they're probably scurrying to get away from a nearby volcanic eruption.
There are even hints.
One of them was smaller, but one of them was holding a younger one by the hand.
So this is the sort of evidence that really helps us to kind of empathize with this world.
Skeletons can tell us much more.
For example, paleo dentists, people who study the teeth of skeletal remains,
can tell whether a tooth was used to eat plants or meat.
And knowing whether we're dealing with a vegetarian or a meat eater or something in between
can tell us a lot about their lifestyles.
If you know what they're eating, you can figure out how they got their food,
and that may tell you a lot about what they spent their days doing.
Louis Leakey.
Louis Leakey's dates, by the way, are 1903 to 1972.
He and his family made Aldervai Gorge on the Rift Valley,
one of the most famous of all sites for human paleoanthropology.
It's a bit like the South Dakota Badlands, which I visited recently,
an area where geological processes are kind of cracking open the crust of the earth for us.
And as they do so, they reveal fossil remains.
But in Aldervai, as we've seen, it's the process of tearing apart the African plate
that reveals the remains.
In the Badlands, the crucial process is the rapid erosion of a plateau.
In 1964, Leakey's son Jonathan found a 2.3 million-year-old skull
that was about half the size of a human skull, about 600 cc.
Despite the small size of the skull,
Louis Leakey classified it as a new species.
And this was the first discovery of what we now call Homo habilis,
the second of the three hominin species I described in the last lecture.
By calling it Homo, we've seen Leakey placed it within the same genus as us.
And this was immensely important symbolically, as well as scientifically.
Leakey, we've seen, was convinced the creature was human
because of the stone tools he found nearby.
And just by classifying it as Homo, he asserted that loud and clear.
And, of course, the label has stuck,
even though, as we've seen, many paleoanthropologists
are no longer convinced that it's very helpful to classify habilis as human.
Okay, let's move on.
Now, why was Leakey so insistent that habilis was a member of the same genus as us?
Mainly because of the tools.
So let's talk a bit about stone tools.
The tools that were found with habilis are known now as Aldoven, after the Aldovi Gorge.
I said they were crude.
They were made from pebbles of quartz or flint, or even sometimes obsidian.
Obsidian is a sort of volcanic glass,
one of the sharpest things available to prehistoric cultures.
And they were struck together to remove flakes that could be used as cutting edges, as knives,
some of them as razor sharp knives.
And the remains, the leftover cores, could have been used as crude hammers.
Now, Leakey was impressed because, as we saw,
he was expecting to find technological virtuosity.
That's how he defined humans.
He thought humans were tool makers.
And there was some reason to be impressed, because, though I've described these as crude by some standards,
nevertheless, a fair bit of skill was involved in their manufacture.
How do we know?
Well, one of the reasons is that some paleoanthropologists have tried to recreate them.
Nick Toff and Kathy Schick have been doing this for a long time.
They've been teaching themselves how to make stone tools.
Work of this kind is often known as experimental archaeology.
And they found that the first trick is to find the right types of stones.
So clearly, our homo habilis had to be quite good at picking the right types of stone to make their tools.
Flint, quartz, we've seen obsidian.
Stones that break in reasonably predictable ways.
So you don't just smash them and take the bits and pieces.
You have some idea of what's going to happen when you smash them together.
And ideally, of course, you're looking for stones that produce sharp edges.
Once you've got a sharp edge of some kind, you can use two main techniques to perfect the tool.
The first is percussion flaking.
You hit a stone tool in just the right way so that a sharp flake breaks off.
Now this, it's been shown from experimental archaeology, this is really quite a skillful technique.
You can get better and better and better at this as you practice this.
It takes a fair bit of skill.
And the second technique is pressure flaking.
You simply apply pressure to an edge to break off a fine flake.
And these you can use as razors to slice.
And of course, one of the uses we presume is to slice meat from a skin, to butcher.
It's also possible to learn about stone tool manufacture by reassembling the remains left behind by a stone tool napper.
Cocktail party question.
What's the technical term for making stone tools?
And the answer is napping with a K.
Napping without a K, of course, means sleeping.
Napping is making stone tools.
Okay, we can do more with stone tools.
If you study their edges through a microscope, you can often figure out what materials they were used on.
And this can tell us a lot about diets and life ways.
For example, Homo habilis seems to have had an omnivorous diet dominated by plant foods such as leaves and fruits,
but also including some meat.
Now, what does that tell us?
It tells us that despite the conviction of an earlier generation of anthropologists,
early humans were not necessarily hunters.
In fact, it seems that the vast majority of our ancestors were not.
They spent a lot of time collecting fruits, collecting nuts, collecting vegetable foods of various kinds.
And as we'll see, they probably got their meat by scavenging.
How can you tell? How can we tell this?
How can we tell the difference between hunting and scavenging?
Well, once again, microscopic studies of remains can tell us a lot about this.
Above all, the cut marks and scratches on animal bones that have been found at hominine sites
can determine whether the hominines hunted themselves or scavenged remains killed by other animals.
And Homo habilis, it seems, scavenged most of the meat they ate.
So once again, this suggests that even if some of our ancestors did use meat, they were not really hunting.
It might help to try and imagine the sort of scene we're thinking about.
Imagine our ancestors watching from a distance or behind a tree as lions or hyenas bring down a zebra
and then kill it and eat most of the meat.
Then imagine them waiting till the predators leave and scurrying in,
equipped with a few fine blades that they've made to see if there's anything left on the bones or in the marrow.
It's not quite as impressive a picture as that of human hunters, but if it works, it works.
And of course, meat is extremely rich food.
And if you have a diet with some meat in it, may have been a very productive source of energy.
Okay, now that's a long discussion of some of the things we can learn from studying fossils
and the things that hominines and our ancestors left behind.
And I hope it gives you some idea of how much information a good paleontologist can tease out of these remains.
Now I'd like to look at a second category of evidence that's been used to construct our modern account of human evolution.
And that's the study of primates in the wild.
The crucial work here, and I mentioned this in passing in the previous lecture.
The crucial work here was done, the pioneering work, by two former students of Leakeys,
Jane Goodall and Diane Fosse.
They really pioneered the study of apes in the wild.
Before their time, no one had seriously spent a lot of time watching great apes in the wild.
They'd mostly been studied in captivity in zoos.
And the work begun by those two and followed now by a whole generation of researchers
have transformed modern attitudes to our closest relatives, the great apes.
And what they've done is they've encouraged researchers to think of them not purely as alien species,
but also as species that may have enough in common with us that we can, to some extent, use our capacity to empathize with them.
They encouraged the idea that good research might involve empathizing with the creatures you're studying.
And they showed that the great apes have extremely complex and clearly defined social relationships.
And they showed also that those relationships differ greatly from species to species.
We can't just take a particular species of society and use that as a model, for example, for early human societies,
because the societies, even of closely related chimp species, bonobos and other chimp species, are quite different.
To give one illustration, chimps, standard chimps, have complex hierarchies in which males compete for political ranking.
They form alliances, they challenge each other for dominance physically.
And the most successful, these are the Don Corleones of the chimp world,
the most successful gain greater access to the females, or perhaps we should put it the other way around.
The females are most likely to select as a mate the most successful, the Don Corleones,
the ones that can provide them protection and resources and powerful alliances.
Therefore, they tend to have more offspring. This is what Darwin called sexual selection.
Their genes are going to spread more in the next generation.
These studies also show that humans are not the only great apes to use tools.
One of the earliest things they found was that the great apes use tools as well.
For example, let me just give one famous example.
Chimps often strip leaves from sticks to fish out termites or ants from termite or ant mounds.
Now if you want to try it, here's how, though really I wouldn't recommend it and I have to say I've never tried it myself.
What you do is you stick a slim stick into an ant or termite's nest, then you draw it out quickly with bugs crawling all over it.
Then comes the tricky bit. What you have to do is quickly sweep your hand along the stick.
You gather up all the ants, then you shove them into your mouth and then you crunch down on them quickly.
If you do it all in one clean, efficient movement, the ants won't have much of a chance to bite you.
But if you mess it up, it can be painful.
And it's actually young chimps have been observed learning how to do this by imitating their mothers.
However, no apes make tools as sophisticated as those of habilis.
Despite that, the fact that they do use tools undermined Leakey's claim that habilis was the first great ape or hominin species to use tools.
So studies of related species in the wild have added a lot to our understanding of social relations amongst them
and provide very interesting models for understanding what hominine and early human societies may have looked like.
Now the third basic type of technique I want to discuss briefly is genetic dating.
This is one of the most recent techniques for studying human evolution and it's revolutionized our understanding of the story of human evolution.
It's part of the chronometric revolution which I mentioned in the fourth lecture.
Genetic dating techniques or molecular dating techniques were pioneered in the work of Alan Wilson and Vincent Sourish
in work which they first published in 1967.
So let me try and explain very simply how it works.
Many genes it turns out in the genetic code are not expressed in the physical body
and this means they have no real impact on the survival chances of an organism.
And what that means is that they can change randomly without affecting the process of natural selection.
So there's a lot of random change that goes on inside the genome of any organism.
And where you have random change, it's a bit like shuffling a pack of cards,
you would start using statistical techniques.
And you can use these for example to estimate how different two genomes are from each other
and how much random change has gone on.
And this is particularly valuable if you suspect the two species were once related.
So at one time the two were identical.
You can slowly estimate how much change has gone on.
And then there's another step.
You can estimate how different the two genomes are.
And then by taking species whose history we know well,
you can calibrate these differences against other evidence
such as the knowledge that mammal species diverged rapidly after the sudden extinctions of 65 million years ago.
And you can roughly estimate how rapidly these changes occurred.
So then in principle you can get to the point where you say these two species diverge genetically by such and such a percent
and roughly that ought to mean that they've been diverging genetically for 10 million or 20 million or 50 million years or whatever it is.
This is the basic principle of genetic dating.
Now when they first proposed this idea they were met with great skepticism
and this was largely because most biologists resisted the idea that genes could change randomly.
They were convinced that most genes were so closely linked to fitness
that they were shaped not by random processes but by natural selection.
But it's since realized that actually a very large part of the genome of most large organisms is not used and therefore has no impact on fitness.
And since they first published the idea, the technique has been refined, it's been used over and over again
and it has now been shown that it correlates very closely with other evidence.
So it's now a very powerful tool for paleoanthropologists.
These calculations by the way are even clearer if you use the DNA within mitochondria.
Remember, mitochondria organelles within cells.
These inherit their genes from the mother through the fertilized egg and therefore they don't get mixed each generation.
Now how did these techniques revolutionize our understanding of human evolution?
Wilson and Sarich showed that the DNA of humans and chimps differs by little more than 1%
and they estimated that this suggested that the two species had had a common ancestor about 7 million years ago.
At the time that was revolutionary because most biologists were convinced that humans and chimps were far farther apart genetically and historically
that the lines had diverged 15 to 20 million years ago, perhaps 30 million years ago.
And those claims were based on fragmentary studies of fragmentary skeletal remains.
Now the date that Wilson and Sarich established is now very well established in our understanding of evolution.
So what it shows is that we're much closer to chimps than we once thought.
And we had a common ancestor only 7 million years ago, very recently in terms of human evolution.
The technique was peculiarly crucial because very few fossils exist from this crucial era of about 6 to 7 million years ago when hominin evolution began.
OK, we've looked at the evidence. We've looked at the fossil evidence, studies of neighboring species in the wild today and genetic dating techniques.
Now we're ready finally to introduce human beings.
And let me ask, raise this question again. What is the threshold that leads from not being a human to being a human?
One of the most fundamental questions we can ask. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
What does it mean to be a human being?
Is there any deeper question we can tackle?
Remember Pascal's remark, for what is man in nature?
A nothingness in respect to infinity, a hole in respect to nothingness, a median between nothing and everything.
One of the central aims of a course like this must be to help us think about what it means to be human.
What is our real place in the overall scheme of things?
Do we matter or not?
Can we define the role we play within the universe?
I don't guarantee we can come up with perfect answers to this question in this course.
But what is absolutely certain is that it's easier to think about these large, grand questions about the meaning of life within the very large and multidisciplinary perspective of big history.
In fact, one of the reasons I love teaching big history is that it validates these questions.
It encourages us to think seriously about questions such as the meaning of being human.
And it encourages us to think that they are not just metaphysical or philosophical questions,
but they are questions to which there may be good, rigorous, evidence-based scientific answers.
It encourages us to think, in other words, that it's reasonable and legitimate to think about them.
And that's something that I fear many educational institutions today don't encourage.
Certainly my own experience was that if I raised the sort of deep questions about the meaning of life that as an adolescent,
I used to spend a lot of time thinking about it.
If I tried to raise those in class, they were dismissed as not serious.
And we were told that the serious questions were smaller and much more manageable.
So one of the lovely things about big history, I think, is that it can encourage us to think that these questions can at least be tackled in a serious way.
So it provides a powerful way of legitimizing these deep and fundamental questions,
which I think certainly every young person needs to be wrestling with,
but probably everyone else throughout their lives.
In the previous lectures, I described the history of life on Earth,
and I described the evolution of our own ancestors through the adaptive mechanism of natural selection.
That's the mechanism that Darwin described clearly in the 19th century.
The next group of lectures takes us across a new threshold,
and what it does is describe the appearance of our own species and the earliest stages of human history.
And I'm going to argue that this is indeed a radical threshold.
The appearance of our species marks something new in the history, certainly of the planet,
something radically new, and it marks the beginnings of a build-up towards new forms of complexity.
We've seen so far how similar we are to other living organisms.
Now we must start asking the opposite question.
What is it that makes us so different that the appearance of the first humans,
perhaps 250,000 years ago, at the beginning of the Paleolithic era of human history,
counts as a fundamental turning point in the history of our planet?
What justifies treating the appearance of our species as a new threshold of complexity?
Is this merely parochialism, a sort of species bragging?
Or are there perhaps objective reasons for making such a powerful claim about the nature of our species?
That's what I'm going to argue in what follows.
Now this lecture is going to be a bit theoretical.
It's going to try to pin down the nature of the threshold
and pin down in very general terms what makes us so different.
Now if we ask this question, what makes us so different?
What possible answers are there?
Well, let's begin with one of them.
It's our control of the energy of the biosphere.
This one distinctive feature of our species is the colossal amount of energy we control.
Remember where the energy comes from that supports the biosphere
and how that story links the different stories we tell in this course.
Most of the energy that sustains life on the biosphere is manufactured by fusion reactions in the core of the sun.
It arrives on Earth where it's put in storage by photosynthesizing plants.
It's then consumed by them for their own growth or used by the organisms that eat them.
Or it's buried in the ground to be consumed millions of years later
in the form of fossil fuels such as the stuff you put in your car this morning.
Each species on Earth gets its share of that energy budget
through what ecologists often describe as the food chain.
Now what's really weird about our species is that over about 250,000 years
we have slowly got our hands on more and more and more of that energy.
And I'm going to argue that this is a process that is hard to see in the early stages of our history
but it actually begins 250,000 years ago.
Let me remind you of the figures Eric Chesson has given.
He calculated that about 20,000 ergs per second per gram
flow through large-bodied animals such as apes.
Modern humans, that's at the end of human history,
use on average 20 times as much energy, something like 500,000 ergs per second per gram.
Now that's calculated by dividing total energy consumption of modern humans
by the number and mass of human beings.
It doesn't necessarily represent what any particular individual consumes
but what it shows is that as a species we're controlling a staggering amount of energy.
Now we know these figures are very, very rough and ready
but I hope you'll agree that their implications make sense.
We all know that as a species we are controlling a lot of the resources of our biosphere.
We guzzle energy at an astonishing rate and we use resources at an astonishing rate.
So the question is why?
What is it about us that enables us to do this?
Now I'm going to argue that human control of energy and resources began
as soon as our species appeared.
In fact, it rises out of the very nature of our species.
It's very hard to observe in the earlier stages of human history.
So human control of energy and resources increases very, very slow
in the Paleolithic era before about 10,000 years ago.
Then we can see it start to build up as agriculture appears and then modern human societies.
In the Paleolithic era, the earlier stage of human history,
humans probably used enough energy to stay alive with a small surplus
but the build up of energy control was apparent in the fact that humans started spreading
to more and more environments.
In fact, in the course of the Paleolithic they spread to more environments
than any other large species.
In the end of the Paleolithic they'd spread around the world.
Early agriculturalists may have been using up to 12,000 kilocalories a day
and today each of us uses on average, it's been estimated, about 230,000 kilocalories a day.
In contrast, think of a closely related species, the chimps,
and you ask whether chimp control of energy has built up in the time that chimps have been on this earth.
That's the answer, and the answer is no.
Chimp use of energy, like that of all other species, has remained essentially stable.
They used just enough to stay alive with perhaps a slight surplus.
More energy, more control of energy allowed our species to multiply.
Till today there are a few hundred thousand chimps
and their numbers are dwindling quite rapidly, but there are six billion humans.
In fact, even at the end of the Paleolithic there were probably about six million humans.
More people, more energy help explain why human societies,
particularly in the last 10,000 years or so, have become more and more complex.
Remember there always seems to be a rough correlation between energy flows and complexity.
So, in this and the next lecture I will argue that this extraordinary buildup of control
over energy and resources by our species is not just a modern phenomenon.
On the contrary, it was made possible by changes that occurred at the very beginning of our history.
It was made possible by new capacities and new abilities that are in a sense defining features of our species.
Now, what's going on? How can we explain this?
Astonishing buildup by a single species of control over resources.
Let's be clear about how extraordinary it is.
We do not know of a single species in the planet's history
and the entire story of life on Earth that I've described in the last few lectures
over almost four billion years.
We don't know of a single species that has controlled energy on such scales
or that's shown this ability to control more and more energy.
So, this raises the question, what is it about us that explains why
in the course of our history we've slowly got control of more and more resources?
What is it about us?
We've seen that it's in the nature of living organisms to explore their environment.
This is what life does.
As life slowly changes, it explores the environment in the search for the energy
and resources that organisms need to maintain themselves.
Now, humans do this as well as other species.
As individuals and as a species, humans look for resources
and they try to find the resources they need.
What's the difference?
This, I think, is the key difference.
With humans, the methods we use to exact resources and energy from our environment
are constantly changing.
In fact, our repertoire of ecological techniques
or techniques for extracting energy and resources is constantly increasing.
So, it's as if humans are simply adapting like all other species.
But unlike most species which develop a successful trick
and then live off it for the rest of their time on Earth as a species,
humans are adapting, that is to say they're learning new ecological tricks all the time.
Now, it's important to stress that this adaptability was apparent
even in the Paleolithic era, the oldest era of human history, the beginning era.
It begins with the appearance of our species.
And one of the best forms of evidence, I'll give more in the next lecture,
but one of the best forms of evidence is these migrations, we'll see,
that took our species into many different environments
and to all continents except Antarctica.
Remember, each time a species enters a new environment,
it has to adopt new techniques for controlling energy.
It has to deal with new species, new organisms.
Humans learnt a million new techniques
as they entered environments from the tropics to desert lands
to the tundra lands to the Arctic.
Think of Darwin's Finches.
For Darwin's Finches, each adaptation was genetic.
Humans seemed to be able to adapt in other ways.
No other species we know of in the history of the planet
has kept finding new ways of extracting energy from its environment throughout its career.
The basic rule of natural selection is that a new species evolves,
it has a new trick for getting energy.
If you're a Galapagos Finch, you have a beak that's good at getting seeds
from a particular type of tree on a particular island,
and you survive as long as you use that trick.
We're the only species that adapts constantly, is constantly seeking out
new forms of energy, new ways of dealing with its environment.
Even Homo ergaster, Homo erectus,
used the same basic toolkit for more than one million years.
Now, is this extraordinary adaptability,
this ability to adapt faster, more continuously
than any other living species that makes us very powerful?
All living species adapt, we've seen it's one of the basic descriptions
of living things. What makes us different is we adapt continuously and all the time.
Our astonishing control of the planet's resources is now so striking
that it's beginning to affect other species.
According to some estimates, we may be controlling,
that is to say our activities determine the use that is made
of anything from 25 to 40% of all the energy
that enters the biosphere through photosynthesis.
Now this leaves less energy to be controlled in the ways that other species need.
So it's hardly surprising that other species are now dying off
at a rate comparable to the five or six greatest extinction episodes
of the last billion years.
Our impact on the planet is very, very significant.
So our activity, this slow build up of control of resources
is something that makes us striking on the scale of planetary history
with the first species in the history of the planet to behave like this.
Now it's possible that we're strange even on cosmological scales.
For almost 50 years astronomers have searched without any success
for evidence of other organisms with a similar level of technological creativity.
They haven't found them and that's beginning to look a bit strange.
One possible conclusion about this is that we may be unique on galactic scales.
It may be that there's nothing in nearby parts of our galaxy,
no species, no organism that can adapt with the virtuosity of our species.
Okay, all of this is an attempt to pin down
as a first approximation what it is that makes us rather distinctive.
And I've argued that it's our unique ability to constantly find new ways
of getting energy and resources from our environment.
We adapt all the time.
Now, if that's true, the next task is to explain what it is about us
that explains our unique ability to adapt.
Why are we so ecologically creative?
Now I have to say straight away, there is no universally accepted answer to this.
Though there are lines of argument in several disciplines
from psychology to anthropology that seem to be converging on some good answers
and what follows is based on some of this scholarship.
Here's what I'll argue.
I'll argue that our species came onto this earth.
The threshold that was crossed when our species was formed
was that we came with a unique and extraordinarily powerful adaptive mechanism.
And I'm going to call that mechanism collective learning.
It's a term I'll use a lot.
So I need to try and explain very carefully what I mean by collective learning.
Adaptation by natural selection we've seen is slow.
Darwin thought it would always be slow.
Sometimes we now know it can be faster and slower, but basically it's slow.
It depends on genetic changes over many, many generations.
It can take hundreds or thousands of generations for changes to evolve and spread.
So the fundamental mechanism through which living organisms adapt
is certainly by the standards of a human lifetime quite slow.
Through random change an individual is lucky enough to be born
with a slightly different way of relating to its environment.
Say it's an eagle with slightly better eyesight.
That skill then may spread very slowly over many generations
and many thousands of years until eventually we might have a new species,
an eagle with much, much better eyesight.
That's what adaptation normally means.
But we need to remind ourselves at this point that that's not quite the only form of adaptation.
There are other ways of adapting.
Natural selection has been the dominant mechanism throughout the history of life on earth,
but it's not the only mechanism of adaptation.
Here's the second one.
Many multi-cell organisms such as ourselves have brains
and organisms with brains can change how they relate to their surroundings,
not by waiting many generations but within a single lifetime.
This is clearly a much faster adaptive mechanism.
You and I can do it all the time.
As adults we hope that we're better at dealing with our environment
than we were as babies or infants.
Now we can call this second adaptive mechanism individual learning.
It works much faster than natural selection,
but it has limitations which explain why it's had a limited role in the history of life on earth.
Here are the two crucial limitations.
The first is that it's costly.
Brains are complex energy-guzzling organisms
and if you want a brain you better be able to get hold of a lot of energy to feed it.
Now let me give you an illustration of a lovely story that illustrates this.
The Emperor Hirohito you may know was a biologist
and he once studied a species of sea slug that illustrates the point nicely.
This is the story of the sea slug that he studied.
When it's very young it makes an epic journey through the sea in search of a rock
and it's looking for a rock that it can sit on for the rest of its life
and simply skim food from the environment.
Now I hope you'll agree the journey itself is dangerous
and it's probably going to need a brain to survive
and it's going to need a brain to figure out whether it's found the perfect rock or not.
So early in its life this particular sea slug actually has a small brain.
It's not particularly impressive but it's enough to do the job.
Then it finds its rock.
So the question is it's now found a rock.
For the rest of its life it's not going to need a brain
but the brain is going to keep needing energy.
It's going to have to keep feeding that brain.
It's going to have to take in more energy than it might otherwise need
to feed an organ that is now no longer any use.
So what does the sea slug do?
The answer is it eats its brain.
It gets the energy out of its brain and now the brain is not going to take up any more energy.
Daniel Dennett whose book I first read that story
and has a delightful footnote at this point where he says
I shouldn't say this but I'm going to.
He says does this remind you of some academics when they get tenure?
Okay, so brains are costly.
That's the first drawback of individual learning.
But there's a second.
Individual learning is not cumulative.
Most of what an individual learns cannot be passed on to others.
So each individual has to start from scratch.
This is a bit like Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the hill each time until it rolls down again.
Individual learning doesn't accumulate.
Every individual has to start from scratch.
So that's why individual learning doesn't shape the long-term history of an entire species,
though it may affect the lives of individuals.
So we've got two adaptive mechanisms, natural selection, the genetic mechanism and individual learning.
Now, imagine a species in which individuals learned.
They had access to this very rapid adaptive mechanism of individual learning.
So individuals learn better during their lifetimes how to deal with their environment.
Now imagine that they can pass on everything they've learned to other members of their species,
presumably, first of all, those closest to them, their family.
If that was possible, we'd have a third and much more powerful way of adapting
because what each individual learned would then be stored within the entire community.
It wouldn't need to be learned again by each individual.
Individuals could learn it through the community without having to go through the difficult experience of learning it
and slowly information about how to deal with the environment would build up within the community.
Instead of figuring out how to make a car from scratch before commuting to work
and then putting in many hours building it,
you could count on the knowledge having been accumulated by others.
So you could make use of their knowledge and skills and use your time to get on with something else.
Now this, in fact, is the unique gift that humans acquire with human language.
And the evidences we'll see is quite powerful that they first acquired this gift
when our species first appeared something like 200 to 300,000 years ago.
Now you may respond, don't animals communicate? Why can't animals do collective learning?
Well, yes, animals can communicate. Many animals can communicate.
But to communicate in the way humans do requires forms of communication like a sort of broadband
that can transfer huge amounts of information very fast and with great precision.
So what is it that's different about human systems of communication?
Well, let's make a very broad distinction between two types of language.
Many animals have languages that involve one-to-one signals.
This is the simplest form of communication, a one-to-one correspondence,
like the warning call of a vervet monkey.
A bark-like call means a leopard while a sort of stutter means a snake.
Now such utterances can communicate information about as much as an ambulance siren.
But the language systems of most animals seem to take essentially this form.
And there's a severe limit to how much information you can communicate.
It can say leopard, leopard, leopard.
But can it say about 300 meters off behind the tall tree, there's a leopard,
it's heading this way and it's looking very hungry, look out.
No, you can communicate much less information.
Now humans are capable of what we call symbolic language
and as far as we know humans are the only organism that can do symbolic language really well.
Symbols are arbitrary signs that can group many observations or ideas within larger categories
and can therefore rearrange information in many new ways and classify it in new ways.
So while a vervet can say leopard, it can't say much about what the leopard's doing.
Now symbols can convey such information.
They can refer to things that are not present such as the leopard I saw yesterday
or even to things that may not exist, pink elephants or Santa Claus.
Human languages also have elaborate systems of grammar
that enable you to put those symbols together in very many different ways.
And this greatly enhances the efficiency and power of language.
Grammar lets us arrange symbols in almost infinite configurations but with great precision
so that humans can use word pictures to convey large amounts of complex information with great precision.
Unlike a vervet a human could explain, for example,
my cousin was killed by a cat-like predator at the waterhole one mile away to the south of the volcano.
A vervet can't do that.
What's the result of this?
The result is that individual humans exchange so much information with such precision
that more is transmitted than is lost.
And the result of this is that that information begins to accumulate within the community as a whole.
If chimps function mostly like standalone computers, we function like networked computers.
Each of us has access to information that resides in the entire network of our society.
Each of us has continuous access to a large and accumulating store of information about how to adapt to our environment.
That, I'll argue, is the key to our unique adaptive ability.
So the phrase I use for this unique form of adaptation which accumulates information
so much more rapidly than other forms of adaptation is collective learning.
If I'm right, and let me remind you that what I'm arguing here is not yet an orthodoxy,
though many researchers share similar views.
If I'm right, we can say that collective learning is what makes us unique.
It's the key to the distinctive features of human history.
And it explains why human history represents a new level of complexity.
It's what human history is about.
It explains how and why humans can accumulate more and more information about the environment.
So the stock of information about how to relate to the environment, how to get energy, builds up over time.
That's the explanation for our slow build-up of control over energy.
Now note, this does not necessarily imply that it's our intelligence that makes us so distinctive.
The truth is, as individuals, we're not really that much smarter than chimps.
The difference is that we're networked.
Chimps are very, very clever.
But chimps basically deal with their environment using their individual intelligence
and the knowledge they've accumulated in their lifetime, plus just a few tips from mum.
We deal with our environment equipped with all our intelligence as individuals,
plus ideas and information accumulated by literally millions of other humans throughout the course of human history.
We face the world as members of a large, extended community that reaches out in time and space
to include everyone who has contributed anything to our cultural heritage.
Chimps have to do it more or less alone.
Now if you doubt this for a moment, just ask how much of the knowledge in your brain
or the information embedded in the objects you use around you, such as your watch or your computer,
could have been generated by you alone in a single lifetime.
Collective learning therefore explains why only humans have a history of constant change.
Constant change comes from this slow build-up of information.
Indeed, I'll argue that human history is all about the many changes made possible by our capacity for collective learning.
Collective learning explains why we've got better and better at extracting energy and resources from the environment
and it explains why collectively we have become one of the most complex entities in the universe.
Now let me summarize. This lecture has tried to describe the nature of the threshold that was crossed
when our species first appeared between 200 and 300,000 years ago.
It's tried to explain what it is that makes us different.
And I've argued that what makes us different is the fact that because of our ability to communicate through symbolic language,
we have access to a new and much more rapid and powerful adaptive mechanism
than any other organism or any other species in the history of life on Earth.
That explains why unlike all other species, we keep finding new ways of extracting energy and resources from our environment
and it's that slow build-up of knowledge that will explain why eventually human societies start becoming more and more complex
and it's that that explains why human history is really very different from the history of other species
and that I'll argue is why human history is so fascinating. Thank you.
Lecture 21, Homo sapiens, the first humans.
The last lecture was more theoretical than chronological. In it, I tried to tackle, I began to tackle
what is for a human being like you and me, one of the most fundamental questions we can ask
and that is, what is it that makes us as human beings different?
What is distinctive about being a human being?
In the last lecture, I tried to define a threshold that was crossed with the appearance of the first human beings.
Let me remind you briefly about the definition I offered of that threshold.
By arguing that humans have a quite exceptional capacity to adapt and by adaptation, remember,
I'm referring to something that all living things do and I mean the ability to keep changing slightly
so as to find new ways of extracting the energy and resources they need from their environment,
their environment in order to survive.
And I argued that human beings adapt much more rapidly and more continuously than any other organism on Earth.
We have this astonishing ability to adapt.
Now, as adaptation means, amongst other things, finding new ways of getting energy from the environment,
that explains why in the course of human history beginning very, very slowly at first and then faster and faster,
we have learned to control more and more of the energy and resources of our biosphere
until now we are controlling what is, for a single species, a quite extraordinary share of those resources.
So then we ask the question, why are we so good at adaptation?
What is it about us that explains why we seem to be able to adapt faster, more continuously than any other organism on Earth?
And in the last lecture, I suggested that our astonishing ecological creativity
arises essentially from our capacity for symbolic language.
That is to say, we have a system of communication that is vastly more powerful than that of any other organism we know
and that makes it possible for us to share learned information unlike any other species.
So the result is that humans can share not just genes, but also learned information, the things that each individual learns.
And as a result of this, the learning of each individual can in principle be stored within the collective memory of the community as a whole.
And that means that that information can slowly accumulate and be made available to other members of the community
and also to later generations who can, in their turn, add to it.
And that is why information, knowledge, culture, if you like, is cumulative for our species and it's not for any other species.
Now we move on to the main question of this lecture.
If this argument that I described in the last lecture is correct, how can we tell when the first real humans appeared?
What evidence should we look for to show the presence of symbolic language and a new level of ecological and technological creativity?
We've defined the threshold, how can we identify it in the record?
What evidence might indicate that this crucial threshold has been crossed?
Or to put it slightly differently, when did their first appear creatures that are, for most purposes, just about identical to you and me?
Now unfortunately this is one of those areas where the evidence is thin.
It's so sparse and ambiguous that we have no perfectly clear-cut answers.
Instead we'll see there are several conflicting theories about the evolution of Homo sapiens.
So it's peculiarly vital in this case, given the importance of the question to look carefully at the available evidence.
So what evidence should we look for? Let's be precise about what we're looking for.
I think we can imagine two main types of archaeological evidence that might provide an indication that the threshold I described to collective learning has been crossed.
The first is evidence for symbolic language, and the second will be evidence of an accelerated capacity to adapt and learn.
So let's focus first on symbolic language.
How could we tell if an organism appeared, say in the last, sometime in the last million years, that had a capacity for symbolic language?
Language leaves no direct archaeological traces. However, it may leave indirect traces.
For example, studies of the base of the skull can show how the larynx was placed in a particular species of hominine,
and that can suggest how well a species could manipulate sounds.
So if we assume that symbolic language is associated with a capacity to manipulate sounds in a rich and precise way, that may be suggestive.
And a second clue to symbolic language may be the appearance of what in retrospect we can call art objects.
Evidence of sculpture or cave painting or body painting.
If we have a hominine species that seems to be constructing art objects in some sense, we have to suspect that that species is capable of symbolism.
And if it's capable of symbolic thinking, it's capable of symbolic thought and language.
So those two types of evidence might hint at the presence of symbolic language.
The second type of evidence we look for is evidence of accelerated adaptation.
A species that suddenly is changing its relationship to the environment extraordinarily fast.
Now what form might this evidence take?
Well, it ought to take the form of evidence of a sort of technological acceleration, but it might also take the form of increased geographical range.
As we see a species moving into different types of environments, because we know that each environment may require slightly different technologies.
So if we see a species migrating into different types of environments, it's a very good bet that that species is showing a considerable degree of technological adaptability.
So we have some general ideas now about the types of evidence we're looking for.
Evidence of accelerating technological changes is, I'm afraid to say, as scarce as evidence of symbolic language, particularly from Africa, where our species probably evolved.
But we'll see later on that there are at least forms of evidence that are highly suggestive.
Now, with these questions in mind, let's go looking for possible signs of the appearance of a species capable of collective learning.
The first species, let me remind you, in the history of life on Earth.
We've seen that fossil evidence for most of the last million years is dominated by two other hominine species, Homo ergaster and Homo neandertales.
Now, let's begin by looking at them. Could they speak? Will they capable of symbolic language? Could they adapt with the virtuosity of modern humans?
In other words, should we regard the appearance of Homo ergaster or neandertales as the point at which the crucial threshold was crossed?
Let's start with ergaster.
As we saw in lecture 18, ergaster evolved almost two million years ago.
We know that some members of ergaster migrated to Indonesia and China. They left Africa, migrated along the southern shores of Afro-Eurasia to Indonesia and China.
They probably used fire. They certainly used Ashulian stone tools, which were, as we've seen, more precisely constructed than the Aldoven tools of Homo habilis.
Now, what does this tell us? Well, this is certainly evidence of technological creativity. But is it evidence of exceptional creativity?
The sort of exceptional creativity we're really looking for.
Other species, including other apes, such as orangutans, but also other species of mammals, such as tigers and elephants, had also migrated from Africa to Asia.
So perhaps we shouldn't be too impressed by this. In southern parts of Eurasia, they found landscapes and environments not too dissimilar to those of Africa.
So this is not a proof of extraordinary adaptability.
Evidence on how efficiently ergaster-controlled fire remains limited.
If you find evidence of fire in caves, and we do find this evidence, in caves outside Beijing, in Zhegodian, and if the caves also contain ergaster remains, what exactly does it mean?
Now, one possibility is that there's no real link between the two. They weren't there at the same time.
But it could mean that ergaster occasionally maintained fires. It could even mean that they had significant control over fire.
They knew how to start fires from scratch. They knew how to maintain it carefully. But the truth is, we don't really know.
And as we've seen, the stone tools of ergaster barely change over one million years.
That certainly does not suggest a species that is continually adapting and developing new technologies.
Now let's look at Homo Neanderthalis. Can we find any evidence in the literature on Homo Neanderthalis that this threshold has been crossed?
Neanderthals are fascinating, precisely because they seem so close to the threshold that creates modern humans.
They lived in Ice Age Europe and Russia. In fact, there's very good reason to think that they were genetically adapted to cold climates.
Neanderthal remains show that they were as tall as us, and they had brains as large as ours.
Indeed, possibly slightly larger than ours.
They also manufactured new and more precisely made stone tools that are known to paleontologists as musterian tools.
These are often very small. They appear in a wider range than the Aschulian tools manufactured by ergaster.
Neanderthals probably used fire. They lived in very cold environments, so it's hard to believe that they couldn't make use of fire.
And we also know that they could hunt, and they could hunt large Ice Age mammals such as mammoth and woolly bison.
Now, think for a moment of what that means.
Bows and arrows haven't been invented yet. Guns certainly haven't been invented yet.
So what you're doing is you're trying to bring down a colossal animal, an animal bigger than most elephants today.
And you're trying to do it probably with a spear that has a point that's been hardened in fire.
So you're going to be trying to rush in close to this mammoth and stab it.
This, frankly, is very dangerous work, and quite a few Neanderthal remains have signs of serious wounds to prove it.
So Neanderthals are very clever. They did adapt to a difficult environment, the environment of Ice Age Russia, Ice Age Europe.
Yet, even Neanderthal technologies don't quite show the sort of variation and creativity that we're really looking for.
They don't vary that much over 200 to 300,000 years.
And besides, there's no firm proof that the Neanderthals had symbolic language.
Indeed, studies of Neanderthal skulls suggest that their larynx would not have allowed them to speak like us.
However, I should add that serious claims have been made that Neanderthals did have a capacity to think symbolically.
The most powerful of these are claims that Neanderthals bury the dead.
Now, if they bury the dead, then that means they're thinking in terms that we can hardly avoid describing as sort of religious.
That really would seem to imply symbolic activity, though these claims have been disputed.
For example, there's a famous burial of a Neanderthal child in Teshiktash Cave in modern Uzbekistan,
and around the child, laid out in what seems to be a systematic pattern of the horns of mountain goats.
But again, this could be disputed. We're not absolutely sure that they're laid out there deliberately.
In Iraq, in Shenedar Cave, the 50,000-year-old remains of a Neanderthal have been excavated that are surrounded by flower pollen,
and it's been suggested that what happened was that the Neanderthal was buried and flowers were strewn around its grave.
It's a very beautiful picture of what may have happened. It's very attractive and it's very tempting to accept it.
Unfortunately, archaeologists can be real spoilers, and it's also been suggested that the flower pollen may have simply blown into the cave,
creating the impression of a formal burial.
So it has to be said that at the moment, we have no firm evidence for symbolic activity amongst Neanderthals,
though there are enough hints of this that I have to say that the jury is still waiting on this one.
We could find our ideas of Neanderthals are revised in the near future.
But in the meantime, I think we have to argue that Neanderthals don't quite cross this divide.
There's one more reason for saying this, and that is that recent analyses of DNA extracted from Neanderthal skeletons,
and this I have to say is an extremely delicate art.
But the scholars involved in this project are getting better and better and better at this.
Recent analyses of DNA extracted from Neanderthal skeletons suggest something very, very clear indeed.
It suggests that Neanderthal and human lines split more than 500,000 years ago, maybe 600,000 or 700,000 years ago.
And what that suggests is that we really are talking about different species.
We're not talking about minor variations on the same species,
and that evidence also seems to rule out any possibility that humans and Neanderthals interbred.
So, here we are.
Though tantalizingly close to us,
neither Ergaster nor Neanderthals display quite the technological creativity that is the birthmark of our species,
nor apparently the ability to communicate with the fluency, precision and speed of modern humans.
Both species disappeared about 20,000 to 30,000 years ago,
probably under pressure from our species.
We don't know whether there was any direct contact between the species.
It may just be that modern humans hunted more successfully, invaded their territory,
and they found that the resources available, given their technologies and their ways of extracting resources, diminished.
If so, that would confirm my argument.
It suggests that they couldn't quite adapt to the threat posed by our species.
There are tantalizing, and I have to say, I think, rather melancholy hints
among some of the latest finds of Neanderthal sites near the Pyrenees
that late Neanderthals were trying to imitate human technologies, but apparently without much success.
So now let's focus on our species, Homo sapiens in a narrower sense.
How did we evolve?
Currently, there are two competing explanations for the origins of Homo sapiens.
The first is the multi-regional hypothesis, and the second is the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
So let me begin with the multi-regional hypothesis, as it's called.
This has been defended for many years by an American scholar, Milford Volpoff,
and an Australian scholar, Alan Thorne.
And what they argue is that our species evolved gradually throughout Africa and Eurasia from Homo ergaster.
The story is that most hominines throughout most of the last million years
belong to a single evolving species with regional variants that show up today in racial differences.
So what they're imagining is that all these hominines, most of whom can be classified as ergaster
or Neanderthals for most of the last million years, are really part of a single evolving species
evolving slowly in the direction of modern humans over a million years.
The trouble is that evolution normally seems to start at a single point and spread.
The idea of sort of parallel evolution over this huge landmass strikes most anthropologists as implausible.
What you have to argue is that humans or proto-humans over this whole period
count as a single species because they're interbreeding, but this is a vast area.
And we'd have to assume quite a lot of contact to assume it's really a single species.
And this is why most paleontologists no longer accept the multi-regional hypothesis.
At the moment, it's distinctly a minority position.
Currently, most paleontologists prefer what's known as the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
Now, according to this, our species evolved quite rapidly,
not gradually, but quite rapidly, somewhere in South or East Africa within the last 250,000 years.
This theory builds on recent developments in evolutionary thought and dating techniques.
Now, I've mentioned Stephen Jay Gould before.
He and his colleague, Niles Eldridge, developed the theory of punctuated equilibrium,
which argues that evolution can sometimes be very, very fast indeed.
Sometimes it can happen extraordinarily fast, and sometimes it's very, very slow indeed.
There are periods of stasis and periods of rapid change.
So that sometimes new species may evolve within thousands rather than millions of years.
Do you remember the blue moon butterfly of Samoa, which has developed a genetic defense
against a dangerous parasite in just six years?
Well, that's the sort of evidence for the idea that evolution can sometimes be very fast.
One of the mechanisms for rapid evolution is what's known as allopatric speciation.
Now, imagine a species, and it's spread out over a considerable area.
Now, let's look at some of the individuals at the edge of the species range.
Let's say a small group of 10, 20, or 30 individuals.
What sometimes happens is a small group can get cut off from the rest of the population.
It could be a volcano, an earthquake, a flood, or something like that.
When that happens, these small groups can often diverge quite rapidly from the parent population.
Partly, this is because variations can spread very rapidly in small populations.
If you have an advantageous mutation, it simply doesn't have as much spreading to do
until it dominates the small population.
Secondly, such species may already be statistically atypical, simply through random variation.
So allopatric speciation can give you quite rapid change at the edge of the range of a species.
It may explain, for example, the rapid species formation that Darwin observed on the Galapagos Islands,
and it may also explain the sudden appearance of our species.
Modern genetic dating techniques also show that modern humans are extremely closely related.
The so little variation within our species, within the 6 billion humans alive today,
that it's hard to believe our species can have been evolving from a small group of ancestors
for more than about 200,000 to 300,000 years.
This is one of the most powerful reasons for thinking that we're a quite recently evolved species.
Indeed, genetic variations between neighboring groups of chimps or gorillas in the wild
appear to be greater than the variety you can detect in the 6 billion humans alive today.
So limited genetic variety points certainly to a relatively recent speciation event
because it means we've not been around for long enough to develop a huge amount of genetic variety.
Even if in that time we have developed an enormous amount of cultural variety.
Now, one more point under this heading.
The greatest variation between individuals appears within Africa.
In other words, most of the variation you find within our species appears within Africa,
and that too is extremely suggestive.
What it suggests is that our species is fundamentally an African species.
And that's where we've lived for most of our time on Earth,
so that is where the greatest genetic variation has accumulated.
Finally, a final piece of evidence for the out-of-Africa hypothesis
is that the earliest fossil evidence of anatomically modern humans,
that is to say that the first skulls and skeletal remains that paleontologists
broadly accept as representing our species come from Africa,
whose remains are about 160,000 years old.
Okay, there are two accounts of the appearance of our species.
The multi-regional hypothesis, which I've argued is now a minority position,
and the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
There's one more wrinkle to this.
There's another possible interpretation of the out-of-Africa hypothesis,
and it goes like this.
Perhaps we did indeed evolve in Africa,
but modern human behaviors.
In other words, the behaviors that make us different evolved much more recently.
Let's look at this argument because it's reasonably widely held.
Archaeological evidence seems to show that in Europe and Russia,
there was a sort of acceleration in technological change about 50,000 years ago.
Improved stone tools appear.
Here in a greater variety, new materials start being used, including bone and skins.
Cave paintings begin to appear and carved objects such as the Venus figurines
that are very widely scattered from Mongolia to Europe from about 25,000 years ago.
And many specialists have described this change as a revolution of the Upper Paleolithic.
As if suddenly there's a burst of creativity in this period.
And many have argued that this proves that even if Homo sapiens evolved earlier,
modern human behaviors and above all our creativity appeared only 50,000 years ago,
perhaps what we're talking about here is tiny changes in the wiring of the brain
that gave us, that through a switch, that gave us symbolic language and everything that goes with that.
And if so, this means the critical threshold was crossed just 50,000 years ago
and human history as a whole has only lasted for 50,000 years.
Remember, all this discussion is really about when human history begins, when our species begins.
Now, this is one of those points at which I have to remind you, I am not a paleontologist,
so I'm not the ideal person to adjudicate in these debates.
But recent work by two paleontologists, Sally McBriety and Alison Brooks,
has convinced me and many others that the most powerful evidence is on the out-of-Africa hypothesis.
In other words, the argument is that both our behaviors and our bodies appeared about 200 to 300,000 years ago.
So, with due warnings that things could change if new evidence appears,
that is the date I'll go with in the rest of this course.
I'll argue with McBriety and Brooks that our species appeared in Africa about 200 to 300,000 years ago.
Accordingly, I'll argue that human history really begins about 200 to 300,000 years ago,
and I'll take as a symbolic date about 250,000 years ago.
Now, why? What's the evidence for this?
In 2000, McBriety and Brooks wrote a long and extremely important article in the Journal of Human Evolution.
And in that article, what they argue is that the revolution of the Upper Paleolithic,
this apparent evidence for a sudden acceleration in technological creativity in Europe and Russia, is actually an illusion.
And it's created by the very simple fact that so much more archaeology has been done in Europe than in Africa.
Remarkably little archaeology has been done in Africa, despite the fact that we know that our species almost certainly originated there.
It's partly a simple matter of lack of funding.
So what they do is they suggest that what we need to do is go back very, very carefully over the somewhat limited evidence that is available for Africa.
And to ask ourselves the question, can we see the same things that appear during the revolution of the Upper Paleolithic earlier in Africa?
And they argue that if you look carefully at the evidence, you can indeed see just that.
From almost 300,000 years ago, they argue, there is evidence of many of the new technologies that emerge much later elsewhere and even hints of symbolic activity.
For example, you find evidence of the grinding of ochre.
Now, presumably, if you find a hominin species grinding ochre, why is it doing it?
Presumably to paint its body. And if you're painting your body, you're giving signals, you're conveying symbolic information of some kind.
Now, ochre. The use of ochre appears in association with a new hominin species, Homo helmiii, which they regard as an early version of Homo sapiens.
Here's another illustration. Blombos Cave in South Africa offers very good illustration of these sort of arguments.
It was occupied from 70,000 years ago. Its inhabitants certainly used ochre, presumably to paint their bodies.
They made fine, delicate stone tools. They used shellfish, which is a sign of adapting to a new and rich environment, the environment of the seashore.
They may have fished.
Evidence from sites such as Blombos Cave, and they list many more examples of this, suggests that in Africa, early humans, we're doing all the things we find in the Revolution of the Upper Paleolithic much, much earlier.
And that suggests that both our genetic makeup and our behaviors had been evolving in Africa since perhaps 200 or 300,000 years ago.
Now, a very brief summary. The details, many of the details, of exactly how our species evolved remain unclear.
But I've argued that there's very good recent evidence for a rapid appearance of modern humans about 200 to 300,000 years ago somewhere in eastern or southern Africa.
If this evidence is pointing to the right direction, then that means that that's when the critical threshold was crossed. That's when human history really began.
Thank you.
Now, try and get your imaginative juices going. Imagine, here's what I want you to try and imagine. Imagine you're one of the earliest humans.
You may live 200,000 years ago, or perhaps 100,000 years ago.
Of course, you would have no consciousness of the fact that you're one of the earliest humans.
You live in Africa.
Biologically speaking, you're more or less identical to the humans who live today. Your body is the same.
You have the same range of emotions. You can communicate freely and eloquently with other humans.
You're as intelligent as anyone alive today. You have as powerful a sense of community and you have as powerful a sense of family.
But obviously, the way you live would be very different from the way most people live today.
So how would you live? What sort of community would you live in? What would you eat? How would you see the world?
And what would your material living standards be like? Would you live well or not very well?
To put it slightly differently, how different would your life be from that of a human being living in, say, New York in the early 21st century?
In the previous lecture, I concluded that our species Homo sapiens appeared in Africa about 250,000 years ago.
We saw that there's still some room for uncertainty about that, but the evidence is very powerful for that conclusion.
So now we ask, how did they live? What can we know about the life ways of our Paleolithic ancestors?
We'll see that we have enough evidence to sketch out some very general answers to these important questions, but not enough to be much more precise.
Here, of course, we can't give names, we can't give precise dates, we can't say when battles happen and so on.
So we have to offer a very general sketch of life in the Paleolithic, and that's what I want to do.
But before I begin, I want to talk about periodization, about how we're going to divide up human history into particular eras.
We need to tidy up the chronology, and I want to be clear about how I'm using the word Paleolithic,
because you'll find it used slightly differently.
In this course, we're going to divide human history into three large eras.
The first is the Paleolithic, the second is the Agrarian Era, and the third is the Modern Era.
This large chronological division will shape the rest of this course,
so it's very important to be clear about it as we begin to survey the history of our own species.
Let's talk just briefly about the history of periodization.
Chopping up history into different parts is one of the most tricky challenges that historians face,
and the results are bound to be slightly arbitrary, but to do so is absolutely vital.
If we're to talk about historical change with any clarity.
The classification of historical eras by archaeologists has traditionally focused on different tool types,
and this is simply because tool types of different kinds, particularly when made of non-perishable materials such as stone,
are what archaeologists are most likely to see.
So, a classification developed in the 19th century that classified the great archaeological eras into eras of stone, of bronze,
and of iron, the stone age, the bronze age, and the iron age.
This was the brainchild of a 19th century Danish archaeologist, C.J. Thompson.
In the mid-1860s, an English naturalist, John Lubbock, further subdivided the stone age into an old stone age.
The Paleolithic, the old era of stone, and a new stone age, the Neolithic era.
We'll see that the Neolithic era begins at about the same point as our agrarian era,
but in this course we're going to prefer the term agrarian era.
Now, here we have one more of these classification systems that we've seen several times in this course that are very simple,
but they bring clarity to a mass of data, in this case archaeological data.
And what these labels suggested was that behind the mass of archaeological information that was accumulating in the 19th century,
it was possible to see a certain directionality, particularly, of course, in the history of technology,
because most of the surviving remains from Paleolithic sites represented technology.
Now, let's be clear about how we're going to use the term Paleolithic, or old stone age.
It's often used for the entire period since Homo habilis made stone tools some two million years ago.
And you'll find that usage elsewhere.
So let me be very, very clear that in this course we're using it slightly differently.
Here, I'm using it to mean the first era of human history.
So it begins when humans appear.
And that means, as we saw in the last lecture, about 250,000 years ago.
So in this course, the Paleolithic means the era from about 250,000 years ago when our species first appeared
to the earliest appearance of agriculture about 10 or 11,000 years ago.
Now, let me just summarize some very broad general features of the Paleolithic era of human history.
First of all, it is, of course, by far the longest era of human history.
In a sense, it laid the foundations for human history.
Everything that happens later builds on what happens in the Paleolithic era.
So it's a real shame that historians so often ignore it.
Of course, prehistories don't, archaeologists don't.
But historians, by and large, tend to ignore it.
Why?
Well, one reason often given is that prehistory requires different skills from those of a historian.
Historians work with documents and archives.
There aren't any written documents for the Paleolithic era.
What you need to study it is the skills of archaeologists who work with things, objects, remains.
So historians will very often say, you know, I do written documents.
I don't do what archaeologists do. Let them deal with that.
Now, this is all true, of course.
And these divisions between disciplines that we've seen many times are, of course, extremely helpful.
And they mean that people can develop a particular expertise.
But we've also seen several times in this course that the divisions between disciplines can hide things as well.
They divide up problems and they make it very difficult to see a problem or a question as a whole.
And there's actually something slightly bizarre about this particular division.
Let me caricature it slightly.
When historians say, I don't do the Paleolithic because I do written evidence.
It's a bit as if Sherlock Holmes were to say in the middle of one of his investigations,
sorry, chaps, I can't pursue this case any further because there are blood stains and I don't do blood stains.
Well, one possible response to this might be, of course, well, if you do don't do blood stains,
then perhaps you should learn to because that's what we need to do to solve this problem.
Or at least you should talk to someone who does do blood stains because otherwise we'll never be able to solve this case.
And something like that is also true of human history.
We'll never be able to see human history whole if we insist too rigidly on these divisions between different types of expertise.
So we have to invade the archaeologists territory a bit.
So this is one more sign of how discipline boundaries can hide problems.
They may focus research, but they can also obscure important questions.
Okay, back to the Paleolithic.
To get a preliminary sense of the distinctive features of the Paleolithic era,
it may help if we compare it very, very broadly with the other two eras, the agrarian era,
which runs from about 10,000 years ago to just a few centuries ago,
and the modern era, which covers just the last few centuries.
So here's just a very, very broad comparison so you can see these three eras clearly.
The Paleolithic era occupies the entire period from about 250,000 years ago to about 10,000 or 11,000 years ago.
That is about 96% of the time that our species has existed.
It covers by far the largest chronological period in human history,
which is one more reason why it's a shame that it's so often ignored in courses on history.
The agrarian era occupies most of the last 10,000 years.
In other words, it occupies essentially the other 4% of human history.
The modern era covers just a few centuries, a tiny fraction of human history chronologically speaking.
However, of course, you'll immediately understand this way of putting it is interesting and illuminating,
but it's also slightly deceptive.
And one reason for saying this is that Paleolithic populations were extremely small.
It's a good bet, as we'll see, that even at the end of the Paleolithic,
there were no more than 5 or 6 million humans on Earth,
and at the very beginning there may have been for most of the Paleolithic perhaps less than a million humans.
So, of all the humans who have ever lived, and the Italian demographer Massimo Livibaci
has estimated that about 80 billion humans have lived since our species first appeared,
of all the humans who've ever lived, probably only about 12% lived in the Paleolithic era.
So, in terms of human lives, the Paleolithic era represents a much smaller proportion of human history,
only about 12%.
The agrarian era dominates human history.
It represents about 68%, and the modern era, despite being extremely short,
may have included the life spans of some 20% of all the humans who've ever lived,
and that's simply because so many humans have lived in the modern era.
Okay, now what evidence do we have?
Let's return to the Paleolithic era.
What evidence do we have about Paleolithic life ways?
We have two main types of evidence.
First, archaeological remains, and secondly, modern anthropological studies of societies
that may have been similar to those of the Paleolithic.
So, let's begin with archaeological remains.
Most important, these are probably the most important single type of source.
Blombos Cave, which I mentioned in the last lecture, is a very good example of the sort of evidence available.
You can find living sites, you can find the tools that Paleolithic humans used.
You can get a very good feeling for their life ways from their material remains.
However, things can't talk to us, so very often we need to supplement the material remains
that archaeologists use with insights from modern anthropological studies.
Anthropologists have studied many societies, particularly from the 1960s, I should say,
many modern societies that live by a foraging or hunting and gathering technology
very similar to that of the Paleolithic era and lived in similar types of groups.
And these are very suggestive about some of the problems such communities face
and some of the solutions they may come up with,
but we need to remember that such analogies are also potentially misleading
because modern foraging societies have been greatly influenced by modern societies.
They are modern societies, even if they look in some ways like Paleolithic societies.
After all, why should desert Australian communities resist the temptation
to use four-wheel drives, cell phones and high-powered rifles when they go out hunting kangaroo?
Now these two types of evidence enable us tentatively to reconstruct
some of the main features of Paleolithic life ways.
So now what I'd like to do is try and sketch out some of the crucial features
of those life ways insofar as we can construct them today.
The first thing to say is probably that the communities that people lived in
were small family-sized groups.
There's no equivalent of the nation-state.
The family is the basic unit, the family or the kinship network.
We're talking probably about groups that could vary from very small,
five, ten people, maybe to twenty or thirty, moving together
and occasionally meeting up with neighbouring groups
amongst whom they have relatives.
So that's the sort of basic social structure of this world.
These groups are so small that relations are personal.
All human relations are personal.
The fleeting, anonymous relationships of our world barely exist.
Society means family.
Second, the primary technology we can describe as foraging.
You'll sometimes see it described as hunting and gathering.
Foraging, of course, is a label that embraces a whole range of different specific technologies.
Essentially what it means is taking the things you need from the environment
and using them without processing them a huge amount.
You take stones from the environment.
You take plants for food.
You take insects or animals for food.
And you use them more or less, not completely, more or less in their natural form.
Now immediately we need to ask,
are we simply saying that Paleolithic humans live in exactly the same way as all other animals?
Don't all animals do exactly this?
They scour their environment.
They get the food they need.
They get the other things they need from their environment.
And they use them more or less without processing.
Well, in many ways, yes, that's certainly true.
But there's a critical difference between the foraging of our ancestors
and the foraging of other species such as chimps or gorillas.
And the difference is one we've seen already.
It's collective learning.
Through collective learning,
Paleolithic humans accumulated much more knowledge about their surroundings
than any other animal species.
And that meant as they travelled through their environments,
they approached the environment,
they approached the challenges of foraging
with infinitely more information than other animal species.
This is the difference.
Human foraging is informed by information that's accumulated over many, many generations.
Human parents can pass on to their children much more information than, say, chimp parents.
Now, a further general point about these technologies is that they are extensive.
This is a slightly technical term and I'll be making use of it later on,
so we need to be clear about it.
To survive by foraging,
Paleolithic humans like other animals that survived by foraging needed to exploit large areas.
So, Paleolithic communities had to be small and they had to be nomadic.
They travelled regularly to different parts of their home territory.
So, it's a reasonable bet that almost all Paleolithic communities were both small and nomadic.
And this means that they may have camped in one place for maybe a few weeks
and then slowly moved around in seasonal migrations
that took them round very familiar circuits from territory to territory in different seasons.
Now, in the jargon of economists, this was an extensive way of exploiting the environment.
That is to say, it was one that depended on using a large area
rather than one that depended on exploiting a small area more intensively.
We'll come back to this contrast between extensive and intensive technologies later
because I'm going to argue that the Paleolithic is dominated by extensive technologies,
but with the appearance of agriculture, we start to get more intensive technologies.
Now, another feature.
These families I've talked about,
we can imagine Paleolithic communities travelling in these small nomadic groups, essentially families.
We need to add one more thing about, thing to this picture.
Modern evidence suggests that modern hunter-gatherers, modern foragers,
meet periodically with neighbours and relatives.
These groups, we shouldn't think of them as completely isolated at all.
There are many reasons for meeting.
You may want to swap information.
You may want to swap people, so an individual may marry a member of another community.
People who are discontented in their group can avoid further conflicts simply by moving to another group.
There are all sorts of reasons why people might move around.
They might do it just for a change.
But note that by doing so, by moving around in this way, what happens is durable kinship links
created between neighbouring groups so that each group has friends, contacts in neighbouring groups
and over sometimes very, very large areas indeed.
So we need to think of these two groups, the group that moves around together
and the larger kinship network which can cover a very large territory.
Now, when they come together, of course, they have to come together in an environment that's abundance
where there's enough food to support a gathering of maybe several hundred people for a week or two at a time.
So these have to be special places.
In the snowy mountains in Australia, there's a site where bogong moths used to spawn
and for a week or two, you get huge numbers of bogong moths
and this spawning season apparently used to attract large numbers of aboriginal groups to kinship meetings there.
These meetings are often described as carobberies in Australia.
At these meetings, they exchange marriage partners, gifts and, of course, information.
They may also have been sites for exchanges between groups.
Here's a following account from 1881 of meetings that took place in the Australian state of Victoria in the late 19th century
and I'm quoting from a standard prehistory of Australia.
It's from an account written in 1881 by a settler in Victoria called James Dawson and this is what he writes.
At the periodical great meetings, trading is carried on by the exchange of articles peculiar to distant parts of the country.
A favourite place of meeting for the purpose of barter is a hill called Norat near Terang.
In that locality, the forest kangaroos are plentiful
and the skins of the young ones found there are considered superior to all others for making rugs.
The aborigines from the Geelong district bring the best stones for making axes
and a kind of wattlegum celebrated for its adhesiveness.
This Geelong gum is so useful in fixing the handles of stone axes and the splinters of flint in spears
and for cementing the joints of bark buckets that is carried in large lumps all over the western district.
So I hope that gives you some feeling for these larger and usually more temporary gatherings
that seem to have been very characteristic of life in the Paleolithic.
Stephen Mithony in a book called After the Ice that I'll come back to later on
describes how these networks worked in the valleys of the Meurs and Les about 15,000 years ago in southern France.
Here you got territories of groups of hunters and gatherers who no longer travelled back south to the homelands of past generations.
We don't know exactly how many lived in these valleys but a figure of 500 people is usually taken to be the minimum.
This figure is derived from mathematical models of dispersed hunter-gatherer groups who periodically meet up to exchange members
and it corresponds with historically documented hunter-gatherers of North America and Canada.
Such gatherings he writes may have happened only once or twice a year.
For the most part the hunter-gatherers of the Meurs and Les valleys are likely to have lived in groups of between 25 and 50 individuals
divided into four or five families.
So I hope that gives you some sense of what we mean when we talk about society.
This was the world they lived in.
These were do-it-yourself societies.
By that I mean they didn't have states.
So all the things we expect states to do you had to do yourself or the family had to do
including administering justice.
Now the following example comes from the work of the anthropologist Richard Lee
who studies of the indigenous peoples of South Africa and the Kalahari
did so much to enrich our perceptions of societies living with Paleolithic technologies.
This brief description of an episode in which justice was administered
may give you some idea of how Paleolithic justice might have worked.
In languages of the Kalahari there are these cliques you may remember.
You'll see this printed as a slash so I'm going to try my best to imitate them.
So there's a man called Twee.
Twee had killed three other people.
And eventually the community in a rare move of unanimity writes Lee
ambushed and fatally wounded him in full daylight.
As he lay dying all the men fired at him with poisoned arrows
until in the words of one informant he looked like a porcupine.
Then after he was dead all the women as well as the men approached his body
and stabbed him with spears symbolically sharing the responsibility for this death.
The family is everything. The family does.
All the things that we expect states to do as well as the things we expect families to do.
Now I've suggested that these were simple societies
and I'm going to argue that eventually much more complicated societies are going to appear.
So I want to avoid any suspicion that I'm implying that these were unsophisticated societies
in their ways they were extraordinarily sophisticated.
Certainly by some criteria these were simpler than modern societies.
They had fewer people less social complexity
but it would be a mistake to assume that this means they were unsophisticated.
To survive using Stone Age technologies think about it.
You needed detailed scientific knowledge of your environments
incredibly detailed knowledge accumulated through millennia of collective learning.
So these were people who knew a fantastic amount about their environments
you needed to in order to survive with Paleolithic technologies.
Okay, let's move on.
We can find evidence of some of these extremely delicate adaptations
in sites such as Southwest Tasmania one of the most remote environments on Earth
in the Paleolithic era.
Studies of Kutikina Cave which was occupied from 35,000 years ago
to perhaps 13,000 years ago have revealed hundreds of stone tools,
ancient hards, delicate spear points of wallaby bone
and knives made from natural glass.
So we must think these are very, very sophisticated societies in their way
and a lot of that sophistication is not visible to us.
It was stored in knowledge.
What about their religious lives? Can we say anything about it?
We have little access of course to the spiritual world of our Paleolithic ancestors
yet Paleolithic art such as cave paintings
hints at a rich artistic and spiritual life.
It's a reasonable guess that Paleolithic religions were based
on the animistic assumption that the world is full of living beings
that rocks, stars, mountains, trees, animals, rivers are all living beings
and that the best way of explaining the world is to assume
that it's full of beings that make choices and do things because they want to.
In 2006 in a cave in Botswana archaeologists found evidence
dating back more than 70,000 years that delicate stone tools were presented
as gifts to a python god whose shape had been carved from a large boulder.
Now this sort of evidence and the cave paintings of later eras
or another example is incredibly frustrating.
We know we're dealing with people very like us.
We may often feel that we have at least a glimpse of what these symbols mean
but the truth is we don't really know.
We're so close to them yet we're also so far,
a feeling we often have in considering our Paleolithic ancestors.
Now let me talk about living standards a bit.
How well did they live?
The question matters because if Paleolithic lives were desperately hard
we may conclude that human history is a story of progress
but if their lives weren't too bad we may have to question that assumption.
So let's take the idea of progress.
It's the idea that at large scales life has got better throughout most of human history
and it's an idea that's been one of the great shaping myths of modern historical thinking.
Indeed it's so familiar we often take it for granted but we shouldn't.
It's one of those ideas we need to constantly test
and we'll see that if we test it the picture begins to look a bit more complicated.
Now to most people it may seem obvious that this was a harsh primitive and unpleasant world
in which people lived in a constant state of anxiety, poverty and perhaps starvation.
But maybe not.
In 1972 the American anthropologist Marshall Saylins wrote a famous article
The Original Affluent Society and he argued that in many ways this was not a bad world to live in.
Being nomadic people had little desire to accumulate goods
so they experienced a world in which everything you needed was around you.
This is what Saylins calls the Zen path to affluence.
He argues they experienced themselves as affluent.
Diets were often healthy and varied.
As a forager from the Kalahari Desert told a modern researcher
why would you want to take up farming when there were so many mongongo nuts around?
Food is all around you.
How hard do they work?
Modern studies of foraging societies suggest maybe
you could survive on three to six hours of work a day.
So what do you do for the rest of the time?
You sleep, you hang out, you talk, you tell stories, you dance.
Lots of free time.
Much more in fact than most people in modern societies.
And this is also a world in which communities are so small that disease
can't really get much of a purchase on them.
No jails, no states.
And no extreme inequalities.
All inequalities were personal.
Now that doesn't mean of course that they weren't experienced as painful.
They were not institutionalized.
On the other hand, it's also true that studies of paleolithic skeletons
suggest that most people died young usually from physical trauma of some kind.
So I don't want to overstate the case.
And salons may have overstated it in his article.
We can be sure that someone reared in modern societies would really struggle
if plonked down in the middle of a paleolithic society.
Nevertheless, the opposite's also true.
If you'd taken someone from that world and plonked them down in our society,
it's almost certain they would have suffered from terrible levels of stress
that they would have found very hard to cope with.
So taken on their own terms,
these could be societies in which many people probably had a sense of living both well
and abundantly and in salons terms affluently.
We should not assume that human history is a tale of endless betterment.
In this lecture, I've tried to sketch out some of the main features of life ways
in the paleolithic as if nothing has happened.
But in fact, we'll see a lot happened during the paleolithic.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
APPLAUSE
We've seen that chronologically speaking,
the paleolithic era took up most of human history.
It begins with the appearance of our species,
as we're defining the term in this course,
and it ends about 10 or 11,000 years ago.
Yet we've also seen it's largely neglected in historical scholarship and teaching.
The paleolithic era often gets dropped from textbooks,
even some textbooks in world history.
Why?
We've seen one reason which is that historians are mostly trained
to use written evidence.
So they tend to ignore those eras of history for which such evidence doesn't exist.
And that means basically every era of human history
before about 5,000 years ago
when we begin to get the first evidence of writing.
So if you rely on writing as a historian,
you have to exclude, or frankly,
95, 98% of human history chronologically speaking.
So that's why so many texts, even in world history,
but not all of them start with the appearance of the great civilizations
of Mesopotamia about 5,000 years ago.
But there's a second reason why the paleolithic is often ignored,
and that is that the paleolithic is often assumed to have been an era of stagnation.
Nothing happened.
There were no world wars, no international trade,
no great novels, no great symphonies.
Nothing much happened.
Now, this sense that if we can't date very specific events,
that means nothing much happened,
is something we've actually seen before in this course.
We've seen a tendency to assume that if we can't assign absolute dates
to events that happened in the past,
maybe there wasn't much change.
We've seen that before the discoveries of the 20th century,
it was widely assumed that the universe, for example, didn't have a history.
We couldn't put any dates on things that might have happened in the history of the universe,
nor did the earth, nor did biological species.
So biological species were assumed to be fixed, as the creator had made them.
But then gradually, we began to be able to assign absolute dates
to things that happened in the past,
and we began to see there was a story, there was change.
In fact, things happened.
There was history in all these domains.
Now, we're seeing the same assumption applied to the earliest phase of human history.
Too often, the Paleolithic has portrayed as a period of timelessness.
Now, we need to concede immediately
that people who lived in the Paleolithic may themselves have thought in this way.
And the reason for this was that change was indeed, by modern standards, extremely slow.
So slow that during a single lifetime,
it was very unlikely that you'd see really fundamental changes.
Of course, there were social changes.
People were born, people died, people grew up, there were conflicts within a group,
but not larger changes.
The universe, the landscape, everything, social structures seemed to be fixed.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that people at the time
probably experienced the world as more or less changeless,
and therefore thought of time as moving perhaps in cycles
so that everything returns to the way it was in the past on the model of the seasons,
this incidentally is the argument of a famous work by the Romanian historian of religion,
Mircea Eliade, in a book called The Myth of the Eternal Return.
Even if it's true that Paleolithic people thought of history as a sort of constant return, a cyclical,
we are now learning that actually a lot happened.
There was linear directional change in the Paleolithic, and there was plenty of it.
Now, it's not easy to see it, but the evidence is accumulating to show that a lot happened.
In other words, the astonishing creativity and changeability of our species
that I have identified as a crucial feature of our species is evident, even in the Paleolithic.
There was plenty of change.
It's hard to see just because it was slower than today.
On the other hand, we need to remember change was much faster than it was before the appearance of modern humans.
There's no change at all that we know of in chimp societies on this scale.
So, the Paleolithic was not an era of stagnation, not at all.
Now, what I want to do is try to describe three main types of long-term change in the Paleolithic.
They are, first, climatic change.
This is not a change caused by humans, but more a change that they had to react to.
Secondly, migrations into new environments, accompanied by population growth.
And third, new technologies that ensure the Paleolithic populations began to have increasing impacts on the natural environment.
Let's begin with the first, climate change.
So, the first thing we need to remember about the Paleolithic is that over 200,000 years or so,
climates changed, and they changed quite drastically,
and they forced humans in area after area to adapt to change.
The study of climate change has advanced very rapidly in recent decades.
It's been driven partly by fears of global warming.
But a bit like the techniques of radiometric dating that developed in the 60s,
climatologists have in recent decades discovered a whole series of techniques
for actually identifying climatic changes in the distant past.
I'll just give you one illustration of these, but there are now numerous techniques,
and what they're doing is they're giving us a much better picture of the history of global climates.
We're learning that here, too, there was a history, and we're beginning to be able to document that history
and to date it with some precision.
As you'll know, this work is immensely significant in our understanding of problems such as climate change and global warming.
Now, here's just one illustration of the sort of techniques that are used.
If you take ice cores from glaciers that have been around for a long time,
say from Antarctica or Greenland, you take huge tubes of ice,
and at the bottom of those tubes, you're in effect grabbing bits of ice that were formed, in some cases, maybe half a million years ago.
Within them, you'll find little bubbles of air,
and what those bubbles contain is samples of the air at the time that those bubbles were laid down.
So in these ice cores, we get samples of the air at different periods in the Earth's history
over the last several hundred thousand years.
Now, you can tell a lot from these bubbles.
Oxygen comes in different isotopes.
Let me remind you what an isotope is.
Oxygen always has eight protons in its center,
but also in the nucleus, they may be neutrons.
Neutrons, you'll remember, are electrically neutral,
but their number can vary slightly, unlike the protons.
And with each chemical, atoms which have slightly different numbers of neutrons are known as isotopes.
So every chemical can come in several isotopes, every chemical element,
and they may differ very, very slightly in their properties.
In the case of oxygen, you can find a different ratio of oxygen isotopes in these bubbles found in ice cores.
And the ratio of isotopes can tell you quite a lot about average temperatures,
and one of the reasons for this is that some isotopes tend to get locked up in glaciers rather than others.
So in periods of heavy glaciation, that's periods in which the Earth was undergoing ice ages,
you find the ratio of oxygen isotopes is different than in periods when there wasn't heavy glaciation.
This is just an illustration of the sort of technique that we can use now
to actually tell remarkably something about average temperatures,
sometimes many hundreds of thousands of years ago.
This whole range of techniques have revealed very clearly
that there were dramatic climatic changes in the past.
And the story very broadly goes roughly like this.
For the last 50 million years, it seems, global climates have been cooling, slowly cooling.
This may have something to do, we're not absolutely certain,
with changes in the configuration of the continents as Pangaea broke up
and the Earth acquired its present-day tectonic configuration.
These changes affected ocean currents and could have a considerable impact
on the formation of ice caps in the north and the south.
For 50 million years then, temperatures have cooled.
As they've cooled, this has reduced evaporation from the oceans and increased aridity.
So as a general rule, cooler climates tend to be associated with drier climates.
During the Pleistocene era, that's the last two million years,
ice sheets spread in polar regions and what this did was generate a series of ice ages.
And in the last million years, they seem to have followed a reasonably regular pattern
which goes something like this.
You get an ice age that lasts roughly 100,000 years
and then you get a so-called interglacial, a warmer period that may last about 10,000 years in between.
This pattern has repeated itself several times in the last million years
and what that means is that our species has already survived two ice ages.
Today, we're at the end of an interglacial that's already lasted 10,000 years.
And that's something worth thinking about.
One of the intriguing questions raised by recent climatic changes is this.
Are we overdue for an ice age or is human activity breaking up this traditional pattern
and sending temperatures in the opposite direction the direction of global warming?
Back to the impact of the ice age, at the coldest phases,
tundra-like steps and deserts spread, forests retreated,
glaciers covered much of North America and much of Northern Eurasia
and sea levels fell around the world as water was locked up in glaciers.
In general, plant growth tended to be less vigorous in middle and upper latitudes,
so less vegetation, less food for organisms that were largely vegetarian.
And it's possible that these changes had an impact on the evolution of our species
because our brain-y networked and ecologically creative ancestors were ideally suited to surviving
in a world where there was considerable climatic and environmental change.
So, when we talk about the Paleolithic era, we need to remember that what we're really talking about
is an era that was dominated by ice ages.
For most of the Paleolithic, climates were significantly colder than today
and glaciation covered much larger areas.
The differences were less marked in tropical regions,
but much more marked in regions at higher latitudes.
So, we know that our Paleolithic ancestors had to cope with these changes.
Now, that's the first major type of change, the ice ages.
Second, global migrations.
Perhaps the most striking historical change in the Paleolithic era
was the migration of modern humans around the entire world
until they settled all continents apart from Antarctica.
Now, we've seen that humans were good at adapting to new environments
because, through collective learning, they could keep accumulating
new information about their environment and generating new technologies
or tweaking existing technologies.
When we're talking about migrations in the Paleolithic,
what we're really talking about is groups that nudged slowly into neighboring regions
and, as they did so, tweaked their technologies
until, over time, they developed whole new technologies to deal with new environments.
We can imagine we're dealing with communities, remember, that travel a lot.
These are communities that are constantly exploring their environments.
Now, if small groups are expelled from one region by conflict
or by climate change or overpopulation,
they already knew something about regions at the edge of their terrain.
So, this sort of slow, slow creeping migration is the sort of mechanism that we could imagine.
And, eventually, it led humans to spread around the entire world.
As they did so, it's a reasonable assumption that human numbers rose.
As we find humans in more and more parts of the Earth,
we can assume that the total number of humans was rising,
so that migrations, roughly speaking, equal population growth for the species as a whole,
though not necessarily we'll see for any particular community.
The size of particular communities remained roughly the same.
Now, until about 100,000 years ago, all humans lived in Africa.
So, let's now get a rough chronology of these migrations.
So, this we can call the African era of human history.
It includes at least half of human history.
For half of human history, all humans seem to have lived in Africa.
But this doesn't mean there was no migration or nothing happening during that first period.
Within Africa, it's clear that humans were migrating,
and they were settling new environments.
Our species probably evolved in savanna lands of various types.
But, as Macbriety and Brooks have shown,
over time, they gradually adapted to desert regions, to more arid regions,
to tropical forests, and eventually to seashores, as Blombos Cave suggests.
We can trace this process very dimly.
The point here is to remind you that migrations of this sort,
the slow creeping migration into new territories,
has probably been characteristic of humans throughout their history.
Then, in the last 100,000 years, some humans left Africa.
Entering the southern parts of Eurasia was probably not hard.
We've seen already other species, including Ergasta, had made this migration.
These species included tigers, apes, elephants, and so on.
But migrating further afield required more ingenuity.
So, if humans turn up in southern Eurasia, we're not that impressed.
When do we start getting impressed?
Well, here's the first really impressive and striking migration of our species.
It is to Sahul.
Now, some of you won't have heard of Sahul.
Sahul is the Ice Age continent that included Australia, Tasmania, and Papua New Guinea.
At the height of the Ice Age, these three land masses were joined in a single continent.
And what we know is that humans appear on this continent from perhaps as early as 50,000 years ago.
Now, that is actually extremely impressive.
To reach the hole, you had to cross a significant body of water from what is today the archipelago of Indonesia.
So, what it means is here we have a species that has apparently quite considerable ability to use the sea, to navigate.
Migrants had to cross at least 40 miles of open water, so they must have had considerable maritime skills.
We're not talking about individuals just washed up on shore.
That's not enough to found a population.
We're probably talking about systematic, deliberate migrations.
And when they arrived, they encountered completely unknown environments.
Entirely new species of animals and plants, the whole range of marsupial animals and plants dominated by eucalypts.
No other species had made this crossing successfully.
It's likely that humans spread first around the coasts and only later began to develop techniques that enabled them to settle harsher environments such as Australia's central deserts.
But let me remind you, the crucial thing here is no other species had made this crossing.
Here is a very clear sign of our exceptional ecological creativity.
So, the migrations to Sahul are a very clear sign of the sort of change that's characteristic of our species.
Then another migration, equally impressive.
From 40 to 30,000 years ago, humans begin to appear in the tundra-like environments of ice age Ukraine, Russia and Siberia.
This too, in its way, is a very impressive migration because it too requires a whole suite of new technologies.
Plant life was a lot less abundant here.
So settlers had to learn to hunt large mammals such as mammoth.
They had to tailor well-fitting skin clothing and they had to manage fire.
Sites from this area give some idea of how they lived.
There's a wonderful site at Pushkary in Ukraine.
19,000 years ago, temperatures here could reach to minus 30 degrees centigrade in winter.
Yet, people lived there and they lived in round houses built using mammoth bones.
I'd like to quote Stephen Mithun's wonderful description from his book, After the Ice.
He writes, huts were built from mammoth bone and hide rather than blocks of ice.
Each has an imposing entrance formed by two tusks upended to form an arch.
The walls use massive leg bones as vertical supports between which jaw bones have been stacked chin down to create a thick barrier to the cold and wind.
Further tusks are used on the roof to weigh down hides and sods of turf that are supported on a framework of bones and branches.
And Mithun goes on to describe this world.
Villages hunted mammoth and other large tundra species in the summer and they stored them in pits in the ground.
They unfroze and roasted the carcasses by lighting fires above them when they needed them.
They tailored close-fitting clothing from fur-lined hides and they made containers of leather.
They made harpoons, knife handles, needles and art objects including instruments that look remarkably like flutes and they made them from bones, teeth and ivory.
They made bowls from wood and cords from ligaments and sinews.
They maintained hearts and they lit their dwellings with lamps using animal fat as fuel.
Now all of this is what I mean when I talk about our astonishing ecological creativity.
Incidentally, this description of life in Ice Age Ukraine is also a reminder that Marshall-Salin's description of Paleolithic lives may give an exaggerated impression of an idyllic world.
Life could be very tough indeed in the Paleolithic.
Now here's a third great migration and that's to the Americas.
We know that humans had entered the Americas from eastern Siberia.
Now to get there, of course, they had to learn to live very successfully in Ice Age eastern Siberia.
Very tough indeed.
But we know that humans had reached the Americas from Siberia by about 13,000 years ago.
There are tantalizing hints of earlier settlements.
Some claims have been made that humans were present as early as 30,000 years ago.
But at the moment, none of the evidence is conclusive.
There's a very interesting site in Chile called Monteverdi where a village that's been excavated seems to be about 13,000 years old.
Now there are questions about the dating and exactly what's happening here.
But if the dating is right, this is so far from Beringia that we have to assume that humans had been in the Americas for a bit longer than 13,000 years.
So, in summary, by 13,000 years ago the range of our species was already much wider than that of any other large land mammal species.
And this is clear evidence for ecological and technological prowess as a species.
As these dates suggest, the pace of innovation had accelerated during the last 50,000 years.
This is the archaeological reality behind the idea of an upper paleolithic revolution.
Now, as humans migrated, their numbers increased and so did the number of archaeological remains they left behind.
Estimates of paleolithic populations are, of course, largely guesswork.
But the Italian demographer Massimo Livibacci suggests that there were perhaps several hundred thousand humans 30,000 years ago.
And as they migrated, their numbers increased quite significantly in the latter part of the Paleolithic era,
rising to perhaps five or six millions at the end of the Paleolithic era about 10,000 years ago.
The dominant form of change in the era is typified by migration.
And we can describe it using the ugly word extensification to contrast with intensification, which may be more familiar.
We've already mentioned the difference between extensive and intensive technologies.
Extensive technologies use a large area.
Intensive technologies use a smaller area, but they work it much more intensively.
So they get more resources out of a given area.
Now, by and large, the foraging technologies of the Paleolithic era can be regarded as extensive.
So by extensification, I mean technological change that allowed migration to new environments
without permitting more intensive exploitation of existing territories.
And it's extensification that partly creates the illusion of stagnation in the Paleolithic
because it explains why the size and complexity of individual human communities did not increase during the Paleolithic era.
Technological change took the form of migration.
That's really what I mean by extensification.
So the total area occupied by humans did expand.
They kept exploiting these larger areas at a similar level of intensity partly
because throughout the Paleolithic expansion was still possible.
There were still empty lands to be filled up.
So though human numbers were increasing, human communities remained about the same size.
They were not becoming significantly more complex.
Now, finally, I want to talk about the third major type of change, and that is growing impacts on the environment.
If you doubt that Paleolithic societies underwent significant change
or experienced innovation or technologically creative, I hope these examples will change your mind.
We've seen that in the Paleolithic, humans were constantly developing new technologies
or they were tweaking existing foraging technologies.
And as a result, their ecological power, I've argued, was increasing.
And one of the best illustrations of this is that they began to have an increasing impact on their environments.
And I want to describe two forms.
I'll give two striking examples of what I'm talking about.
The first of these, the first of these examples is firestick farming.
And the second is what I'll call megafaunal extinctions.
So let's begin with firestick farming, firing the land.
Humans transformed the environments of entire continents by systematically firing the land.
The Australian archaeologist Reese Jones, who died in 2001, coined the phrase firestick farming
because Australian Aboriginal communities often keep lighted firesticks to keep fire alive.
And he used the phrase to describe how Australian Aboriginal communities used fire to manage their environments.
What they did was they regularly fired the land. What did this do?
Well, first, it prevented uncontrolled fires by making sure that fuel didn't build up in an uncontrolled way.
So that meant they could control the fires.
Secondly, by firing the land, you stimulate new plant growth.
That attracts prey species such as kangaroo.
So that in effect, it brings more food into your territory.
It's sort of a form of intensification. It's bringing more of the stuff you want into your territory.
And we know that similar practices were used in other parts of the world, including North America.
And they could be extremely sophisticated.
Here's a description from work by an archaeologist, environmental historian rather, Ian Simmons,
on firestick farming in North America.
The Beaver Indians of Northern Alberta, he writes, had a sophisticated and delicately tuned approach to creating fire.
Certain patches of vegetation were burned deliberately in order to maximize their value as resources.
Openings or clearings, known as yards, were created within a forest area and maintained by burning.
Grass fringes of streams, wetlands, trails, and ridges or corridors were similarly created and maintained.
For they were both areas where hunted species of animal would either collect or traverse, or both.
Fires were also set along trap lines around lakes and ponds and within large areas of dead fallen trees,
which otherwise had no resource value.
And so on. So this is a very, very sophisticated technology.
And it transformed entire landscapes in Australia.
It encouraged the spread of fire-resistant species such as eucalypts.
So that the landscape that Europeans encountered, in fact, was much more dominated by eucalypts than it had before.
It was a landscape created by human beings almost in the same sense as the manicured gardens of 18th century Europe.
Now, the final example of change impacting the environment is megafaunal extinctions.
Let me talk about this very briefly, far more briefly than it deserves.
In the last 50,000 years, many large mammal species have become extinct.
They include mammoths, giant kangaroos, saber-toothed tigers, giant sloths, North American horses.
Most extinctions occurred in newly colonized lands such as Australia and the Americas.
In Australia, we know that 70% of mammals over 44 kilograms in weight may have vanished. That's about 60 species.
Now, the question is, why do these large fauna vanish?
And the dates of these extinctions in different regions coincide remarkably closely with the appearance of humans.
And that suggests that humans, particularly as they were developing improved forms of hunting,
may have played a crucial role in these megafaunal extinctions.
The dates coincide very well for the arrival in Australia, in the Americas and even in Siberia.
Now, I should warn you briefly, not everyone agrees with this interpretation.
There are those who argue that climate change plays a crucial role in this.
And the debate may be eventually decided as our dates get more precise.
But at the moment, there's quite persuasive evidence to suggest that humans had a massive impact on these megafaunal extinctions,
in effect changing the fauna of entire continents.
And amongst the earliest victims of our increasing ecological power were our closest relatives,
Homo Ergasta and Homo Neanderthalis, both of which vanish about 20 to 30,000 years ago.
One of the saddest signs of our ability to drive other species to extinction, even those very close to us.
And it's a reminder that our astonishing creativity carried dangers as well as advantages.
We're certainly very, very dangerous for other species.
Indeed, today we may be driving our surviving close relatives, the great apes, to extinction as well.
In summary, we've seen that a lot did indeed happen in the Paleolithic era.
This was not an era of stagnation.
Our astonishing creativity is already evident in this era.
Humans spread around the world and as they did so, they began to transform both the plants and the animals they lived with,
as they did so.
Now by the end of the last ice age, 10,000 years ago, humans have occupied all parts of the world.
And this means there's no room left for further extensification.
There's no more unoccupied territory.
And that is going to be quite critical in the next crucial change,
which takes us to the next threshold in our course, the appearance of agriculture.
Thank you.
It's the seventh of the eight thresholds in this course.
And what I want to do in this lecture, as I did with the previous threshold,
the threshold on the borderline between non-human and human,
is to define the nature of that threshold very, very clearly indeed.
And the threshold, of course, is the appearance of agriculture about 10,000 years ago.
But I want to remind you that there are some striking parallels between all of these thresholds
and in fact some particularly striking parallels between this threshold
and an earlier threshold, that of star formation.
Do you remember how we got from the early universe to stars?
We had an expanding universe within which all the basic units of matter were fairly similar.
Matter consisted basically of hydrogen and helium atoms.
Then gravity began to draw these clumps of matter into denser communities
within which pressure began to rise and then temperature.
And then eventually, at the critical temperature of 10 million degrees,
fusion reactions began at the center of these clouds and stars lit up.
And suddenly, you had the universe arranged in a very different way
with powerful hotspots dotted throughout it, a new form of complexity.
Now, I want to sort of explore some of the parallels with human history.
Polylythic communities with their astonishing ability to adapt to new environments
through the capacity for collective learning, as I described in the last lecture,
provide the equivalent of the Big Bang as their range expanded to reach across most of the Earth.
Now, of course, polylythic communities were nothing like as simple as those primeval clouds of hydrogen and helium.
As humans spread through the smaller universe of our planet,
they were developing more diverse and in some cases more powerful ways of dealing with their environments.
Nevertheless, their basic units, these small kin-based nomadic groups
into which humans were organized throughout the polylythic, seem not to have changed fundamentally.
Then, from about 11,000 years ago, a series of new technologies that we will label agriculture
began to bring humans together into larger and denser communities
just as gravity had once drawn huge clouds of hydrogen and helium together.
As agriculture increased the population density of human communities,
they began to draw in other communities through a social equivalent of gravity,
just as towns suck in rural migrants today.
And in this way, agriculture increased the pressure within human communities
and the number and even sometimes the violence of encounters that occurred between individuals
until eventually, in a parallel to fusion reactions, towns and cities appear quite suddenly,
as we'll see, in a striking parallel with the lighting up of stars.
In this way, agriculture began to create regions of greater density across the surface of the Earth
and was in and around these hotspots using the energy flows that they generated
that new forms of complexity would eventually arise in human history.
And eventually these emerging hotspots would create a more complicated and diverse geography of complexity
within human history.
Now we start describing the build-up of these new forms of social complexity.
The early stage is a bit like the collapse of a solar nebula.
Now, having mentioned this parallel, let me say immediately,
I don't want to make too much of such parallels.
In the present state of knowledge, it would be a mistake to do so.
But I cannot resist the temptation to think that the similarities are not entirely accidental
and they may arise from the very nature of complexity itself.
And meanwhile, of course, they're exactly the sort of thing that you expect to see in a course like this,
which compares change across many, many disciplines.
And they may, if nothing else, help us to think about how these thresholds occurred.
If so, they will have fulfilled a useful function within this course.
Okay, back to agriculture.
Threshold 7 introduces a new type of technology, agriculture,
or rather a whole suite of new technologies.
Why did the appearance of agriculture set human history off in entirely new directions?
It did so by increasing human control of food, energy, and other resources.
So, like gravity, it generated denser communities and larger energy flows.
And that is why it provided the foundation for new forms of complexity.
And that's why we regard the emergence of agriculture as a major transition in this course.
So, in this lecture, I want to define the nature of agriculture,
give a very brief chronology for the appearance of agricultural societies,
and discuss the impact of agriculture on human history.
Let's begin with some chronology and periodization again.
I want to define the early agrarian era.
The appearance of agriculture marks the appearance of what I'll call the early agrarian era.
This is the first of two subdivisions of the agrarian era.
And we've seen the agrarian era is one of the great divisions in this course.
The second subdivision of the agrarian era I'll call the later agrarian era.
And it begins, at least in some parts of the world, about 5,000 years ago,
with the appearance of the first large cities and states.
Now, the early agrarian era begins with the appearance of agriculture.
So, we can define it as the first era in which there were communities
that supported themselves, mainly from agriculture.
The first era of human history in which such communities existed.
Now, let's look at some dates.
Seen globally, seen across the entire world,
the early agrarian era lasted from the appearance of agriculture more than 10,000 years ago
until the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations,
until cities and states appeared just over 5,000 years ago.
However, in many parts of the world, agriculture appeared later,
and so did agrarian civilizations.
So dates for the era vary significantly in different regions.
And to explain this, it might be helpful to introduce an idea
that we're going to make a lot of use of later on.
And that is the idea of world zones.
To understand the agrarian era,
it'll help to think of the entire world as divided into four major world zones,
whose histories were so different that they might as well have taken place on different planets.
They were zones in which history played itself out
without any significant exchange between them.
Now, we could have used the idea of world zones in the Paleolithic era,
but we'll see it's much more useful in discussing the agrarian era.
What were the four zones?
They were, first, the largest and oldest, the Afro-Eurasian zone.
It includes the Eurasian landmass and Africa,
because, of course, the two continents were joined.
The second in size is the American world zone.
That includes both North and South America,
because these two, in recent, in the last few million years,
have been joined into a single landmass.
The third world zone is, I'll call, Australasia.
It includes Papua New Guinea for most of the last Ice Age.
And the fourth is the Pacific.
The vast archipelago of islands spread out throughout the Pacific.
A world zone that is occupied only in recent millennia.
So here are four world zones.
And to understand the chronology of early agriculture,
we'll need this concept.
So let's go back to the chronology.
Agriculture evolved independently in at least six separate parts of the world
that were scattered through three of these world zones.
The dates I give represent current estimates.
But I should remind you that work on early agriculture is flourishing.
And some of these estimates could change slightly in the near future.
But at present, there seems to be a reasonably clear picture.
But you should note that all the dates are approximate.
And one more thing about dates.
I'm going to give these dates as dates BP.
That means before the present.
This is a terminology that archaeologists use,
and it's associated closely with radiometric dating.
To be strict, a date BP means a date before 1950.
As that was the benchmark date used when Carbon-14 dating was first introduced.
But for most purposes, we can ignore this wrinkle.
So a date BP essentially means a date before the present.
Now the crucial thing to note is that agriculture appeared within a few thousand years
in parts of the world that had little or no, or in some cases, no connection with each other.
That's one of the most remarkable things about it.
One of the great oddities of the early history of agriculture.
The earliest evidence for agriculture comes from the fertile crescent.
This is a semi-circle of land that begins along the Nile.
It runs up the eastern seaboard of the Mediterranean through Israel and Lebanon,
up to the southern borders of Turkey, turns east,
then runs down along the borders between Iraq and Iran.
Here, agricultural villages appeared as early as 11,000 years BP.
That's 11,000 years ago.
Their main domesticates were wheat, barley, peas, lentils,
and a few animal domesticates, sheep, goat, pig, and cattle.
Agriculture may also have appeared this early in parts of the Sahara,
which was then wetter than today.
So that's our first date, about 11,000 years ago, for the first appearance,
the first clear evidence of agriculture.
By 9,000, somewhere between 9,000 and 6,000 years ago,
there's evidence that agriculture was being practiced in Papua New Guinea.
Now, this, let me remind you, is in the Australasian world zone.
So the second, one of the second areas in which agriculture appears
is within the Australasian world zone.
It was based on taro, a root crop, on sugarcane and banana.
Agriculture will see, never appeared in the other parts of the Australasian world zone,
only in Papua New Guinea.
By 9,000 BP, some form of agriculture had almost certainly appeared
also in East Asia, in China.
Agriculture based on rice towards the south, on millet further north,
and pigs and poultry were important in both regions.
So by 9,000 BP, agriculture has appeared also in China.
And by the same time, it's probably also appeared in parts of the Indian subcontinent.
By 9,000 years ago, agriculture was probably well established along the Indus River
in modern Pakistan.
Perhaps, we're not sure about this, as a result of diffusion from Mesopotamia.
And then from Pakistan, it seems to have spread to much of the rest of the Indian subcontinent.
Now the next crucial date is somewhere between 5,000 and 4,000 years ago
when we start to get evidence of agriculture based on millet and yams
and African rice and cattle appearing in sub-Saharan Africa.
It may also have appeared earlier in the Sahara and Sudan.
At about the same time, this is about 5,000 to 4,000 years ago,
agriculture appears in Mesoamerica.
Now here's the first evidence of agriculture in the American world zone.
Agriculture based on maize, beans, squashes, manioc and tubers such as potatoes
as well as small animals such as guinea pig was present in central Mexico
and in parts of the Andes region in the American world zone by 4,000 to 5,000 years ago.
Then, one or 2,000 years after that, evidence appears of agriculture in parts of North America.
Agriculture here is based on squashes and local crops such as sumpweed.
It may have appeared independently, but it may have appeared under the influence of agricultural regions in Mesoamerica.
So this is a brief outline chronology of the first appearance of agriculture
and that gives sort of beginning dates for the early agrarian era in three of the world zones.
Now, we need to define carefully what we mean by agriculture. What is agriculture?
This is one of those questions we've seen before that seems to have an obvious answer when you first ask it,
but once you try and pin it down to give a precise definition, it turns out to be subtler than it seems.
So defining agriculture is surprisingly tricky.
What we need, I think, in this course is a definition that's not just a dictionary definition,
but a definition that captures the essence of agriculture and also can convey something of its astonishing transformative capacity.
So now I'm going to try to define agriculture carefully as in an early lecture I tried to define collective learning precisely and carefully.
This is one of those areas where the multiple perspectives of big history can be very, very helpful indeed.
So let's look at agriculture from the perspective of a biologist.
From a biologist's point of view, agriculture can be regarded as an intense form of symbiosis.
Now, we've met symbiosis before. We've seen that in the biological realm, cooperation is in many ways as common as competition
and we've also seen that cooperation can take many different forms.
Essentially, what we mean is that two quite separate species start living close together in ways that advantage both species.
Now, let's describe different forms of symbiosis. Mutualism is a type of symbiosis involving relations between species that seem to benefit both species.
We can think of it, if you like, as a sort of fairly equal form of symbiosis.
For example, there's a type of ant known as a honeypot ant.
Honeypot ants keep herds of aphids. They protect them, they help them reproduce, and they also extract honeydew by stroking them with their antennae.
Now, it's clear what advantages the ants get from this. They get food, honeydew, just as we milk cattle.
But what benefit do the aphids get? Why should we call this mutualism?
Well, they lose a lot of freedom, but they're protected and they're helped to reproduce.
So the species as a whole does pretty well.
There are many other examples of mutualism, including, for example, one of the most important forms of mutualism that we know of,
the relationship between flowering plants and pollinators, such as bees and birds.
This is a fantastically important form of mutualism for modern agriculture.
Other forms of symbiosis, such as parasitism, seem to benefit one organism much more than the other.
Nevertheless, in all durable forms of symbiosis, both sides must get some benefit,
because if one side is seriously damaged, eventually it will cease to exist, and the relationship will collapse, harming both partners.
So we can think of symbiosis on a scale running from mutualism, a fairly equal relationship, to parasitism,
in which one side clearly seems to be getting more benefit than the other.
Okay, with those ideas in mind, here's a preliminary definition of agriculture.
Agriculture, I'll suggest, is a symbiotic relationship between humans and the species that we call domesticates,
and it's a relationship that benefits both sides.
So let me say that again.
Agriculture is a symbiotic relationship between humans and the species we call domesticates,
and it's a relationship from which both sides benefit.
So let's look at the cost-benefit analysis of agriculture.
How do the domesticates benefit?
Well, they benefit from human protection because humans look after them and protect them,
and humans do that because humans need them, and that's why their populations are so large.
Vatslav Smil proposes an interesting way of thinking about this.
He suggests a way of estimating the total biomass of domesticated and wild mammals to see which has benefited most.
In effect, what he does is he imagines that we take all these organisms, we boil them down until all we've got left is carbon,
so he reduces them notionally to a biomass in carbon.
Now, this is what happens when he calculates this out.
He estimates that the biomass of all domesticated mammals when reduced to carbon is now about 120 million tonnes.
The biomass of wild mammals on Earth today is only about 5 million tonnes.
Now, immediately that gives a very striking demonstration of the evolutionary benefits to domesticated animals of being domesticates.
Now, many domesticates could no longer survive without human help.
This relationship has become so close that it's a matter of life and death, certainly for the domesticates.
Maze can't seed itself.
A domestic sheep are now pretty helpless against predators without human protection.
How do humans benefit?
Humans benefit because humans receive food and other services from their domesticates.
If maize or sheep were to vanish overnight, millions of humans would suffer serious starvation.
We are very dependent on this relationship too.
Now, once you get species that are this dependent on each other,
what tends to happen is that they, in the language of the biologists, they co-evolve.
As one changes, so do the other.
So what's happened is that we and our domesticates have co-evolved.
We've slowly changed, sort of, in lockstep with each other.
But the co-evolution takes different forms for humans' domesticates.
Domesticates have mostly changed genetically.
Domestic cattle, for example, are smaller and more tractable than their wild ancestor, the fearsome aurochs.
Arochs survived until the 18th century, incidentally.
These were seriously fierce, dangerous animals.
Or compare another example.
Compare wild and domestic sheep.
The wild relatives of sheep, such as the thin horns of the northwestern United States,
are intelligent, athletic, cunning.
They're well able to defend themselves against or to escape at least from some pretty ferocious predators.
Frankly, they're pretty magnificent beasts.
Now, can we say the same of their domestic cousins?
I don't would be too hard on domestic sheep, but I don't think so.
They are, frankly, stupid, slow, fat, and more or less incapable of defending themselves.
Why?
Why should they evolve to become stupid, fat, and incapable of defending themselves?
And the answer is, because that makes them meatier, woollier, easier to manage,
and therefore more attractive to humans who protect them and look after them.
So both sides benefit.
But, while the domesticates have changed genetically, humans have mostly changed culturally.
In a sense, therefore, we can say that humans, too, have been domesticated.
Certainly, from the point of view of surviving foragers,
the life of farmers often seems little better than that of domestic cattle.
Farmers are genetically more or less identical to their Paleolithic ancestors,
but they have very different life ways.
They've evolved culturally rather than genetically.
However, I should add that even humans have undergone some genetic changes.
For example, genes allowing adult humans to digest raw milk seem to have spread very rapidly
amongst farmers that also depend quite heavily on the herding of livestock
and that milk their livestock.
So, in summary, we've been discussing what agriculture is,
and I've argued it's a symbiotic relationship
in which humans help favoured species to reproduce in return for food and other services.
The domesticates evolve genetically, humans evolve culturally.
Now let's ask why agriculture had such a transformative impact.
Why does it count as a fundamental threshold in this course?
Now here I'm going to offer a very general answer,
the more detailed answer we're going to see in the course of subsequent lectures.
Agriculture transformed human history above all by increasing human control of energy and resources.
Now we've seen that humans, by their very nature, are fantastically good
at finding new ways of getting energy and resources.
Agriculture marks a very sharp acceleration in this process.
It's a sort of energy bonanza.
It generated massive new energy flows.
How? What happens with that agriculture?
Well here's a way of describing agriculture that may convey this.
What farmers or agriculturalists do is this.
They clear away species that they can't use.
Now we call these species weeds or pests,
but of course in an objective sense they have as much right to exist as anyone else.
That's simply, we use those terms because we can't use them, we don't want them.
So you get rid of them, you remove them, you hunt them down, you move them from the soil.
And we do that to increase the production of those plants or animals that we can use,
which we call domesticates.
Now this activity, removing species we don't like, increasing production of those we like,
very often reduces total biological productivity.
But what it does for us is it channels more of the sun's energy,
captured through photosynthesis, into species that we can use.
The result is an increase in our species' share of biospheric resources.
I hope you see that agriculture seen like this counts as a successful grad for more energy by a single species.
We're increasing the amount of biospheric energy and resources that come our way.
Now another way of putting this is to say that agriculture implies intensification.
I described the extensive technologies of the Paleolithic era
and how they allowed human populations to spread to new regions
without ever increasing the density of human populations.
The intensive technologies of the agrarian era work in a very different way.
What they do is they allow more humans to live in a given area.
This is how agriculture increased the social pressure within early human communities.
It brought people together in larger and denser communities
where they encountered each other more frequently
and like atoms in those early solar nebulae collided with each other more frequently.
It's as if the social temperature began to rise as the social pressure rose.
Larger, denser communities then began to pose new problems,
but they also created new opportunities.
Human populations supplied with more energy began to grow rapidly.
Human population really begins to take off with the appearance of agriculture.
So humans get more energy and resources and that supports population growth.
Our species along with the domesticates that we're supporting begins to grow in numbers.
Human populations become larger.
Even the earliest forms of farming could support something like 50 to 100 times as many people
as foraging technologies could from the same area.
So this is a massive increase in the number of people that can be supported from a given area of land.
Larger, denser communities in turn generate new forms of power and hierarchy
and they stimulate collective learning and innovation.
After all, living in a permanent community of 10,000 people is a very different thing
from living in a mobile community of just 10 or 20 people.
More ideas are being exchanged.
This increases the synergy of collective learning,
but also in the larger community it was impossible just to relate on personal terms now
because you don't know most people.
So new rules are necessary to govern relationships between people who barely knew each other.
People had to be classified in new ways so that strangers knew how to deal with each other.
So in these large communities all the rules begin to change
and these changes accelerated social change and they began to transform human societies.
Niles Eldridge, Stephen J. Gould's colleague and one of the pioneers of the theory of punctuated evolution,
rights of agriculture,
agriculture represents the single most profound ecological change in the entire 3.5 billion year history of life.
This is a biologist speaking, not a historian.
Now I'll leave you to decide whether this is too much of an exaggeration,
but I quote him to suggest just how striking this change may appear
in the eyes of a biologist who spent a lot of their career studying the evolution of life on Earth.
Now in summary, we've seen that agriculture is a symbiotic relationship between humans and animal and plant domesticates
whose effect is to increase the resources available to both sides of the relationship.
By doing so, by supplying humans suddenly with a very considerable increase in energy,
it allowed greater complexity, certainly among humans who after all played the dominant role in this relationship.
In this lecture I've discussed what agriculture is and why its impact was so revolutionary.
Now, with a very clear understanding of what agriculture is and why it counts as such an important threshold,
we can ask the question, why?
Why did agriculture appear in so many different parts of the world from about 10,000 years ago?
Thank you.
In the previous lecture, I took time out to try and define agriculture,
and we saw that defining it is quite a subtle problem.
So it was worth taking a fair bit of time to explain what precisely the nature of that threshold was,
because only once we've defined it clearly and we understand the nature of the threshold,
can we really explain it and then understand its impact.
We also talked in general terms about why agriculture had such a revolutionary impact.
We saw that the appearance of agriculture counts as one of our great thresholds of complexity,
and it'll generate new emergent properties that are going to transform human history, absolutely transform it.
We also saw that there are some intriguing similarities between this threshold and other thresholds,
including the creation of the first stars.
Now what I want to do in this lecture is begin or try to explain to offer an explanation of agriculture.
We begin by discussing the evidence that we can use to trace the origins of agriculture,
and then I'm going to try and explain or offer an explanation for this revolutionary turning point.
Why did humans, in so many different parts of the world, some of them completely disconnected from each other,
suddenly start getting their food and energy in entirely new ways in a series of different parts of the world?
When I say sudden, I mean sudden in comparison to the 200,000 years or so of the Paleolithic era,
we'll see that agriculture pops up quite independently in several quite distinct regions.
Evidence.
We have to ask the question again.
How can we know about events that occurred many thousands of years ago, long before the appearance of writing?
Agriculture appeared at least 6,000 years before there were written records of any kind anywhere in the world.
So this is a topic once more that we must study through archaeology.
How?
Rather than discussing the evidence abstractly, we can get a feeling for the sort of evidence that archaeologists use
in handling this issue by looking at the so-called Natufian people and a closely related group, the Kebaran people.
And here I'm making a lot of use of the work of Stephen Mitham, whose book, After the Ice,
offers a sort of imaginary tour of life since the last 20,000 years
by a fictional character that he calls Lubbock after the 19th century British archaeologist of the same name.
So what happens is we follow Lubbock, who's a sort of time traveler.
We follow him right around the world to a number of archaeological sites.
And what he does is he visits them in real time, so we actually see through Lubbock's eyes what people were doing.
It's a lovely way for a non-archaeologist to get a feeling for the relationship between
what archaeologists actually find, which often doesn't look terribly exciting to a non-archaeologist,
and the real lives that the archaeologists can construct from that evidence.
So Lubbock watches these people as they go about their daily lives,
and it's a very vivid and powerful way of getting a sense of how archaeologists reconstruct the past.
The Natufian people, back to the Natufians.
The Natufian people lived in the fertile crescent in modern Jordan and Israel from approximately,
and all dates for this period I always have to say approximately,
from approximately 14,000 to about 12,000 years ago.
Let me just try and describe what I mean by the fertile crescent.
It runs north from the Nile along the eastern edge of the Mediterranean shore
through Israel, Palestine and Lebanon to southern Turkey, then curves east
and curves down along the border between modern Iraq and Iran and down to the Persian Gulf.
Natufian sites illustrate some of the techniques and the challenges of the sort of research archaeologists do
when they're trying to study early agriculture.
Now here are some of the distinctive features of Natufian sites.
First, Natufian sites are strikingly different from those of most of the sort of foraging populations
you find if you're studying the Paleolithic world.
Their dwellings in general were more substantial.
They were often built into the ground for warmth,
and they were built with well-built dry stone walls.
So these are sort of dwellings that are much more substantial than the sort of dwellings
that were built by foragers throughout most of the Paleolithic era.
Secondly, they seem to have been sedentary.
By sedentary, I mean they seem to have stayed in one place most of the year,
which is something that farmers conventionally do.
Now they may have left for a few weeks, but they're there.
They're in one place for most of the year.
How do we know this?
Well, Natufian's hunted gazelle.
So you find lots of gazelle bones at these sites,
and this is an illustration of some of the things that archaeologists can do with bones.
You can tell from the growth bands on the gazelle teeth what age they were
and what time of year they were hunted.
And what this evidence shows is that they were hunting gazelle all year round from the same place.
So that's one of the pieces of evidence that they were pretty sedentary.
And the other, of course, is the piece we've already seen,
that they built these very solid, durable houses,
not the sort of things you build and then leave for 11 months.
A third feature of the Natufians is that they clearly harvested grains.
This is a surprise for a foraging population.
You find in Natufian sites grindstones,
and you can find, you can detect what they've been used on.
And it turns out what they were used on was emma, which is a form of wheat.
That's spelled E-M-M-E-R.
And you also find in Natufian sites, sickles.
They're made by setting flint blades into bone handles,
often made from the jaw bones of gazelles or other hunted animals.
Now, archaeologists can study the edges of these sickle blades through microscopes.
And what it shows is that they had been used clearly to harvest grains.
You can find the remnants of this. You can find clear evidence of this.
Now, all the evidence we've seen so far looks like an agricultural village.
They're sedentary, they have solid houses, they're harvesting grains.
But some of the evidence in these villages doesn't fit in with this picture at all.
And the first thing is that if you analyze the grains that they were harvesting,
it turns out they were not from domesticated, but from wild species.
How can archaeologists tell this?
By studying grain pollen, archaeologists can distinguish,
for the most part, between wild and domesticated species that supplies to plants
and also they can do the same thing by and large by studying animal bones.
So very often archaeologists can distinguish between wild and domesticated species.
The fact that the grains were wild showed that they were not farmers.
Instead, they were sedentary or semi-sedentary foragers.
Later, we'll see how study of the Natufians has helped us to solve some of the puzzles
that surround the agricultural revolution.
But we have already seen examples of sedentary or semi-sedentary foragers.
OK, now let's try to explain the agricultural revolution.
In the previous lecture, we saw that agriculture appeared within just a few thousand years
in many different parts of the world.
So this is actually very odd.
Why, after living apparently quite contentedly as foragers for perhaps 200,000 years,
should humans suddenly start using an entirely new set of technologies?
And why, when they did so, did human communities in quite separate parts of the world
start doing so nearly simultaneously?
The simultaneity of this is very strange indeed,
and any decent explanation of the agricultural revolution must attempt to explain it.
Here's a quotation from two recent researchers on the subject of early agriculture,
Price and Gebauer.
In a book called Last Hunter's First Farmers, they write this.
For some reason, beginning around 10,000 years ago,
hunters became farmers in a number of different places on the planet.
The intentional cultivation of domesticated plants was an almost simultaneous,
yet completely independent development.
In Southwest Asia, by which they mean Mesopotamia, the Fertile Crescent,
Southwest Asia, China and Southeast Asia, Mesoamerica, South America and the Eastern United States,
transpiring within a period of approximately 5,000 years.
That's the problem we have to explain to explain agriculture.
Why this odd simultaneity?
Let's immediately rule out two explanations that might be tempting.
Let's begin with extraterrestrials.
This is one that I found I'm always going to have to deal with when teaching this subject.
The near simultaneity of the appearance of agriculture
certainly tempts many of my students to remember Stanley Kubrick,
suggesting in 2001 that extraterrestrials nudged humans towards the technology of hunting.
So let's just clear this one out of the way straight away.
You remember 2001, you remember the monoliths,
that they nudge humans towards civilization of some kind
by planting ideas in the minds of hominins of various kinds.
Well, we're not going to even look at an idea like this, of course,
until we can find some concrete evidence.
So let's just get that one out of the way.
We have no concrete evidence for this.
We have to find a subtler way of explaining this.
Now, here's a much more serious and much more influential idea
about the origins of agriculture.
It probably dominated explanations of this phenomenon in the 19th century
and for much of the 20th century, and it goes like this.
The idea is that agriculture appeared as a brilliant one-off invention,
a bit like, say, the steam engine or the internet.
And it was such a brilliant invention that once it appeared,
people naturally took it up.
So what it did was it diffused from the center where it first appeared
around the world.
This we can describe as a diffusionist explanation of agriculture.
Such explanations are tempting
because inventions do indeed spread rapidly around the world.
There are many phenomena that do diffuse rapidly.
And these explanations were particularly fashionable in the late 19th century
because they carried some nice implications for European scholars.
In an age of imperialism, they carried the implication that
all the good things diffuse from high civilizations to simpler civilizations.
And that was very much the thinking behind 19th century diffusionists.
And the idea was that agriculture first appeared probably in somewhere like Egypt,
maybe Mesopotamia, and then spread to lower civilizations.
Now, as we'll see, there are very good empirical reasons for rejecting
diffusionist arguments for the initial origins of agriculture.
Diffusionist arguments will be very important
once we try to explain how agriculture spread from these initial points
where it first appeared.
But at the moment, they cannot explain why it first appeared.
And above all, they cannot explain this sort of near-simultaneity that we've looked at.
So diffusionism is now rejected broadly as a general explanation
for the initial appearance of agriculture.
There are several reasons for this.
Agriculture was not a single invention, like the steam engine.
It's actually a cluster of linked innovations requiring entirely new lifeways.
It was not the sort of thing you could have taken a patent on.
Agriculture implied the domestication of crops and animals, techniques for weeding,
elementary forms of irrigation.
It implied discovering the best ways of planting, protecting and harvesting
particular crops, as well as storing them.
It also required new social rules, such as rules about who owned what.
So the puzzle is to explain a whole cascade of changes, not just a single intervention.
Besides, we'll see that agriculture did not necessarily improve living standards.
It was not necessarily so attractive that every foraging community that learnt about it
was bound to take up agriculture.
Modern studies of modern foraging societies have shown that many deliberately reject farming.
They see farmers, they know how farmers live, and they don't want to live that way.
So we shouldn't assume without careful thought that agriculture
necessarily represents an improvement in the way people lived.
Archaeological evidence suggests that those foragers who rejected the agricultural lifeway
may have had some good reasons for doing so, for many early farmers
seemed to have suffered from poor health and nutrition.
We can tell this from archaeological evidence, such as
an increase in the number of stress lines in the bones of early farmers
and a decline in average height.
Now this fact, this indirect evidence that living standards may have deteriorated
in some early agrarian communities affects how we explain agriculture.
If agriculture was not such an attractive lifeway,
perhaps we need to focus more on the push than the pull.
In other words, we need to look for factors that pushed people into agriculture
rather than factors that lured them into it, as in the 19th century diffusionist model.
And the third reason for rejecting that 19th century model is that
as we've seen, agriculture wasn't invented once but many times.
There's not just one point from which it spreads to the rest of the world.
Diffusionism can't explain this near simultaneity we've looked at,
though it will explain the later spread of agriculture.
Now we've seen some of the difficulties of explaining agriculture.
It really is quite a tricky threshold to explain.
Modern explanations include several interlocking factors.
And I have to admit straight away there is as yet no completely uniform consensus
on exactly what is the best way of explaining how agriculture first appeared.
There's still plenty of room for debate on the issue.
However, most explanations refer to the same basic factors,
even if they may link them in slightly different ways.
Here I'll propose a possible explanation in five main steps,
five main steps just to try and clarify the logic of the argument.
Unlike some models you may come across, you should note that this is a push model.
It assumes that by and large humans were eventually pushed into agriculture
rather than lured into it.
Something happened that forced them to take up agricultural lifeways.
It's not a pull model like the diffusionist argument we've just been talking about.
Okay, here are our five main steps in trying to explain the initial appearance of agriculture.
The first of them is pre-existing knowledge,
by which I mean that modern studies of foraging communities have shown over and over again
that they have an immense amount of knowledge about the organisms surrounding them,
the plants and animals, particularly those that they use for food.
They have an immense amount of knowledge,
and very often that knowledge includes knowledge about how to increase
the production of this particular plant or this particular animal.
We've seen that fire stick farming, for example,
is an example of ways that foragers could increase the productivity of a particular area.
The problem, therefore, is not knowledge.
It's not that foragers didn't know many of the things you need to know in order to farm.
They had the knowledge, so it looks as if they simply didn't need to intensify production.
So the problem is to explain why foragers suddenly start applying this knowledge
much more vigorously. The knowledge was not new.
The puzzle is why they begin to apply it on a large scale.
So that's the first step.
A lot of the knowledge you need for agriculture already existed.
Now the second step.
The second step is the distribution of potential domesticates.
Animals, some animals and plants can be domesticated quite easily.
Wheat is an example.
Others can't be domesticated so easily.
Kangaroos are an example of that.
So the exact way that animals and plants were distributed
may help us explain the geographical distribution of early agriculture.
In some regions there were organisms that could be turned into domesticates very, very easily indeed.
In other areas it was tougher.
Jared Diamond has pointed out in his bestseller Guns, Germs and Steel
that the fertile crescent where the Natuthians lived had a remarkable number of species
that can be domesticated with only fairly minor changes.
So this is the second point.
Other regions had fewer easily domesticated species.
The Americas, for example, had far fewer promising animal domesticates.
Now you may remember why.
The reason may be that early humans in the Americas actually hunted them to extinction.
There were very few large mammals in the Americas after the megafaunal extinctions
of the end of the Paleolithic era.
So perhaps the availability or non-availability of easily domesticable species in an area
may help us explain why it appeared in some regions rather than others.
It's surely a matter of luck, the sort of organisms around you.
That's the second factor.
We've looked at pre-existing knowledge and now the geography of domesticates.
A third factor.
Population pressure.
Now here's where the analogies with star formation are most tempting.
Population pressure is similar to the buildup of pressure that created the first stars
in the earlier solar nebulae.
But we'll see that growing population pressure,
we can imagine how it could have driven humans into agriculture.
When you see more population, you suddenly start worrying about starvation,
so you start thinking, well, we must find ways of producing more food from a given area.
So it's a promising-looking argument,
but it probably cannot explain the emergence of agriculture on its own.
It's been proposed in the work of a pre-historian, Mark Cohen,
who's done very important work on the life of early farmers
and on the transition to agriculture.
He's shown that as far as just migrated around the world,
population may have built up in a very loose sense,
in the sense that humans by 13,000 years ago
had entered all the large areas of the earth that were previously unoccupied by humans.
So by about 10,000 years ago,
there are no new continents for humans to enter,
and this may put an end to extentsification, the process I described before,
but to support growing populations, you can simply migrate to a new area.
Now, that possibility is being closed off.
The Paleolithic frontier, if you like, has been closed.
Now, this is a tempting argument, but there's a problem with it,
and the main problem is this.
Studies of modern foragers show that foragers are often very conscious of population pressure.
In other words, they have a very good idea of how much their land,
how many people their land will support,
and that means that very often they systematically limit population growth.
This may mean several things.
It may mean prolonged breastfeeding, which limits fertility,
but it may mean more violent methods such as killing the weaker of two twins,
which seems to have been a fairly common practice,
or allowing the old to die, infanticide and senilecide.
Now, if that's true, it means overpopulation shouldn't have been a problem.
Hunter-gatherers or foragers could adjust by simply limiting population growth.
The argument's tricky in another sense.
By modern standards, the world was grossly underpopulated 10,000 years ago,
but of course, it could still have been overpopulated,
given the fact that foragers needed such huge areas to survive.
So that's the third argument, overpopulation.
It's tempting, but before we can use it, there are problems.
So let's see if we can overcome them.
Here's the fourth factor.
And this may be a way of explaining how population growth worked.
Sedentism.
Sedentism as a cause of population growth.
Here, the natufians may help us solve the riddle.
They settled down, we saw.
They were foragers, but they settled down.
And once they settled down, their populations began to grow fast.
We can see this in the rapid spread of natufian villages in the fertile crescent.
Why would their populations grow?
Well, this was probably because once you're settled down
and you have this abundant resource, this wheat and these gazelles around you,
and you don't need to carry the old or the very young,
there's less need to limit population size.
So once you're sedentary, perhaps population's going to start growing more rapidly.
Okay, so that's the fourth factor.
Sedentism may lead to rapid population growth,
which may force them to start looking for new ways of getting food.
But why would they settle down?
Now, that takes us to the fifth part of this argument, the fifth step.
And here, we introduce the one factor that we know affected the entire world
and is therefore the best possible explanation for the simultaneity of this.
And that's climate change.
The last Ice Age reached its colder stage about 20,000 years ago.
And after that, climates began to get warmer, particularly after about 14,000 years ago.
By 11,500 years ago, after a brief cold snap, they had reached temperatures similar to those of today.
And during the interglacial of the last 10 to 11,000 years,
climates have generally been warmer, wetter and more stable than those of the Ice Ages.
This fact affected the whole world.
But how could this have triggered more sedentism and more population growth?
Well, here's the possible argument.
One way of dealing with this is associated with the work of two Californian scholars,
Peter Richardson and Robert Boyd.
Now, what they argue is actually the simplest argument of all.
It is that during the Ice Age, climate change was so erratic
that sustained agriculture was simply impossible.
You couldn't do it during the Ice Age.
So their argument is, well, once you get stable, warmer climates,
foragers knew how to do agriculture.
It was simply impossible before, so it's no surprise they start doing it.
So their argument implies that perhaps climate change is virtually the single key factor in the origins of agriculture.
As soon as agriculture became possible, humans started doing it.
Any argument as we've seen for which climate change is crucial is attractive,
because climate change is a global phenomenon.
But this argument on its own isn't quite going to work,
particularly if we're not persuaded that foragers are going to like the idea of farming.
So here's another approach.
Gardens of Eden and the Trap of Sedentism.
Warmer, wetter climates undoubtedly led to regions where certainly plant growth,
but also animal populations were more abundant than they'd been during the Ice Ages.
So this may have meant there appeared sort of pockets,
which archaeologists describe as gardens of Eden, areas of great abundance.
And modern studies of foragers suggest that when they find such regions,
foragers will often become more sedentary.
And foragers who become sedentary are often described as affluent foragers.
They're found in environments of exceptional ecological abundance.
The classic example here is the northwest coast of the USA,
where many foragers settle down relying on the abundance of resources such as salmon.
So this may explain why groups like the Natufians began to settle down,
but this can be a trap, and I'll call this the Trap of Sedentism.
Once you're sedentary, populations start growing.
And this is going to mean that within just a few generations,
you're going to find that what seemed an environment of abundance is now an environment of scarcity.
You have to increase food production in order to feed everyone.
So sedentary foraging communities who've now lost probably many of their traditions as foragers
find they're going to have to increase production.
There's probably not spare land around them.
They're going to have to tend their crops more carefully, water them, weed around them.
In short, they're going to have to become farmers.
Now in this rather roundabout way, pressure, population pressure,
may have played as powerful a role in the appearance of agriculture
as it did in the appearance of the first stars.
Now arguments like these work well in the fertile crescent.
Natufians almost certainly had a good understanding of natural plants.
They lived in a region with many promising domesticates.
We know that as they became sedentary, populations grew rapidly.
We know that warming climates may have encouraged them to become more sedentary.
And finally, we know that farming villages appeared quite rapidly
after a period of cooler climates which put a lot of stress on local populations from about 11,000 years ago.
So the argument works well in Mesopotamia, in the fertile crescent.
Elsewhere, the mix of elements may be slightly different.
But by and large, you should expect to find most of these factors wherever we find early agriculture.
In Mesoamerica, nomadic foragers may have cultivated crops of maize before they became fully sedentary.
But with these slightly, slight differences, the story may hold up in most parts of the world.
Thank you.
Let's begin with periodization, how we're going to slice up human history.
I've already introduced the fundamental periodization of human history we're going to use in this course.
We've seen it includes three main eras.
The first is the Paleolithic era, which we saw lasted at least 200,000 years
and possibly as much as 300,000 years.
The second is the Agrarian era.
It lasted about 10,000 years.
And the third is the Modern era, which will last just a few years.
Of course, we haven't reached the end of it yet.
Now I need to clarify an important subordinate periodization.
Within the 10,000 years or so of the Agrarian era.
I'm going to divide the Agrarian era into two main sub-periods.
The first is called the Early Agrarian era and the second is called the Later Agrarian era.
Obvious titles and I hope very clear.
In this lecture, I'm going to focus on the first of these sub-periods,
the Early Agrarian era.
The Early Agrarian era is that part of the Agrarian era
before the appearance of states and Agrarian civilizations.
That's probably the simplest way of defining it.
The remarkable thing about this era is that it seems to have largely vanished
from many accounts of world history,
even though it lasted for at least, as we'll see, 5,000 years.
Now that is as long as the time between the appearance of the first Agrarian civilizations and today.
So it's a very long and important period of time.
One of the advantages of the wide-angle lens that we use in big history
is that though sometimes you may get the sense that we lose the details, the specifics,
what it can do is often see some rather large phenomena that can be easily overlooked
with the small-angle lens and one of these is the Early Agrarian era.
Frankly, how can you lose 5,000 years of human history?
I think I know some of the answers.
One reason may be that historians are sometimes too keen to move from the introduction of agriculture
to the great Agrarian civilizations that this new technology eventually made possible.
Another reason may be that only with the appearance of Agrarian civilizations
about 5,000 years ago do you start getting writing
and with writing you get written evidence.
And of course historians are trained to use written evidence.
So this may be why historians find it very tempting to just skim over the earlier Agrarian era
on the assumption, presumably, that not much happened.
I'm going to try and demonstrate the opposite.
So we're going to stay a bit longer in the territory of archaeologists and anthropologists
and by doing so I hope we can rediscover this lost 5,000-year era.
So the last lecture discussed the origins of agriculture
and I tried to offer a possible explanation for the independent appearance of agriculture
in several different parts of the world.
Now what we're doing is looking at the world in the period after the initial appearance of agriculture
and we're asking what were Early Agrarian societies like?
Okay, now let's be very clear about definitions.
I'm going to define the Early Agrarian era as the period beginning with the appearance of agriculture
and ending with the appearance of cities and states.
So let's try and get the chronology clear.
Globally, if we think of this on a global scale,
the Early Agrarian era lasted for 5,000 to 6,000 years.
That's from the very first appearance of agriculture anywhere in the world
to the very first appearance of agrarian civilizations of cities and states somewhere in the world.
But locally, regionally, its duration varies and we need to be clear about this.
For example, the Early Agrarian era never began in Australia.
Agriculture entered Australia only in the last two or three centuries
with the arrival of immigrants from Europe,
both people as Aboriginal Australians refer to them today.
But it did begin, the Early Agrarian era did begin in neighbouring Papua New Guinea.
It began early and in fact it lasted to the present day.
So whereas in Australia there was no Early Agrarian era in Papua New Guinea,
just next door the Early Agrarian era lasted probably longer than anywhere else
except perhaps for the Amazon Basin.
We'll see that this sort of difficulty in trying to generalise about the world as a whole
is going to become more and more evident during the Agrarian era.
And the reason for this is, once again, it's the dynamism of agriculture.
As agriculture appeared in different parts of the world, the pace of change accelerated
and you find change occurring in different ways and at different rates in different parts of the world.
And that's going to force us now to be much more careful about making generalisations about the whole world
and we're going to have to make them about particular regions.
OK, we've seen that historians often neglect this era.
I'd like to argue in this lecture that this is a mistake.
It's not just that the Early Agrarian era embraces such a large period,
it's also that it lays the foundations for the eventual appearance of Agrarian civilisations.
In fact, if you don't understand the Early Agrarian era,
it's really hard to understand what Early Agrarian civilisations came out of and how they appeared.
So let's talk about some general features of this era.
During this era, probably the most general statement we can make is this.
During this era, the largest and most powerful human communities were villages or small towns.
Now, I stress this because we don't normally think of villages as power centres.
So we have to make a bit of an imaginative effort to remind ourselves that for some 5,000 years of human history,
villages were the most exciting, the most dynamic, the densest human communities that existed.
We'll see also that a lot of change occurred during the Early Agrarian era.
A lot of important things happened.
It was not any more than the Paleolithic, a blank spot in human history,
a period in which nothing happened.
So let me try and describe some of the important things that happened during this era.
The most important large-scale change was undoubtedly the spread of agriculture
in the Afro-Eurasian and American world zones, the two largest world zones.
Note that in the previous lecture, I critiqued what I called diffusionist accounts
of the initial appearance of agriculture.
But diffusionist accounts for the spread of agriculture, we'll see, make lots and lots of sense.
Once it had appeared in six or seven different parts of the world, it begins to diffuse from those regions.
Here's a very, very rough chronology for this process of spreading from independent centres.
10,000 years ago, agriculture was confined to the fertile crescent,
and maybe, as we've seen, Papua New Guinea.
In Papua New Guinea, very early, we saw evidence of a form of agriculture based on root crops.
And in fact, we saw there may also have been a lot of agriculture practised along coastal regions
in the tropics that are now underwater and based on root crops.
Here, there may be a whole world of societies waiting to be discovered by archaeology
that at the moment we know very little about.
So, 10,000 years ago, certainly in the fertile crescent,
almost certainly some form of agriculture in Papua New Guinea, in the Australasian world zone.
Note, these are two completely separate world zones, no connection between them.
By 8,000 years ago, you can find evidence of agriculture in China, in Southeast Asia,
and also along the Nile, in Northwest Africa, in modern Egypt, and Sudan.
That's 8,000 years ago. 5,000 years ago, it could be found in West Africa.
And also now, you've got the beginnings, early signs of agriculture in the Americas,
in a third world zone, the Americas.
You find early signs of agriculture both in Mesoamerica, in southern Mexico,
and Central America, and also in the Andes.
Peru, Chile, Ecuador, parts of Bolivia.
And you find it in Central Asia and parts of Europe by 5,000 years ago.
Now, 5,000 years ago, remember, is an important threshold,
it's when agrarian civilizations first appear.
By then, that's 5,000 years after the first appearance of agriculture,
we can say, we can be very sure about this,
most human beings lived as small peasant farmers.
And that way of life, the life of a peasant farmer,
would dominate the history of the next 5,000 years.
So, just to be clear what an important change we're talking about here.
In an era that's, as I've said, often neglected,
in 5,000 years, in the 5,000 years of the early agrarian era,
what had been the technology of a tiny number of communities
in just two parts of the world,
had become the dominant technology of most of humanity.
So, that's a huge and important change.
This change revolutionized the life ways of most humans.
The life ways of the Paleolithic era,
the foraging life ways of the Paleolithic era,
with their small kinship communities persisted in many areas.
Indeed, they would survive in some areas well into the 20th century.
They ceased for the first time in human history
to be the normal life ways of our species.
They became instead the life ways of an increasingly small minority of humans
who increasingly squeezed out of the most fertile,
the most abundant regions of the earth.
So, it's this fact that justifies the claim
that the early agrarian era marks a profound revolution in human history
despite its near invisibility.
By its end, a majority of humans found themselves
within what I've described as the emerging hotspots created by agriculture.
Now, why did agriculture spread so rapidly?
We'll see here that agriculture did not necessarily spread
because it was attractive.
In fact, we've already looked at this argument before.
On the contrary, for many foragers,
settling down as farmers meant taking up a harder,
more monotonous, less varied, less interesting, and more precarious life.
So, why should they do it?
Why did so many people take up farming?
The best explanation is probably this.
Agriculture spread because it could generate more resources than foraging
and could therefore support larger populations.
Those who are already habituated to the agricultural life ways
simply reproduced more than foragers.
They had far more resources to support growing populations.
So, farming communities grew and multiplied
much faster than non-farming communities
because once established, they could support larger populations
and their larger populations meant that whenever it came to a conflict
between farming and foraging communities,
the farming communities had many advantages,
both in resources and in sheer numbers.
In other words, this suggests that most people
who became agriculturalists were forced into it,
but the growing, the spread of agriculture
and the growth of its populations was really a matter of existing agricultural populations
just growing much, much faster than the populations of foragers.
Why is this true?
Well, even the simplest farming communities could support
perhaps 20 to 30 times as many people per square kilometer
as most foraging communities.
Agriculture we've seen is an intensive technology.
Unlike foraging, which is extensive,
you can support a lot more people from the same area.
So, as agriculture spread, it seems that world populations also rose.
Now, let me give you some figures,
but let me remind you that they are, of course, very, very tentative.
But these are the best guesses we have at the moment.
They are that world populations about 10,000 years ago
were perhaps five or six millions.
By 5,000 years ago, world populations may have risen to 50 millions.
Now, this is a very striking increase indeed.
The population of Southwest Asia alone
may have increased from 100,000 to 5 millions
between 10,000 and 6,000 years ago.
Remember what this really means.
It means for most of human history, for 200,000, 300,000 years,
human numbers have been perhaps a few hundred thousands,
perhaps a million, rising to 5 million just very recently,
and then, in the blink of an eye, in just 5,000 years,
they rise to perhaps 50 millions.
Now, we need to remember, of course, as I've said,
just how rough these figures are,
but the orders of magnitude are probably right,
and they make sense.
Agriculture, as we've seen, is much, much more dynamic
than foraging, demographically speaking.
Now, what this meant was that though agrarian
and foraging societies often traded and lived together peacefully,
as we've seen, when, if they came to conflict,
the agrarian societies had lots of advantages,
and most important, they could generate more wealth
and they contained more people.
So these seem to be some of the reasons why the agrarian frontier
slowly advanced at the expense of foragers.
As farmers spread into regions that were more suitable for farming,
because they had good, easily worked soils,
plenty of water and plenty of sunlight and rainfall,
slowly partly by demographic pressure,
partly perhaps by actual conflict,
they squeezed out local populations of foragers
who may have lived there for many thousands of years.
Agriculture and change.
Agriculture, we've seen, introduced a new technological dynamism
into human history, and it did so because it stimulated collective learning.
How?
How to introduce a modern term did growing populations stimulate innovation?
How do they accelerate what we can think of as the synergy of collective learning?
This is another way of asking why agriculture generates such dynamism,
not just demographic dynamism, but also intellectual and technological dynamism.
Well, I think there are several plausible general explanations for this.
First, with larger populations, you simply have more people
who are accumulating ideas and exchanging them within and between communities.
You have populations that are much larger, much, much denser than those of foraging communities.
So if collective learning, as I've argued, this distinctive ability of our species,
depends above all on the exchange of ideas between individuals,
we should expect that where you have a large number of individuals,
where populations are growing rapidly,
the synergy of intellectual exchanges is going to grow very rapidly indeed.
That's the first explanation.
Now here's a second.
As population grows,
some people inevitably find themselves at the margins of society.
So imagine a grey-in village.
It's growing, population grows, young couples may be forced to find new land
at the edge on land that's perhaps less attractive than land in the middle of the village,
or they may even be forced to migrate somewhere else.
In order to farm this marginal land,
they're going to have to tweak existing farming methods.
In other words, they're going to have to experiment with new techniques,
new crops, new patterns of sowing,
new techniques of hoeing and weeding and so on.
So population growth itself generated a constant series of many innovations in agricultural technique.
And thirdly, population growth generated conflicts over land and resources.
And warfare, that is to say, large-scale organized conflicts themselves eventually begin
to drive technological change and social change in new ways.
A considerable degree of technological dynamism is already apparent in the early agrarian era.
Agriculture itself emerged in many different variations,
each of them adapted to particular environments.
I've tended to talk of agriculture as if it were a single set of techniques,
but from some points of view, this is a mistake.
Like foraging techniques, agriculture adapted in many small ways
to different plants, landscapes, climates and environment.
So the evolution spread of agriculture is a very good example of our remarkable ability to adapt,
as was the spread of foraging lifeways during the Paleolithic era.
Though here, things are speeded up quite remarkably,
as agriculture spread around the world in just a few thousand years,
in contrast to the 200,000 years or so that it took foraging lifeways to make their way around the globe.
That, incidentally, is a very good illustration of what I mean
when I use a general phrase like the enhanced dynamism of agriculture.
Now, so that you don't get a sense of agriculture as a homogenous, uniform technology,
let me describe what were probably two of the most basic agrarian techniques
of the early agrarian era.
And I'm going to describe them as horticulture and swidden agriculture.
Each, in turn, will see could be found with many regional variations
using different plants and adapting to different environments.
So first, horticulture.
Anthropologists use the term horticulture to mean agriculture or farming
that is based purely on human labor power
and uses implements such as hose or digging sticks or mortars and sickles.
So the labor in horticulture is human.
If they turn over the soil, they do it with simple hose or sticks.
And many horticultural communities exist even today.
You can find many of them, for example, in the Amazon.
So if you want to think of a typical farming community in the early agrarian era,
don't think of plough agriculture.
Think rather of a village in the highlands of Papua New Guinea
where people will dig the land themselves using rudimentary hose or digging sticks.
And most of the energy for this type of agriculture comes from human beings,
rather than from animals.
That's horticulture.
And it's probably, it's probably a good,
it probably gives you a good general impression of what we mean by agriculture
for many of the people who lived in the early agrarian era.
But there's a second general type of technology that is really rather important
and also had its own dynamism, and that is swidden agriculture,
sometimes called slash and burn.
This is what swidden farmers do.
Swidden farming you'll find is, what's the best way of saying it?
It's a way of farming forested lands.
Swidden farmers use stone axes and fire to clear forested regions.
Often they'll scar trees, let them die, and then burn them down.
So they'll burn down an area of forest.
And then what they'll do, probably leaving the stumps there,
is they'll plant crops in the rich, ashy soil that's left behind.
Initially, you can get very, very good yields in the ash from burnt trees.
But fertility will probably decline quite rapidly within a few years.
So, swidden agriculture is a sort of semi-nomadic agriculture.
Often within, say, five or six years, the community will have to move on.
It'll have to burn a new patch of forest.
And in this way, swidden families may migrate around an area of forest
in perhaps migratory patterns of 50 or 60 years,
waiting until the forest has regrown in an area they were in before.
So, swidden farming is particularly adapted to forested regions.
And the result, the impact of swidden farming,
is to initiate the process of global deforestation.
It's swidden farmers who really began the process of significantly reducing forest cover.
Indeed, the striking recent evidence about the impact of swidden farming,
a climatologist, William Ruddiman, has recently argued
that there was a minor spike in the appearance of greenhouse gases in the early agrarian era.
And he suggests that this may have been caused in part by decline in forest cover
and in part by the burning of trees.
Now, if he's right, then the spread of swidden farming
is an early sign of humans in the early agrarian era
beginning to have a significant impact on global climates.
While we're on the subject, Ruddiman suggests that a second spike of this kind
can be observed from about 5,000 years ago,
that, he argues, was probably caused by the spread of paddy rice farming
in Southeast and Eastern Asia.
Paddy rice farming tends to generate significant amounts of methane, another greenhouse gas.
And it's even been argued that these changes
may have stopped global climates from cooling,
preserving the benign conditions that are so necessary for agriculture.
If so, humans, even in the early agrarian era,
are beginning to have a very significant impact on global climates,
enough of an impact, in fact, to break the traditional cycle of ice ages and interglace fields
that had lasted for at least a million years.
Okay, now what I'd like to do is look at the sort of communities people lived in.
I'd like to try and get some sense of how people lived in the early agrarian era.
Most early agrarian communities can be thought of as villages.
This is the typical kind of community of this era of human history.
But some may have been large enough that we should think of them as small towns.
Jericho may be the oldest known agrarian settlement.
It lies about 20 kilometers east of Jerusalem.
It's been excavated since the mid-19th century by archaeologists,
looking, of course, for its famous walls.
In the 1950s, Kathleen Kenyon found walls that turned out to be almost 11,000 years old,
way, way, way before Joshua.
As Jericho lies 800 feet below sea level,
it's probable that these walls were not military defenses.
On the contrary, they were intended to keep out floodwaters.
Jericho's first occupants were probably Natufians.
But by 11,000 years ago, just when agriculture was beginning,
about 1,000 people could be found living in 70 mud brick dwellings
and supporting themselves by farming.
This is one of the earliest large communities that we know of.
And again, think of this.
Few permanent communities this large had ever existed.
In the Paleolithic era, people had certainly gathered for brief periods,
perhaps two or three weeks, in gatherings of many hundreds of people.
But Paleolithic technologies simply couldn't support large numbers of people
living in the same area permanently.
So such communities as Jericho, 11,000 years ago, represent a new phenomenon in human history,
one of the many emergent properties generated by the appearance of agriculture.
Out of respect for their ancestors, the inhabitants of Jericho decorated their skulls.
This is a practice we find in modern, early agrarian villages in Papua New Guinea,
in the Papua New Guinea in Highlands.
And it's a very powerful reminder of the importance of kinship and of ancestors
in all early human communities.
Even more densely settled was Chattel-Huyuk in Anatolia,
southeast of the modern city of Cognia.
Chattel-Huyuk flourished 9,000 years ago.
It's an astonishing sight.
Here, mud brick houses were built with adjoining walls.
They are butted onto each other, a bit like the cells in a beehive.
So houses were entered from the roof.
Each house contained a hearth, a storage area, and exotic bull-headed statues.
And the inhabitants exported the tough volcanic glass known as obsidian,
which was the best way of making a hard, sharp edge before the appearance of metallurgy.
And most early agrarian villages were undoubtedly smaller.
Modern anthropological studies of regions such as the Papua New Guinea in Highlands
or the Amazon Basin today may give an impression of how most people lived
in the early agrarian era.
This was, as we've seen, above all, an era of villages.
The village was, for most people, the most complex community they would know.
The hub of power, the source of wealth, and the source of knowledge.
Perhaps these weren't quite hotspots,
but they were at least emerging warm spots dotted around the surface of the earth
in increasing numbers.
Now finally, let me ask about the question of progress,
something we touched on in dealing with the Paleolithic.
Is there any evidence that people lived better or worse in the early agrarian era?
This is an issue we've touched on slightly already.
We saw in lecture 22 that by some criteria, paleolithic foragers lived quite well.
What's the evidence on early farmers?
Well, it's mixed.
There's some evidence that the first generation or two probably lived well,
enjoying improved food supplies.
Incidentally, the evidence depends a lot on studies of the skeletal remains of early farmers.
However, within a few generations,
problems emerged that nomadic foragers had never faced,
as sedentism generated population explosions in settlement after settlement.
Now think about what these denser communities meant.
Sedentary villages attracted vermin and rubbish.
Diseases could spread more easily with a large pool of potential victims to infect.
A disease bacteria can't get much purchase on a small, foraging nomadic community.
But in a village, it can keep travelling around the population creating endemic diseases.
Furthermore, living close to animals meant a lot of pathogens
could pass from humans to animals and back and forth.
So studies of human bones from early agrarian communities
hint at new types of problems that foragers didn't have to deal with.
New forms of stress, for example,
caused perhaps by the intense labour of harvest times
or perhaps by periodic crop failures.
This is one of the great ironies of agriculture.
Farmers relied on a smaller range of foodstuffs than foragers,
and that meant that if one of them didn't succeed in a given year,
they were in real trouble.
So famine enters human history with the appearance of farming.
Overpopulation caused periodic shortages,
which may explain why skeletons in this era seem to get shorter.
And the historian John Coatsworth writes,
bioarchaeologists have linked the agricultural transition
to a significant decline in nutrition,
and to increases in disease, mortality,
overwork and violence in areas where skeletal remains
make it possible to compare human welfare before and after the change.
These results seem to hold whether the transition occurred gradually over a long time
or was forced by conquest as in parts of the New World.
Civilisation, he writes,
we now know stunted growth, spread disease, shortened lifespans,
and set people to killing and maiming each other on an unprecedented scale.
Maybe he's overdoing it,
but let's not assume that agriculture meant progress.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Power in institutionalised forms.
That is to say, the story of states and emperors of kings and queens of armies and wars
has been one of the central themes of much historical scholarship and teaching.
Perhaps this is in part because states have been traditionally great generators of records.
They've generated a huge amount of written evidence.
So if you study the past using written records,
what you're very likely to encounter very soon is the power of states and empires.
So the history of these immense power structures
has been one of the central themes of modern historical scholarship and teaching,
and in fact not just modern historical scholarship,
but of historical scholarship from ancient times to the present day
and in all literate traditions.
A huge amount of history writing has actually been about states and rulers and what they did.
And some of the earliest of all written texts, such as the Great Epic of Gilgamesh,
which we'll refer to quite soon,
which describes events that occurred almost 5,000 years ago,
or the earliest written records to be found in China or the Mayan regions of Mesoamerica,
or the Great Epic, such as those of Homer,
are also about the doings of kings and warriors.
Yet so far, we've not talked much about such things,
and there is of course a very good reason for this.
In the small societies that most humans lived in, for most of human history,
relationships we've seen were essentially personal or familial.
If you want to understand them, you think about the relations within your own family,
not your relations with the police or the state or the law.
Power was certainly there.
It was certainly there in the Paleolithic,
but it was personal or familial rather than institutionalized.
It was embodied in customs of kinship
and in the personal relations of individuals,
and it was exercised within these small groups.
It was not sustained and supported, as power relations are today,
by large institutional structures.
It was not built into large-scale institutions.
So, here's the question I want to start tackling now.
When did institutionalized forms of power,
these forms of power that have dominated historical thinking,
when did they begin to emerge?
When, to put it slightly differently,
did power and hierarchy become more than a matter of family or clan politics?
Institutionalized power we will see as one of the most important,
emergent properties that would appear
as agriculture drove human societies towards new forms of complexity.
Now tackling this question,
trying to explain the origins of institutionalized power,
takes us across not quite one of our major thresholds,
but what we could certainly regard as a mini-threshold in this course.
It's the central question we tackle in this and the next few lectures.
As we'll see, institutionalized power begins to play
an increasingly important role during the early agrarian era.
But to appreciate how and why these new forms of power
begin to play such a central role in human history,
we need to begin by thinking very clearly about
the nature and role of power in human societies.
One of the first things we'll see is that there's a very close relationship
between the spread and development of agricultural societies,
which we looked at in the last lecture,
and the emergence of institutionalized power.
So as agriculture spread during the early agrarian era,
new forms of power and hierarchy began to appear within human societies.
Why and how?
Before we can get far with this question,
we need to take time out to be very clear about the nature of institutionalized power.
We've done this before when looking at life itself,
when looking at agriculture.
We've seen that to understand the origins of a phenomenon,
we need to take time out to be very clear about what it is.
Power, like life itself, seems obvious when we think about it,
but if you try rigorous definition,
we need to take time out to be quite as slippery as the idea of life.
So we need to define it rigorously.
Now, to clarify the nature of the problem,
what I'm going to do is similar to what we did in considering the appearance of life.
I'm going to move forward in time.
From the appearance of agriculture,
I'm going to move forward about 5,000 years
to a period in which states were beginning to appear
so that we can see the results of this mini-threshold.
So I'm going to look at the beginnings and the ends of the early agrarian period
and look at the contrast between the two.
Then, when we've seen what happens over that long period,
we'll return to consider how we get from A,
that is the simple village societies of the early agrarian era,
about 10,000 to 11,000 years ago,
to B, the great agrarian civilizations
that began to appear from about 5,000 years ago.
Now, the appearance of states, I've said,
from about 5,000 years ago marks a very important sub-threshold
within the history of our species.
It's a sub-threshold whose significance is captured rather well
in the following deliberately provocative and vivid quotation
from one of the great American anthropologists of the 20th century, Marvin Harris.
So this is what Marvin Harris says about the appearance of states.
For the first time, he writes,
there appeared on earth kings, dictators, high priests, emperors,
prime ministers, presidents, governors, mayors, generals, admirals,
police chiefs, judges, lawyers, and jailers,
along with dungeons, jails, penitentiaries, and concentration camps.
Under the tutelage of the state, writes Marvin Harris,
human beings learned for the first time how to bow, grovel, kneel, and kowtow.
In many ways, the rise of the state was the descent of the world from freedom to slavery.
This is, of course, a peculiarly bleak view of states,
and it may well underestimate the extent of personal violence, personal coercion,
similar to domestic violence today that undoubtedly occurred within paleolithic societies.
Nevertheless, it captures well the new scale on which power relations were constructed
after the appearance of states.
So states have dominated the history of the last 5,000 years.
Following Eric Wolf, who uses this terminology in a wonderful but difficult book
on modern world history, Europe and the People Without History,
I'm going to use the terminology of tribute-taking states.
The word tribute is used here to mean resources extracted through the threat of organized force.
This is the forcible taking of labor or resources, or even people,
from one group of people by another group of people, who I'll refer to as the state.
Tribute-taking states...
Now, having given this definition, I don't want to give the impression we're talking ever about pure coercion.
Pure coercion simply doesn't exist.
Tribute-taking states often enjoy the genuine support of many of their subjects,
because though they can coerce, they can also, like the mafia, provide real services,
just as farmers provide valuable services to their domestic crops and animals.
My father-in-law briefly ran a business in New York,
and he once told me that he contributed to the benevolent funds of the local police,
and he also paid another group for protection.
Now, he knew exactly who he was being protected against,
but he said to me it was still a worthwhile deal.
If he hadn't paid, his business might have suffered, but because he paid, it never did.
He was paying for real services.
So we'll see in dealing with states, there's always a sort of complex symbiosis to use a word I've earlier used,
between populations who pay taxes and supply resources,
and the states who exact those resources partly by force and partly in return for services.
The great world historian William McNeil,
one of the crucial founders of modern world history in the USA,
has captured this ambiguous relationship really well.
He wrote a wonderful book about the history of disease in the last 2,000 years called Plagues and Peoples,
and in that book, and in another related book about states,
he describes the state and the relationship between states and populations as a sort of unbalanced symbiosis,
or, in his word, as a form of parasitism.
He said it was similar to the relationship between a disease organism and its prey.
If the relationship is to be stable, in other words, if the state is to survive,
if the relationship is to be useful to the parasite, it's vital that the prey survive well as well,
which is why parasites that are too lethal never last.
Most end up hurting, but not killing their hosts.
McNeil accordingly describes states as macro-parasites,
as opposed to the micro-parasites of the disease world.
States like parasites have to offer genuine protection of some kind,
and that is why many of their subjects may value the services they provide.
So this idea of macro-parasitism may help us get a sense of this complex and ambiguous relationship
that emerges when states appear.
Nevertheless, despite this element of mutuality, the defining quality of tribute-taking states
is the ability, when necessary, to impose their will by force, to coerce.
So our question can be rephrased.
Our question about institutionalized forms of power can be rephrased.
How and why did such structures evolve?
The ability to coerce, after all, requires quite complex structures.
It depends on the construction of fairly elaborate systems of enforcement.
The appearance of the first tribute-taking states also clearly marks a new level of social complexity.
Indeed, though I've not classified this as one of our eight major thresholds,
one could make a case for doing so, and in fact, I've already described this as a mini-threshold.
But when preparing this course, I considered seriously the possibility of describing it as one of our major thresholds.
Now, I rejected that partly because I didn't want to introduce too many thresholds within human history.
It would make the story too elaborate.
But we still need to treat it as a very significant turning point in human history.
And it's analogous in many ways to the major thresholds we've seen already in this course.
And that's why we'll treat it as an important chronological marker.
The appearance of the first tribute-taking states marks the end of the early agrarian era
and the beginning of what I'll call the later agrarian era of human history.
We've already compared this threshold in an earlier lecture to star formation,
but it's worth noting an interesting comparison also with another threshold we've seen,
and that's the threshold leading to multicellular organisms.
Remember what happened?
With that threshold, we saw how large numbers of individual, independent organisms
find themselves slowly incorporated within larger structures
within which they were much more interdependent and in some respects had less freedom
than they had had as independent entities.
Yet collectively, within these large multicellular organisms such as ourselves,
cells were of course much more powerful than they'd been before.
So, how does the appearance of states and institutionalized forms of power
make human societies more complex?
Let's be clear about this. Do you remember our four key features of complexity?
They were new structures appear, new existing components are organized within a new structure.
Secondly, there's a degree of stability.
These new structures don't just vanish overnight, they survive for some time.
Third, there are new energy flows and new emergent properties.
So, let's examine states with this idea of complexity in mind.
They clearly had complex structures.
States are larger, they have more internal differentiation,
and in that sense they're clearly much more complex than the village communities
of the early agrarian era or even more so of the small kin-based communities of the Paleolithic era.
That's the first thing, they're more complex, clearly more complex.
Secondly, they had some stability.
All states that are worth talking about, all states that leave significant records,
survived for a certain period of time before eventually breaking down.
Third, new energy flows.
To maintain their complex internal structures including their mechanisms of coercion, for example,
they had to mobilize resources and energy on a huge scale.
They controlled populations of many thousands and sometimes of many millions of people.
And remember that in early human societies, human beings themselves were one of the most important sources of energy.
So it's clear if I use the word labor, states control people and that means controlling energy.
Large projects such as the building of pyramids or the formation of armies
demonstrate their power to mobilize huge amounts of energy, resources and people.
So there are large energy flows associated with states.
In fact, a significant increase in the energy flows that compared with those that existed with earlier human communities.
And fourth, states display many new emergent properties.
And I'll be looking at these in much more detail in later lectures.
Some of them include organized warfare and the building of monumental architecture.
This we'll see over and over again.
Huge buildings such as the pyramids of Egypt or the pyramids built by the Maya in Mesoamerica
designed as tombs or for religious ceremonies that represented the awe and might of the rulers.
Monumental architecture counts as a very clear sign of the appearance of tribute taking states
and counts also as a new emergent property.
Another example is their management of markets and their unprecedented power to coerce and we'll see more.
So states also generate new emergent properties and all these ways the appearance of states counts
as a significant mini-threshold, a significant increase in the level of complexity in human history and human societies.
Okay, now let's go back to the general idea of power.
This is an idea, as I've said before, that is more slippery than it looks
and it's been debated widely within political science and philosophy and in sociology.
We just need some very broad general definitions to help us explain the build-up to tribute taking states
to understand how these structures were constructed over several thousand years.
Now power, I've said, is slippery. So what is it? How can we define it? What is institutionalized power?
Here's an attempt at a reasonably clear and concise definition of institutionalized as opposed to personal power.
I will define institutionalized power as the concentration in the hands of a few people
of substantial control over considerable human and material resources.
Let me break that definition down. It's got two components and it's important to be aware of both of them.
The first component is control. Someone or some institution controls something.
The second is what is being controlled, the resources being controlled and it's important to be aware of the distinction.
It matters because where there are few people and resources to control, as in Paleolithic societies,
power is of limited significance. You may control one or two people, but it does make a huge difference to a large number of people.
It doesn't become a historical fact. So this is why power structures are less significant in the Paleolithic era.
Control may have existed, but it was exercised over very small numbers of people and resources.
Individuals coerced other individuals, but the power was purely personal, exercised within family-sized groups.
Leaders or rulers didn't exist in any sense that would be recognized today and groups took decisions
rather as families do today on group outings. Here's a quotation from Richard Lee, who we've seen before.
Richard Lee studied the people of the Kalahari in the late 20th century.
And here's his description of the form that leadership took among the kong.
You'll remember that the clique is characteristic of many of the indigenous languages of South Africa.
So this is my attempt to do the clique. And this is Richard Lee on leadership in foraging communities.
In a egalitarian societies such as the kongs, group activities unfold, plans are made,
and decisions are arrived at all apparently without a clear focus of authority or influence.
In other words, no institutionalized forms of leadership.
He goes on.
Closer examination, however, reveals that patterns of leadership do exist.
When a waterhole is mentioned, a group living there is often referred to by the kong by a single man's or woman's name.
These individuals are often older people who have lived there the longest or who've married into the owner group
and who have some personal qualities worthy of note as a speaker, an arguer, a ritual specialist, or a hunter.
In group discussions, these people may speak out more than others.
They may be deferred to more than others.
And one gets the feeling he writes that their opinions hold a bit more weight than the opinion of other discussants.
So he concludes, whatever their skills, kong leaders have no formal authority.
We could use the phrase institutionalized authority.
They can only persuade but never enforce their will on others.
So this is the absence of institutionalized power.
This is paleolithic forms of leadership.
As populations multiplied, though, as well as the goods they produced, power began to matter more and more.
So in other words, as the resources potentially available to be controlled,
think of not just people but also warehouses full of goods, grain perhaps, or precious metals.
As the resources began to expand, power begins to matter a lot more,
as leaders have the possibility of gaining control over more and more stuff and more energy.
So this is why the available resources are critical to the scale of different types of power.
Very roughly speaking, we can think of this as a sort of modular process.
We can think of village headmen acquiring leadership roles in villages
and regional rulers gaining authority over a number of villages
than even more powerful leaders gaining authority over regional bosses.
And in each case, what's happening is that individuals are finding the possibility of controlling more and more resources.
And this is the way that their power is slowly built up.
In practice, of course, the changes are always much more complicated
and must always remind ourselves of the dangers of an over-schematized view of historical processes.
Now with that reminder, I return to my attempt to clarify how institutionalized power evolved.
I hope now we have a slightly more subtle idea of what we mean by power
and in particular institutionalized power.
And we can now go back from the first states to the early agrarian era
and start trying to explain the slow build-up of these complex institutionalized forms over several millennia.
So we'll ask how after 200,000 years in which institutionalized power didn't exist,
how did some individuals manage to start exerting significant power over others?
Now to understand the process, it will help to imagine two distinct ways of mobilizing power,
two distinct types of power, they're really complementary, they're different faces of power.
The first I'll call power from below and the second I'll call power from above.
Now let's begin with power from below.
By power from below, I mean power that is conceded to a leader by individuals or groups who expect something in return,
just as domestic plants or animals expect something return, we can imagine, from humans.
They expect to benefit from subordination to skillful leaders.
People expect something in return.
Now in this sense power from below is very clearly a symbiotic relationship.
As societies became larger and complex, the need for leadership increased.
Leadership became more important in order to achieve group goals as groups became larger.
In a group of two or three people, you can do everything by consensus.
In a group of several hundred, you start needing leadership structures.
If you want to build an irrigation system or you want to build a wall to defend your village against a rival village,
you need some organization, you need some leadership.
So here's a very general principle.
As societies get larger, they find more and more that they need leadership in order to cope with more and more complex tasks and challenges.
So this is a process driven by agriculture.
Agriculture leads to larger communities, larger communities create more possibilities for conflict,
more needs for group activity and more need for leadership.
This idea of power from below is very familiar.
We all experience it a lot of the time.
Familiar modern examples include, for example, if you're a member of a club and you want the club to be able to function fairly efficiently in some way,
perhaps to collect dues, you're probably going to elect officials.
And you as a member of the club implicitly grant some authority to those people and you grant them the right to take some crucial decisions.
So this is power from below.
It's very, very familiar indeed.
When we think of power as legitimate in the modern world as opposed to illegitimate,
when we think of it as legitimate, such as the right to tax in a democratic society,
we're generally thinking of it as power from below, even if it's backed by the threat of force, e.g. for not paying taxes.
Now that's power from below.
It's very familiar.
It's all around us and it's a crucial component of all power systems.
And we often forget about it.
Now power from above, the other side of power.
Power from above depends on the capacity to make credible threats of coercion.
Power from above, unlike power from below, which just depends on a certain amount of agreement between people on common goals,
power from above depends on the pre-existence of organised, disciplined groups of coercers
who are loyal to a leader and able to enforce the leader's will by force when necessary.
In modern societies, the police and armies play such a role.
But so do many other officials, such as tax collectors.
In such an environment, people obey because they will be punished if they do not.
This aspect of power highlights the coercive element in power relations.
The element that I said was critical to the existence of tribute-taking states.
You want to know whether there's power from above.
You look for the presence of jails, police, armies, enforcers, gangs of thugs.
And you know that such power exists.
Now, we also need to be clear that power from above can never exist on its own.
There can be no such thing as a purely coercive state.
And the reason for this is very simple. Maintaining an apparatus of coercion is costly.
And it depends on maintaining the willing support of the coercers.
So the gang with which you work has to be supporting you.
No individual can single-handedly coerce millions of others.
There has to be some consensus at least amongst the coercers.
So, coercion.
Power from above depends on the previous existence of complex structures of coercion.
Now, it depends on the existence of complex structures.
Now, in practice, the two forms are always intertwined.
Protection rackets, for example, offer a service.
It's often the racket itself that is the likely source of danger.
So does the payment of protection money count as a form of power from below or power from above?
Which was my father-in-law dealing with?
He could have chosen not to pay to the police benevolent fund or to the other organization.
As any member of a democratic society may decide not to pay taxes.
But in both cases, there are unpleasant consequences.
Okay, this has been an elaborate attempt to clarify the nature of power.
We need to understand this clearly before we can look at the details of the construction of elaborate power systems,
of the structures that have dominated most of the last 5,000 years of human history.
Here's the final point I want to make.
Building coercive groups is complex and costly.
And the earliest forms of power emerged before such groups existed.
This is why the first power elites depended mainly on power from below.
Power from below can exist without power from above.
It doesn't work the other way around.
And what that means is that to explain the slow build-up to institutionalized power over 5,000 years,
we must begin by looking at forms of power from below.
So now let's start asking, how over 5,000 years do you slowly build up from the very simple societies
and structures of the early agrarian era to the elaborate, powerful, institutionalized power structures
of the later agrarian era to the first tribute-taking states?
That's the question we tackle in the next lecture. Thank you.
Applause
Music
Lecture 28, Early Power Structures
Applause
We're discussing the emergence of the great power structures
that have played such a dominant role in the last 5,000 years of world history.
And in the previous lecture, I tried to think very carefully about the nature of power itself
and to distinguish between the highly institutionalized forms of power
embodied in states within the last 5,000 years of human history
and the much more personal forms of power that were present in all earlier eras of human history.
Now the strategic era for understanding how you get from A to B is once again the early agrarian era.
So now we need to go back to the beginnings of that era and see if we can trace,
despite the extreme paucity of the evidence,
some of the main stages in the creation of these complex, institutionalized forms of power.
So we're looking at, if you like, the prehistory of the state.
The previous lecture described the appearance of the first tribute-taking states.
I used that label and defined it as power structures that had the ability, if necessary,
to impose their will through coercion.
Now we ask how did the first and simplest power structures evolve?
But first let's look at the evidence. What types of evidence do we have
if we're to try and construct a good evidence-based answer to this question?
We'll see that the evidence is far from perfect,
but it may be just enough to allow us to construct, in very general terms,
or to reconstruct the history of institutionalized forms of power
through this critical 5,000-year era of human history.
The evidence we need to answer this question comes mainly from archaeology and anthropology.
This is a mix we've seen before in looking both at the Paleolithic era and the early agrarian era.
Let's look first at archaeology.
Archaeology, that is to say, the study of the remains of past communities, past societies,
can offer many indirect hints about early power relations
and the build-up of forms of institutionalized power.
For example, the relative size and wealth of houses and burials may hint at inequalities of wealth and power.
An example, just to give one example more or less at random,
is the huge burial mound of Arjan in the inner Asian steppes.
It dates from the 8th century BCE, that is to say, it was formed about 2,800 years ago.
It was excavated in the early 1970s in the Russian Republic of Tuva on the border of Mongolia.
The tomb is from the early phases of the Scythian era,
and it represents the burial of an important pastoral nomadic steppe leader.
It included 70 distinct chambers arranged like the spokes of a wheel.
It contained about 160 saddled horses.
Each of these had been slaughtered for the burial.
They were under a mound 120 meters wide,
which probably required the labor of something like 1,500 workers,
according to the estimates of the archaeologists who worked on the site.
At the very center were buried a man and a woman.
They wore furs and elaborate decorations.
Subordinate princes or nobles or aristocrats were buried to their south, their west,
and the north of them, which gave them the place of honor in the east.
This was traditionally the place of honor in most iteration pastoral nomadic societies.
Now, if you stumble across such a tomb in the arid steplands of Central Asia,
what can you deduce about power?
You can hardly avoid the conclusion that even in this not particularly productive environment,
there existed very significant degrees of institutionalized power.
If so many people could be mobilized to honor the death of a ruler,
and quite a few of them, including these princes who were buried with the rulers,
were apparently even required to honor the burial by sacrificing their own lives,
you have to conclude that these people were very powerful.
They ruled large numbers of people and they had very considerable power over them
and probably very considerable coercive power.
In the steps, mobilizing coercive power in many ways is actually easier than outside of the steps
because the pastoral nomadic life way is so congenial to teaching to a training in warfare.
So that's just one illustration of the sort of evidence we look for if we're looking for power structures.
Rich infant burials demonstrate something else.
If you find infants that are buried with a lot of wealth around them,
then you know not only that there were wealthy people in that society,
but you know something else as well.
You know that wealth could be inherited.
In other words, this is not just one individual who built up their wealth during their lifetime,
they could pass on their wealth to their children.
That suggests the existence of institutionalized hierarchies of wealth and power.
Much more elaborate evidence can be found as well.
I'm thinking of evidence such as the amazing terracotta army
that was buried with the first ruler of a unified China or extensive fortifications and walls.
These all show the presence of armies and organized coercion.
These things you know you're dealing with powerful tribute-taking states.
Let me talk briefly about the terracotta army, which I was lucky enough to see a few years ago.
There are 8,000 life-sized terracotta soldiers and their horses.
They were mass produced to some extent,
but nevertheless you have quite a variety of costumes and faces.
You have them wearing the precise costumes for different military ranks.
They were buried to honor the first emperor of a unified China, the Qin Emperor Shi Huangdi,
whose dates are 260 to 210 BCE.
And they're part of a 20 square mile wide mausoleum.
This was discovered outside the city of Xi'an, the ancient Han capital in 1974,
by local peasants who were drilling a well.
Constructing the entire mausoleum for the emperor may have required the labor of 700,000 people over many years.
So this is monumental architecture at its most grandiose.
We'll see that one of the most remarkable similarities between all regions where institutionalized power appears in significant forms
is that you find monumental architecture.
Wherever institutionalized power structures appear, rulers seem to have constructed large, grand building projects
that are both examples of power because they require a lot of labor to construct them.
And they show that rulers or someone had the power to mobilize a lot of labor,
but they also displays of power.
So they count in fact as forms of propaganda.
They're designed to impress or over awe someone else with the majesty of the leaders and rulers.
A smaller version of this sort of display of power is undoubtedly the stone figures, the ahu,
these astonishing heads that you find on Easter Island.
They also represent a more modest form of power as the Stonehenge in Britain.
So archaeology can tell us a lot about these power structures.
What is hard to tease out from archaeology is exactly how these power structures worked.
And to get some sense of how they worked, we have to go to anthropology.
And in particular to anthropological studies of modern early agrarian societies such as the societies of Papua New Guinea,
parts of Melanesia or the Amazon, societies that still in many ways will like the societies of the early agrarian era.
And these modern studies can suggest ways of interpreting the archaeological evidence.
As always, when we use modern anthropological evidence to interpret the past record,
we must remember that these are modern models and we may be missing important differences between them
and the first early agrarian societies.
Okay, it's no accident that we start looking at power not in the Paleolithic but within the early agrarian era.
For there's a very close relationship as we've seen between agriculture and the evolution of power.
The emergence of institutionalized forms of power correlates very, very directly with the buildup of agriculture,
the spread of agriculture, the growth of populations that we've seen as a central phenomenon in the early agrarian era.
The key was population growth, more people and more stuff.
I defined power as having two elements, control and the stuff that's controlled.
And the key to the buildup of larger, more institutionalized power structures is the buildup of more stuff,
larger communities with more resources, more stored resources, more warehouses full of grain and wealth and so on.
So as communities became larger, more productive and more interdependent,
the possibilities for building power structures developed.
And something else changed too, as they became larger, more complex, more interdependent, new problems arose
which created more need for forms of leadership.
So these two things, an increased need for leadership and increased resources,
help explain why the buildup of agrarian societies, their expansion in size, numbers and resources,
is the key to understanding the buildup of power structures.
Let's look at this issue of leadership. Why a society's got larger did the need for leadership increase?
Whenever complexity increases, you have to have new coordinating mechanisms of some kind.
This is certainly true once we reach the level of life and all further levels of complexity.
You need something like the nervous systems in multi-celled organisms
and something like this seems to be true of human societies.
Like modern families, we've seen Paleolithic communities could deal with conflicts, for example, face-to-face or simply by splitting.
If two people didn't get on, one of them could simply leave and join another group.
It's a very simple method of conflict resolution.
In earlier agrarian villages, relations were often a lot less personal,
but splitting was also more difficult because households has invested labour and resources in crops and farmed land,
and it wasn't so easy just to pick up and move.
So increasingly, to deal with conflicts within the community, leaders were needed to resolve these disputes.
Or leaders were needed to resolve disputes not only within the community, but also within, with neighbouring communities as well.
So here's one function of leadership that becomes more and more important as communities get larger, more impersonal, more complex.
A second function is religious.
In the very personal world of the Paleolithic, we saw it may have been that people thought of the world as animistic.
They thought of the world as people with spirits of various kinds.
Many of them not very powerful or very large scale.
Figures that might have magical powers, but were probably no more powerful than you and me.
But as societies expanded, the gods seemed to have generally become more magnificent.
And as that happened, worshipping them became itself a public task,
so specialist priests began to take on the role of communicating with these rather grand deities.
And their privileged relation with the gods could give priests considerable influence and prestige
that often could be parlayed into real power.
For example, priests were often in a very good position to extract gifts for the gods.
In Sumer, we'll see the temples of Sumer contained huge amounts of offerings from the population at large for the gods,
which of course were not always consumed by the gods, but sometimes controlled by the priests themselves.
And in large communities, other tasks arose, such as garbage collection, wall building,
or the maintenance of temples and irrigation systems, and these two required leadership.
Another reason why leadership became increasingly important as communities become larger, denser, more complex
is the appearance of specialists and a division of labour.
As you start getting small towns, early forms of cities, you start getting a number of people who are no longer peasants.
They are specialists. They may be warriors, or they may be potters, or eventually they may be scribes.
Now these people, to get food and the other things they need, are going to have to swap them with other members of society.
So once you get a division of labour, you need complex systems of exchange of goods.
You need markets, and you need someone to protect the markets.
Here's one more reason why leadership becomes more crucial.
So this is one of the reasons why, as societies become more complex, they need leaders more,
and power from below becomes more and more important.
Populations in these large and growing communities increasingly find that they need to appoint leaders.
They need to delegate power to someone.
So this is one of the mechanisms by which new forms of leadership emerge.
Who became the leaders? How did you get to be one?
Well in the sort of environment I've been describing so far, the crucial quality may be skill.
The people who step into leadership positions are often people who have particular skills.
So someone who is widely respected for their honesty, their understanding of tradition,
their understanding of traditional ethical rules may well be widely accepted as a mediator.
And they'll be conceded a position that today we might describe as a position of judge.
Or someone, for example, who is regarded as profoundly religious,
or someone who communicates very naturally and easily with the gods,
may very easily acquire a leadership position in relations with the gods.
Or someone with particular skill in warfare or organization.
So there are people who step into leadership roles because they have skills.
Now that's one of the way early forms of leadership undoubtedly emerged.
But the other form is birth.
In Paleolithic communities, it was generally not too hard to figure out who was related to whom within kinship systems.
You're dealing with communities of very small numbers of people who have relations with neighbouring communities as well.
But once you have a community of several hundred or a thousand people,
figuring out relationships becomes much more complex so that kinship systems have to adapt to the growing size of communities.
And as communities expand in size, increasingly what tends to happen
is they begin to construct what we can think of as mythological genealogies.
These are genealogies that they often take the following form.
They'll trace everyone in the community, or most people in the community,
to some mythical or semi-mythical ancestor who may have lived several generations in the past.
But once you do this, you start being forced to classify people in different ways.
Because the question that naturally arises within any kinship system is,
OK, so you're related to this distant founding ancestor,
but precisely how are you descended perhaps from the youngest daughter of that ancient ancestor,
or are you descended from the eldest son of that ancient ancestor?
These sort of questions can become very important in a world that thinks of all social relations in terms of kinship.
And so what very often happens is that in such an environment, you start developing aristocracies.
These are people whose lineage is higher.
They are descended from the senior lines of the senior lines of the senior lines
and can trace their way all the way back to the senior lines of the founding father.
So this is one of the mechanisms that can create a sense of aristocracy.
And very often in large communities, those who can trace their descent
directly to these founding ancestors through senior lines
will claim the deference due in a small family to seniority.
So high birth can begin to provide a seemingly natural basis for authority.
One of the archaeological pieces of evidence for this, or for the importance of ancestry,
may be something we've seen already.
That's the decoration of ancestral skulls, which was done so carefully, even in Natufian communities.
And it suggests how important lineage was, even in the very earliest agrarian communities.
Now here's one more question about who becomes a leader.
The question of power and gender.
Why in leadership systems over and over again do males appear disproportionately
in disproportionate numbers in these institutionalized power structures?
Males dominated leadership roles in most early agrarian communities,
laying the foundations for the asymmetrical power relations that are often described as patriarchy.
So what are the sources of patriarchy?
Clearly, it's not because women are incapable of exercising power.
I say this as someone who grew up in a country with a queen who's been in office now for over 50 years,
which was revolutionized in the 1980s under a female Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher,
probably one of the most powerful ruling figures in modern British history.
So clearly, we must look for other reasons.
A lot of research has been conducted into this issue in the last few decades.
And as yet, there's not a perfect consensus, but here are some possible explanations.
One takes us back to the demographic rules of agrarian societies,
and the fact that they were very different from those of foraging societies.
This is something we've seen already.
In foraging societies, there often seem to have been systematic attempts to limit populations.
And there was a very good reason for this.
You, in a nomadic community, you simply cannot carry people who can't carry themselves.
And also foraging communities, certainly modern foraging communities,
are very often very sensitive to the carrying capacity of their environment.
So we've seen that foraging communities seem often to have deliberately limited populations.
But once they settle down, once they become farmers, the rules change and they change radically.
In most of the agrarian societies we know of.
So it's a reasonable bet that this applied also to early agrarian societies.
One of the crucial rules for the success of an individual household was,
have as many children as you possibly can.
And one of the reasons for this is that one of the few factors of production, to use an economist term,
that most households could control, was labor.
They often couldn't control exactly how much land they had, or cash they had, or capital.
Labor was the one they could control.
And maximizing the amount of labor available on your farm may enhance your wealth,
but it may also provide protection in old age.
So having lots of children seems to have been a crucial rule in most peasant societies.
But what did this mean for women?
What it meant for women is that throughout their reproductive years,
they were tied largely to their roles as reproducers and as child rearers.
Consequently, men who weren't tied anything like as closely to these roles
found it much easier to take on specialist roles as societies became more complex,
as a division of labor emerged, and particularly as power roles began to emerge.
So this may explain the initial imbalance in power roles.
But then something else takes over, the symbolism and mythology of power.
Once power roles emerge, and you find that most of the people who occupy them are male,
this can very easily generate the presumption that males were natural leaders.
So I think this may be the source of the sort of mythology of patriarchy,
the idea that males are natural leaders,
even if in most households, power relations in practice were probably quite variable.
Okay, now let's try and look at some small-scale forms of power,
the kind of embryonic forms of power that probably emerged in the early agrarian era.
And here we rely largely on modern anthropological studies.
They offer some very helpful models of how simple forms of power may have emerged.
And I'm going to focus on two of these models.
Let me say immediately that these models are models.
They are sort of tools for thinking rather than necessarily terribly precise descriptions
of what actually happened, because the truth is we don't really know.
So we have to use these models.
And the first is the big man, and the second is the chief.
So let's look at the idea of the big man.
And the big man was, as far as we know, invariably a man.
In a classic 1955 study, Douglas Oliver described the big men,
or the mummies, M-U-M-I-S, of the Solomon Islands, east of Papua New Guinea.
Ambitious young men would go round to their relatives and friends collecting food.
Then they would throw a huge feast.
Now, the feast might include pigs, it might include coconut pies,
it might include sago puddings for local men.
So they throw this huge feast.
At the end of the feast, they're broke.
I mean, everything they've collected has gone.
So at first sight, it's hard to see what they gain out of this.
Those whose feasts were judged impressive enough, however,
could acquire enough of a following to become mummies.
So what they gain out of this is prestige,
and they also gain debts, as it were, that they can cash in later on.
So though they may end up impoverished as a result of collecting all this stuff,
then giving it away again.
A widely used term for this process, incidentally, is potlatch,
from similar practices on the northwest coast of North America.
The result of giving away this stuff is that you create potential followers.
They owe you something, and you can cash in these debts sometime in the future.
This is very like modern so-called pork barrel politics.
Gift-giving is a form of political investment.
So here's a very early form of power that we can describe as a form of power from below.
You've bought powerful allies by giving them gifts.
Now this form of power could be turned quite rapidly into a rather coercive form of power.
Mummies could become powerful war leaders.
One old man in Oliver's study remembered that, and I quote,
in the olden times there were greater mummies than there are today.
Then they were fierce and relentless war leaders.
They laid waste to the countryside and their clubhouses were lined with the skulls of people they had slain.
So this business of giving away stuff to recruit followers was very, very serious politics,
and it could lead quite quickly to quite coercive politics.
So the move from power from below to coercive power could be very swift indeed.
Still, in this sort of world the power to coerce rested mainly on the ability to line up loyal followers.
As Marvin Harris writes in a passage from which I've taken these quotations,
without warfare the potential for control inherent in the egg of redistribution would never have hatched.
And of course the leader to retain their power has to keep finding goods and handing them out.
So this is a fairly precarious form of power.
Now let's look at the second model of power, the chief.
And again, let me just stress that this is a model.
In fact, it's so schematic in some ways that these are labels that many anthropologists are uncomfortable about using.
So I just need to remind you that these are sort of tools for thinking about how power may have worked,
rather than anything more specific.
The concept of chiefs is often used to refer to leaders that normally rule over other leaders.
So here we have two or three levels of power.
They may have little direct contact with most of their subjects.
Their power is often based on high lineage and birth.
Very often chiefs acquire a leadership role because of aristocratic birth.
The Polish anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski, who did very important work in the early 20th century in Melanesia,
once describes witnessing how, and I quote,
how all the people present in the village of Boitalu in the Trabriand Islands
drop from their verandas as if blown down by a hurricane
at the sound of a long drawn out cry announcing the arrival of an important chief.
Unlike the mummies whose relationship with their followers is quite personal,
the chief is a more remote figure.
In fact, much more god-like.
Chiefs in the Trabriand Islands ruled many thousands of people.
They wore special shell ornaments to show their status,
and others were forbidden to even stand so that their heads were higher than that of the chief.
So these are figures that are almost god-like.
Archaeologists suspect the presence of chiefs
when they find large structures such as pyramids or earthen mounds
which required control over not just single villages,
but over hundreds or thousands of workers.
And at their most, most powerful, chiefs can wield very considerable power indeed.
A French explorer, La Parge du Pratz,
lived briefly amongst the Natchez tribes of the Mississippi in 1720.
And in the words of the prehistorian Brian Fagan,
he found himself in a rigidly stratified society
divided into nobles and commoners
and headed by a chieftain known as the Great Sun,
whose members lived in a village of nine houses
and a temple built on the summit of an earthen mound.
Pratz witnessed the funeral of the Great Sun.
His wives, relatives and servants were drugged,
then clubbed to accompany him in death.
So as Fagan points out, this is a unique description
because very soon these societies would be destroyed
by the arrival of European diseases.
Okay, in summary,
we've seen that institutionalized power must begin with power from below.
We've seen how significant forms of power
could be built largely on support from below.
But how is it possible to take the next step,
to build forms of power that are much more institutionalized,
much more bureaucratized,
much less dependent on sort of constant personal negotiation
between the ruler and their followers?
How do you get in short to the level of tribute-taking states
which will introduce the next mini-threshold,
the era of agrarian civilizations?
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
We've traveled a long distance in this course,
and we've accomplished a lot.
Let me just remind you of some of the things we've done.
In just 28 lectures, we've created a universe.
We've created stars.
We've allowed the stars to create chemical elements.
Using those chemical elements,
we've created entire solar systems,
including our Earth.
We've created life.
We've created human beings.
And we've allowed those human beings to develop agriculture,
a much more productive technology
than the earlier technologies they used.
So now what we're going to do
is to set up the appearance
of the large, exotic communities
known as agrarian civilizations.
These have been one of the central subjects
investigated by historians.
And we'll find that a lot of things change
once we cross this mini-threshold
with the appearance of agrarian civilizations.
The previous group of lectures
described the origins of agriculture,
some features of the earliest agrarian societies,
and we looked at the emergence
of simple forms of power and hierarchy.
We looked at how power slowly built up
and how populations grew up and built up
and as agriculture spread.
We've seen how during the earlier agrarian era,
as populations rose,
larger, denser, and eventually more complex communities
began to appear.
And as they got more complex,
they began to need power structures.
And at the same time,
the resources for leaders began to build up.
The possibilities for larger forms of power began to expand.
And eventually, this build-up
in types of power and in the scale of power
led to the crossing of what are called a new mini-threshold.
And that's associated with the appearance
of the first tribute-taking states
and the first agrarian civilizations.
And that mini-threshold we saw was crossed
about 5,000 years ago.
Crossing this threshold
takes us into the second major subdivision
of the agrarian era.
And I'm going to call that the era of agrarian civilizations,
or sometimes I'll call it the later agrarian era.
Those two terms are more or less interchangeable.
What we'll see in the era of agrarian civilizations
is remarkable new forms
of social, technological, and cultural complexity.
These, if you like, are the new emergent properties
associated with this new level of complexity
associated with agrarian civilizations.
But there's one more distinctive feature of this threshold.
This is the era in which writing and written documents
appear for the first time in human history.
So that, for the first time in this course,
we can look at the past using written documents.
At last, we enter what many historians
may be tempted to call the domain of real history.
And a lot does indeed change
as we enter the last 5,000 years of human history.
This is the era of human history
on which historians, professional historians,
have lavished by far the most attention
precisely because written records are available.
So, at last, for this period,
we have masses of scholarship
and we have masses of information.
In fact, suddenly, you'll be aware of this,
that for a long time we've asked questions
for which there was very, very slender data.
We had to work really hard to scrabble around
and find data to answer some of the big questions.
Now, suddenly, the situation's very different.
We're drowning in information.
So, for earlier periods, we had to really work hard
for our data.
Now, increasingly, the problem's going to be rather different.
We're going to have to find a way,
if we're going to maintain the big history perspective,
we're going to have to find a way to navigate
through a sort of blizzard of information.
In this course, I want to alert you
to the strategies we're going to adopt to do that.
We're going to try to capture the main lines
of development of human society throughout the world.
And that will mean letting go
of many of the details of that history
and trying to see human history at large scales,
trying to see the very large shapes.
This is like the ant trying to see the whole elephant,
rather than just the wrinkles.
So, we're trying to see the very large patterns
without getting too bogged down in the details.
Now, that is not always easy.
And I want to alert you to one more change
that occurs at this point.
You'll understand that there is a huge amount of room
for debate over the interpretation
of some of the large trends in human history.
And this is particularly because, for the most part,
historians have tended not to look at the past
on very large scales.
So, before we go any further,
I must alert you to the fact that here,
more than in most earlier parts of this course,
I've often had to try to distill a clear story
from scholarship that allows plenty of wriggle room for debate.
In the parts of the course dealing with the sciences,
I could often summarize a consensus position.
There was almost universal agreement amongst the scientists,
and I could just summarize that position.
Within the discipline of history by and large,
there is, for the most part, much less consensus,
particularly about the very large patterns.
So, much of the rest of this course
accounts as a slightly more tentative attempt
to identify amongst the massive information
the very large patterns and the main lines of development.
So, there's more room for controversy here
than in any earlier part of this course.
Okay, that's a way of introducing some of the changes
we're going to encounter as we cross this divide
into the era of agrarian civilizations
about 5,000 years ago.
Lecture 29 to 37, the next group of lectures,
surveys the 5,000 years or so
during which agrarian civilizations
dominated the history of most people on Earth.
This is the largest single group of lectures in this course,
and it has to be admitted that we lavish so much attention on it
in part simply because we do have more information
than for earlier eras.
Now, let me be clear about definitions,
particularly about this phrase I've used,
agrarian civilizations.
I've already defined tribute-taking states,
which are one of the central components
of agrarian civilizations,
but I need to be clear how I'm using this phrase
agrarian civilizations.
What were agrarian civilizations?
In this lecture, I'll offer a careful definition
of agrarian civilizations.
Then I'm going to offer a brief chronology
of the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations.
And we'll see that, like agriculture,
agrarian civilizations appeared quite independently
in several different parts of the world.
It's an odd phenomenon, but it's not quite as odd
as the independent appearance of agriculture
because as we've seen,
there is clearly a close link between the appearance of agriculture
and the eventual appearance of agrarian civilizations.
So if we've solved the problem of agriculture to some extent,
we've solved the problem of the independent appearance
of agrarian civilizations.
Agriculture, as it were, littered fumes
that ignited agrarian civilizations several millennia later.
Now, after a brief chronology,
I want to turn to one particular region,
to Mesopotamia in modern Iraq.
This is the region in which the first agrarian civilizations appeared,
and we'll describe how increasing productivity
in the lands of modern Iraq created the foundations
for the first agrarian civilizations,
which emerged about 5,000 years ago.
Okay, definitions. Let's clarify what we mean by agrarian civilizations.
Agrarian civilization is a label that can be used in distinct ways,
so I need to be very clear about how we're using the phrase in this course.
I'll use the term agrarian civilization to refer to the large communities
that emerged around the first tribute-taking states.
Agrarian civilization is therefore a broader term
than state or even tribute-taking state.
At tribute-taking states are merely one component of agrarian civilizations.
Now, the word civilization itself is slippery.
In the 19th century, it was often taken for granted
that when you said civilization,
you were referring to a type of society that was distinctly superior
to most of the smaller-scale societies that existed at their edges.
So I need to be clear straight away that I'm not using the word civilization
in a judgmental sense.
It does not imply superiority or inferiority.
I'm simply using it to refer to a very specific type of human community.
I imply no value judgments.
However, I will make some judgments about degrees of complexity.
Though, as we've seen already, there's nothing intrinsically good about complexity or bad.
Complexity is just complexity.
So, by agrarian civilizations, I mean, first,
large human communities of many, hundreds of thousands,
and maybe many millions of people.
This is the first distinguishing feature.
They were huge.
They were huge compared with the two other main types of human communities
that we've looked at so far.
The first being the kinship groups of the Paleolithic,
these small family-sized nomadic groups that dominated in the Paleolithic era.
And the second being the village communities.
Several hundred people, maybe a thousand or two,
care more or less permanently that dominated the early agrarian era.
So, agrarian civilizations are a new type of community,
and they are vast.
They include millions of people.
The second feature, main feature,
most of their resources came from agriculture,
and that meant that most of their inhabitants were small farmers or peasants.
Agrarian civilizations were founded firmly on the technological breakthroughs
associated with agriculture,
and on the ability of agriculture to extract more resources from the environment
and therefore to support larger and denser communities.
So, what this means is that most of the people in agrarian civilizations
were peasants,
and most of the resources that sustained agrarian civilizations
were generated by peasant households.
So, we need to remind ourselves,
if you do a sort of quick association test,
and you think of civilization,
I'm betting you'll start thinking of grand monuments,
of pyramids, of palaces and so on.
We need to remind ourselves that despite these great monuments,
this was really a world of peasants.
In fact, there's a sort of very rough rule of thumb
when thinking about agrarian civilizations,
and it's this.
Given the levels of productivity of most pre-modern forms of agriculture,
it normally took, roughly speaking,
and this is just a rule of thumb,
nine peasants to support one city-dweller.
So, what this implies, I hope, is obvious.
In most regions of agrarian civilization,
we're talking about a world in which perhaps 90% of the population
were peasants or small farmers.
So, that's the second crucial ingredient of agrarian civilizations.
First, they're huge.
Secondly, they're based on agriculture,
and that means most of their population is peasants,
and that means that throughout this era,
most people lived as peasants.
If you and I were to be transported randomly
into the era of agrarian civilizations,
randomly put somewhere in that society
the odds are that we'd be peasants.
Third, agrarian civilizations also contained cities,
and tribute-taking states.
They are all shaped by the presence of institutionalized power
on large scales in the form of tribute-taking states,
and they were also shaped by the presence within them
of these demographic hotspots that we call cities.
Okay, so those are three very general features.
Later on, we're going to look at some of the other important
emergent properties that arise once agrarian civilization appears.
Now, world history courses often focus on the differences
between different agrarian civilizations.
Eventually, we're going to do the same thing.
We're going to look at some of these critical differences.
They're shaped by geography, by cultural traditions, and so on.
But initially, we're going to focus on some of the remarkable similarities between them.
Indeed, the notion of agrarian civilizations is useful
precisely because all agrarian civilizations shared
a remarkable amount of common features.
They seem to contain the same basic components.
So from the wider perspective of big history,
what stands out about this era is not so much the variations
between distinct civilizations.
The variations say between Chinese civilization and Muslim civilization
as the idea of agrarian civilization as a distinctive type of community,
a distinctive phenomenon within human history.
Okay, we've seen that their major components are peasants
and peasant farms whose work supports cities, states,
and the various institutions associated with them,
from organized armies to literate bureaucracies and organized markets.
It's the fact that all these components seem to appear together
that encourages us to think of these as a single type of human community.
Now, let's talk in very general terms about chronology.
When did the first agrarian civilizations appear?
Here's a very broad global chronology of the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations.
Like agriculture, as we've seen,
agrarian civilizations evolved differently in different parts of the world.
But because they depended so much on agriculture,
you could more or less predict where they were going to appear.
They appeared precisely in those regions where agriculture was well established.
Let's begin 5,000 years ago, roughly speaking 5,000 years ago.
The first agrarian civilizations appeared about 5,000 years ago in Mesopotamia,
in the southern part of modern Iraq, in the area.
The largest city today is probably Basra in this area.
But also they appeared along the Nile.
Agrarian civilizations appear in both these two zones at about the same time.
About 500 years later, that's to say about 4,500 years ago,
the first agrarian civilizations appeared in the northern parts of the Indian subcontinent
along the Indus River in what is today Pakistan.
That's the second area.
And in that area, almost certainly there were some contacts with Mesopotamia.
So there may have been an element of diffusion here.
How independent the appearance of civilization was in the Indus Valley region
is still not absolutely certain.
We move forward another 500 years.
About 4,000 years ago, we get the first evidence of agrarian civilizations appearing
in northern China along the Yellow River.
Then about 2,500 years ago, the first agrarian civilizations appeared in Southeast Asia,
sub-Saharan Africa, around the Mediterranean,
and also for the first time in a second world zone, the Americas.
And they appear in Mesoamerica and also in the Andes region
during the first millennium BCE, that is to say, about 2,500 years ago.
And here's a final date.
During the last 1,500 years, states appeared in one or two regions of the Pacific zone,
in regions such as Hawaii.
This, you'll remember, is a third of our four world zones.
But the communities that appeared in these regions
were probably too small to count as fully developed agrarian civilizations.
So you can decide whether you want to call them agrarian civilizations or not.
Now, if you follow this chronology on a map,
and you can remember the chronology of the spread of agriculture,
you'll see straight away that the map of early state formation matches the map of agrarian origins,
because it was agriculture that generated the raw materials for civilizations
just as clouds solar nebulae generated the raw material for stars.
Now, what I want to do is turn to one particular region
and try and see if we can pan in on this process of agrarian civilization appearing.
And that region is Mesopotamia.
I want to see if we can trace some of the processes that led to the appearance
of agrarian civilization in that one region.
Now, here, as elsewhere, the emergence of agrarian civilizations depends on this buildup of agrarian resources.
In other words, it depends on the process by which agriculture generates larger and larger populations,
denser populations, more communities.
And it depends on improvements in the technology and productivity of agriculture.
In Mesopotamia, and also in several other parts of Afro-Eurasia,
in which agrarian civilizations would emerge,
two large clusters of innovations would play a particularly important role.
They would stimulate agriculture and they would boost this process of increasing populations
and increasing the resources available in society.
And these processes are, these innovations are the secondary products revolution and irrigation.
So I'm going to talk about each of these innovations.
We saw earlier that agriculture began with fairly simple technologies,
but slowly, slowly those technologies were tweaked and improved as people moved to different areas.
And these two innovations can count as large-scale examples of this process of slow, continuous improvement
in the technology of agriculture.
Let's begin with the secondary products revolution.
The idea is associated with the work of an archaeologist, Andrew Sherret, who died in 2006.
Andrew Sherret identified a cluster of innovations that he called the secondary products revolution.
Let me explain what he meant by this.
Sherret pointed out that when they were first domesticated, animals were used mainly for their meat and hides.
Now what this meant was you had to slaughter them in order to exploit them.
And that meant that early farmers who had domesticated animals were keeping these animals more or less
simply keeping them in reserve until they were slaughtered.
So they were protecting them, they were putting work into protecting them,
they were feeding them, they were looking after them, but sometimes for many years until they slaughtered them
without getting much benefit from them.
Now that may be great for the animal, but from a modern economist's point of view, this is just not very efficient.
What Sherret points out is that from about five or six thousand years ago,
throughout quite an area from Mesopotamia into parts of the Eurasian steppes,
the borderlands between modern Russia and Europe for example, a whole series of new technologies appear
and they have this common feature, that they all allow you to exploit animals while they're still alive.
They allow you to exploit the animals' secondary products.
Those are products that you can use without killing the animal.
Now here are some of the secondary products that could be used by these techniques.
They include the use of milk for food.
Milking is, I mean we take it for granted, but it's actually a reasonably sophisticated technology
and humans couldn't really use milk until they developed ways of digesting it.
Sometimes this involves genetic changes.
It's clear that some communities that use milk a lot, that use dairy produce a lot,
have undergone minor genetic changes which allow them to process milk throughout their life,
rather than just in childhood, which is normal.
But milking itself as a technology is quite complicated.
So this emerges, the earliest evidence is about five or six thousand years old.
And the second secondary product is wool cloth making,
using the fibers of sheep, camel, other large domestic mammals,
for cloth making, for making clothes, for making shoes,
eventually for making tents, for making carpets.
So milk and wool.
But a third whole group of secondary products includes energy.
Remember we're talking about large mammals here.
We're talking about horses, camels, oxen, and slightly smaller organisms such as goats,
but it's the large ones that are crucial here.
People learnt to use their energy.
This is very important, it's immensely important,
because it constitutes in effect a sort of energy revolution that took place
towards the end of the early agrarian era.
An ox or a horse can deliver up to four times as much power as a human being.
So if you can harness that power, you suddenly have access to a lot more energy than before.
What did they use this energy for?
Well, animal power allowed farmers to plow soils more deeply.
If you have an ox or a horse pulling a plow, you can cut much deeper into soils,
you can cut your way through really tough soils.
And what this meant is that you can turn over the soils more deeply,
and also you can bring into cultivation areas that simply couldn't be cultivated
using traditional hose or digging sticks of some kind.
So plow agriculture greatly expanded the area that could be brought into cultivation
and generally probably increased the productivity of agriculture.
Using horses, camels and oxen for their traction power
also revolutionized transportation in both commerce and warfare.
In arid steppe regions, these innovations were of really revolutionary importance
because they laid the foundations for pastoral nomadism.
These are communities that rely almost entirely on domesticated animals,
rather than domesticated plants, and they tend to be nomadic
because one of the most efficient ways of using these domesticated animals
is to let them graze over a wide area.
And to do that, you have to travel with them.
It's often being supposed that pastoral nomadism developed in parallel with agriculture
and at the same time, but evidence that's accumulated in recent decades
makes it very clear that this is not true.
Pastoral nomadism evolved later as farmers in regions well adapted to grazing
but less well adapted to crop growing began to introduce the new technologies
of the Secondary Products Revolution.
It became possible to extract more resources, more energy to get more value
out of domesticated livestock,
and eventually this made it possible to build an entire life way
around the exploitation of domesticated livestock.
And it seems that what happened is livestock farmers in sort of marginal farming lands,
perhaps on the border between modern Russia and Kazakhstan,
began grazing their animals over large areas, developing larger herds,
and eventually becoming more or less nomadic.
And think what this means.
Humans can't digest grass, but these domesticated animals can.
So suddenly you have a technology that allows you to extract the energy
in the grass, in the great steplands of Eurasia,
and all the way down into the Savannah lands of East Africa.
So pastoral nomadism opens up vast new terrain for exploitation.
And we can detect the presence of pastoral nomads in the Eurasian steppes
in part by the appearance of burial mounds or kurgans.
You don't find villages, what you find is burial mounds.
And the earliest clear evidence of pastoral nomadism comes from the steppes
on the border between Russia and Kazakhstan, and dates to about 5,000 to 6,000 years ago.
Okay, this innovation would lay the basis, eventually,
for the great pastoral nomadic empire such as those of Genghis Khan.
Now, I've spent too much time on pastoral nomadism because it fascinates me so much.
So let's talk briefly about irrigation. It's simpler to understand.
This is the second great group of innovations.
Irrigation means artificially introducing water to regions with limited natural rainfall,
but fertile soils and plenty of sunlight.
You find such regions particularly in hot climates,
arid climates with alluvial plains,
that is to say regions that are regularly flooded by large rivers
that bring fertile silts down with them.
And Mesopotamia is such a region.
In fact, literally Mesopotamia means the land between the rivers,
the rivers being the Tigris and Euphrates.
So irrigation, once it's introduced, can have a huge impact on populations.
Suddenly, you have these fertile soils, but no water to farm with.
Now, if you introduce irrigation, suddenly you can farm them
and you can get huge yields and sudden increases in population.
And that's why irrigation has been crucial to the emergence of agrarian civilizations.
Now, how did these innovations prepare the way for the evolution of agrarian civilization in Mesopotamia?
Archaeologists have lavished a lot of attention on Mesopotamia,
so here we can track this process probably more clearly than anywhere else.
We saw that the first farming communities appeared in the fertile crescent,
a ring of highland around Mesopotamia, around the edges of Mesopotamia,
and here they could use rainfall.
There was enough rainfall for simple forms of farming.
But eventually, some of them began to migrate down into the arid lowlands.
By 9,000 years ago, you have some farming communities already beginning to descend
for the highlands of the Zagros Mountains, east of modern Iraq,
and settling the arid plains, but as yet only in regions where there's enough water for crops.
Then they begin to push further into the arid lands,
and some begin to develop very simple forms of irrigation.
By 8,000 years ago, there were many villages of irrigation farmers
settled along the major rivers and tributaries north of modern Baghdad.
Some of them are already beginning to build substantial canal systems,
but they still rely largely on semi-natural forms of irrigation.
The site of Chogarmami to the east of modern Baghdad is a good illustration of this.
The village lies between two tributaries,
so that you could divert water to flood the fields and then drain it away again.
And the village may have had 1,000 people living in it.
And then things began to speed up.
By 7,000 years ago, villages are multiplying, particularly along the Euphrates,
even in the lands to the south of Baghdad now, in the lands of what would later be known as Sumer.
Villages of the so-called Ubaid culture appear.
Sometimes in small clusters near larger settlements,
some of which have as many as 4,000 people, and we can think of these as small towns.
They dug canals, sometimes several kilometers long.
They grew barley and dates, and they kept cattle and sheep.
They also fished and caught water birds.
As the archaeologist Brian Fagan points out,
these settlements must have depended on organized communal efforts.
There must have been quite a lot of politics going on and quite a lot of leadership.
You needed to get raw materials to build houses,
from the plentiful supplies of sand, clay, palm trees and reeds between the rivers.
But digging even tiny canals required a lot of effort.
The back-breaking task of clearing silt from clogged rivers
was hard work and took a lot of organization.
So we see larger communities appearing, more elaborate irrigation, more organization.
And eventually, rising productivity is going to encourage population growth
and the emergence of more and more of these medium-sized towns.
And as population increases throughout Mesopotamia,
particularly in the arid lands watered by the Tigris and Euphrates,
you start finding more integration between these towns and communities.
We find trade goods being moved over large areas.
Obsidian from atal Huyuk in southern Turkey appears throughout much of Mesopotamia.
You find also that clay apotry types of particular kinds,
such as Halafian, where appear over very large areas traded over 600 miles or more.
Now, all of these processes mesh together.
Populations are growing. They're becoming more interdependent.
The technologies are becoming more productive.
And it's all of these processes together that will eventually lay the foundation
for the quite rapid appearance in Sumer towards the end of the 4th millennium BC,
just over 5,000 years ago of the first agrarian civilizations.
And we'll discuss that in the next lecture. Thank you.
One of the curious features of big history is that agrarian civilizations seem to arrive so late.
I've had colleagues who've been shocked at how late they arrive in my big history course.
We're now up to lecture 30, and finally we get to agrarian civilizations.
But I do hope that you're getting a sense of how the much wider perspective of big history
can help put very familiar subjects in new contexts.
What we're really seeing is how the familiar topics of history,
and particularly of world history, are not just given.
The big history perspective forces us to see that very clearly.
They too had a history, and the history had a history, and the history had a history, and so on.
So what we're really doing is setting them in a context
consisting of all these multiple scales that we deal with in big history.
Now, in a sense, in a minor way, that's what we've been doing in the last few lectures.
Now, we look at the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations.
And we focus on southern Mesopotamia, where the process has been studied with peculiar thoroughness,
which means that we can see the process probably more clearly than anywhere else in the world.
So, how did the buildup of human and material resources that I described in the last lecture
generate the first tribute-taking states, the first agrarian civilizations, and the first real cities?
All of these developments occurred with surprising suddenness just before 3000 BCE,
in the last few centuries before the turn of the millennium in Sumer at the southern edge of Mesopotamia.
Now, I'm afraid that here we have one more threshold.
Many components are suddenly arranged into something new.
This is something that happens each time we get a new level of complexity.
The first cities, the first tribute-taking states, and the first agrarian civilizations.
Now, we're going to focus on Sumer for the present, but we'll look at other areas in the next lecture.
So, back to Sumer, although there's just one more bit of business I must deal with before we actually go to Sumer.
And that concerns chronology and the labels we use for chronology.
So far, it's usually been enough if I give a date to describe dates as before the present.
And I've used the archaeologists' terminology of BP before present.
We saw that this is how radiometric dates are conventionally given.
Technically, it means before 1950, but that's not going to worry us most of the time.
There's a sort of intuitive logic to such dates, but once we get into an era where we have documents,
it makes much more sense to start using a more familiar way of dating events.
And that is the convention that used to use the terminology of BC and AD.
Now, of course, that comes ultimately from the Christian calendar.
BC means before Christ, AD means Anno Domini, or Year of the Lord.
And what I'm going to use is a slightly modified terminology, BCE or CE.
BCE means before the common era, CE means in the common era.
The system is essentially identical, of course, to the older system.
The only reason for using it, and I'm not making a very strong argument for this,
is that it's become the convention in writing on world history,
and it is just slightly less tightly tied to the traditions of a particular culture, European, Christian culture.
So that's the terminology I'm going to use from now on, dates BCE and CE.
And just remember the simple rule, to convert from dates BP into the system we'll use from now on,
you deduct 2,000 years.
So 4,000 BCE is 6,000 BP, OK?
That's more or less where we're going to start.
So let's now imagine ourselves transported to Sumer, southern Mesopotamia, near the Persian Gulf,
about 6,000 years ago.
So we're in Sumer, 6,000 years ago, in 4,000 BCE, remember?
Sumer before this period was a swampy region, it was a delta region,
it was the delta of the Tigris and Euphrates.
Andrew Sherrod described it as a backwater, as just an area of mud.
People, he writes, did live there in grass huts and using clay sickles,
but it was not the most lively spot on earth.
However, that would begin to change from about 4,000 BCE,
and the fact that trade networks passed through the region may have been a crucial part of it.
As Andrew Sherrod has argued, the fact that there were abundant trades far to the north
and probably in lands to the south meant this was a region that traders passed through.
That may have encouraged the growth of communities in this region.
And so did another thing, the fact that beneath those swamps there were very rich soils.
And eventually the region started to dry out, so climate change plays a crucial role in the story.
As the swamp lands of southern Sumer begin to dry out,
this turns into a region that can potentially support large numbers of people,
and it begins to attract immigrants.
So during the next thousand years, from 4,000 to 3,000 BCE,
and again that's from 6,000 to 5,000 years ago,
climates became drier.
This made it easier to farm the land as swamp lands began to dry out.
But eventually, when the drying process went too far,
it began to force more and more people to settle in the regions rapidly growing towns,
as region after region became not just dry, but positively arid.
And so gradually you find that people are forced into towns,
into towns that control scarce water supplies and irrigation systems.
Another thing that may have forced them into towns may have been conflict over resources as the land dried.
So what the drying did was first attract a lot of immigrants to the south,
and then force more and more of them into towns that controlled water supplies.
So what the archaeologists see in Sumer between 4,000 BCE and 3,000 BCE
is a very rapid buildup of population,
and then quite suddenly these populations seem to move out of villages and into a series of towns.
Then 10 to 20 powerful cities appear quite quickly late in the fourth millennium,
in the centuries before 3,000 BCE.
They include Ur, Abraham's home city according to biblical tradition.
They include Oruk, Nippur, Lagash and Eridu.
Most of these towns, we can still identify them.
There are still some remains that can be excavated today.
By 3,000 BCE, the city of Oruk may have had 20 to 50,000 inhabitants.
By modern standards, 20 to 50,000 inhabitants is not a particularly impressive town.
It's a sort of medium sized, small to medium sized town.
But remember the context.
In 3,000 BCE, a town of 20 to 50,000 inhabitants
had to count as one of the densest, largest communities that had ever existed in human history.
And probably Oruk, or maybe one of its rival cities,
were almost certainly the largest communities on earth at the time.
How did people live in Oruk?
They lived in whitewashed, mudbrick houses along narrow streets.
At the centre of Oruk, on a huge artificial mound, 12 metres high,
which must have taken a lot of labour to build, stood the so-called White Temple.
This was dedicated to the goddess Inana, a goddess of both love and war.
She has some interesting similarities to the Egyptian goddess Isis and the Hindu goddess Kali.
And it's always tempting in these situations to think there may have been some cultural diffusion
between these different regions.
Inana is also associated with the planet Venus.
Around the main part of the city, there was a massive wall, sometimes more than 7 metres tall.
The Epic of Gilgamesh is probably the world's oldest recorded epic.
And what it describes is the epic adventures of a king of Oruk
who probably, if he really existed, reigned from about 2750 BCE.
The versions we have today were written down only in 1200 BCE.
But it still may capture something of the city's appearance in the reign of King Gilgamesh.
This is early in the third millennium BCE.
I have to say, actually I have to take a moment just to say,
we've, in this course, we've had to work from indirect evidence so long
that it's really fun to be able to use documentary descriptions at last.
So, here we go.
Now at last, written sources give us the sort of sharp focus that historians are used to.
And we can begin to actually name people and name places
and we can actually begin to sort of think our way into an entire world.
Here's the description from Gilgamesh of the city.
Gilgamesh had restored the Holy Aeana Temple and the massive wall of Oruk,
which no city on earth can equal.
See how its ramparts gleam like copper in the sun.
Climb the stone staircase, more ancient than the mind can imagine.
Approach the Temple of Inanna, sacred to Ishtar, that's another name to Inanna.
A temple that no king has equaled in size or beauty.
Walk on the wall of Oruk, says the poem.
Follow its course around the city, inspect its mighty foundations, examine its brickwork,
how masterfully it is built.
Observe the land it encloses, the palm trees, the gardens, the orchards,
the glorious palaces and temples, the shops and marketplaces, the houses, the public squares.
This is one of the oldest literary texts we have and I hope you'll agree,
it at least creates the illusion of quite a vivid picture of a place.
The modern description is a description in general of a number of Sumerian cities
and it comes from the writing of an archaeologist, Susan Pollock.
Now she has a long description of these cities and I'm going to just cherry pick some of the nicer parts.
She writes, the area inside a city's wall was densely built up, but not in a uniform manner.
She gives a wonderful sense of the sort of chaos of some of these early cities.
There's only occasional evidence in Sumer for systematic city planning
and most areas of cities probably grew organically, in other words, ad hoc, higgledy-piggledy.
Streets varied from narrow lanes to broader routes two to three meters wide
and served not only as passageways but also as convenient places in which to dump garbage.
Abandoned buildings were used as receptacles for garbage disposal along with cleared areas where no buildings stood.
In general, we're going to see this over and over again.
Early cities, the problem of waste disposal was very rarely handled well.
She writes that large quantities of waste material were discarded at the edge of the city
perhaps in an attempt to organize refuse disposal.
Open space, occupied houses as well as abandoned ones and garbage dumps were also used sometimes
and this actually to a modern ear is quite shocking as places to dispose of the dead,
sometimes casually and sometimes informal burials.
The description goes on to describe how these cities to some extent had a slightly rural feel in them.
For example, you could find small livestock, you could find some pigs, you could find gardens.
She also describes, gives a nice description of the sort of vibrant, noisy quality of these cities.
The dense architecture, narrow lanes and wide range of activities in diverse population
must have made these cities vibrant, noisy, smelly, sometimes bewildering and dangerous,
but also exciting places.
Houses actually goes on to describe the architecture.
We usually constructed a butting one another over time as the composition and fortunes of a family changed.
Walls might be knocked down or erected, doors blocked or created, additions constructed or portions sold.
In many ways the houses she describes also could be recognized today.
She writes many of them had flat roofs with access to them by staircase or ladder.
Just as today in the Near East, inhabitants of ancient Mesopotamian communities may have used roofs
for a variety of activities including sleeping in summer, drying items and other tasks that required a large layout space.
And one more detail that actually strikes a very modern ring.
Around the edge of these cities, archaeologists have found evidence of sort of shanty towns
as immigrants from the countryside tried to make a living often without great success in the big cities.
So I hope that gives you some sort of feeling for the quality of life in these early cities.
Now these, we even have a map by the way of one of these cities, Nippur.
The map dates from about 1500 but it is the first street map we have in world history.
It shows the city's walls, its gardens, its canals as well as a large temple complex.
Now these early cities that appear quite suddenly in Sumer were the densest
and most complex communities that had ever existed.
Uruk's 20 to 50,000 people lived in just 2.5 square kilometers.
That's an area that would have supported, it could barely have supported a single individual
using the foraging technologies of the Paleolithic era.
So this is an astonishingly dense congregation of people.
Unlike the foraging communities or the villages of the early agrarian era,
these dense communities are not self-sufficient.
Cities have never been self-sufficient and they couldn't support themselves.
Many of their inhabitants were simply not farmers.
They depended for getting food and other resources on relations of control and exchange with nearby peasants.
So though some of the population could have been farmers travelling outside the city during the day to farm their lands,
for the most part these cities had to control nearby hinterlands.
So a city almost by definition is a seat of power.
And what this meant was forcing the peasants of nearby villages to supply them with goods,
sometimes in return for a degree of protection or help with the maintenance of irrigation systems,
often simply by force.
These cities also traded along Mesopotamia's great rivers and across the seas,
partly because this was indeed an arid land by now and many resources including stone were in quite short supply and wood.
Now, I've talked a lot about complexity in emergent properties,
so let's try and look at some of the emergent properties that appeared quite quickly as the first agrarian civilizations evolved.
First cities and institutionalized power.
The inhabitants of the first cities had many needs that could only be met by appointing powerful rulers.
So these places were seats of power.
And that's why I've argued they include some of the first tribute-taking states ever to appear.
There are also sites of specialization and a division of labor.
That specialization and a division of labor, these count as emergent properties of agrarian civilizations.
What I mean by this is that in the village communities of the early agrarian era,
basically everyone did the same thing, everyone more or less, with very minor exceptions, was a farmer.
And probably in the villages of Mesopotamia this continued to be true.
In cities it's no longer true. Many city dwellers are specialists.
They don't grow food, they're dependent on markets for essential supplies
and therefore they need to be in an environment where states can police and organize markets.
There's a document from Sumer from about 2500 BC called the Standard Professions List.
It mentions many different professions including, and I'll just list some of them,
soldiers, farmers, priests, gardeners, cooks, scribes, bakers, coppersmiths, jewelers,
even snake charmers, and even the profession of king.
Now markets were vital also because Sumer, as we've seen, lacked basic materials such as wood.
So rulers supported merchants who traded within what we'll call a world system.
This is a terminology we'll use more later on.
That is a large area of several interlinked agrarian civilizations
between which there was a lot of trade.
And this world system reached to Egypt, to North India, to Central Asia, and to Anatolia.
We can tell this because we find in the archaeology of all of these regions goods that come from Sumer.
Another emergent property, warfare, linked with power.
Cities needed defensive walls and irrigation systems.
These could be built and maintained only by powerful rulers who could organize huge labor levies.
Rulers controlled labor to some extent probably through slavery, fairly coercive forms of control, or corve.
In other words, obligations imposed on free people to occasionally supply labor instead of resources as tributes.
Forced labor was important in all early agrarian civilizations for a very simple ecological reason.
In societies without modern energy supplies, human beings themselves are the most exploitable sources of energy, apart from domesticated cattle.
Humans were, from the point of view of rulers, living batteries.
That incidentally explains why throughout the era of agrarian civilizations, slavery was such a powerful institution.
If you keep slaves, you have supplies of living energy, and they also happened to be reasonably intelligent as well.
So, humans were stores of usable energy for warfare, excavation, building, ditch digging, and so on.
In several of the cities of Sumer, archaeologists have found mass-produced, very basic beveled rim bowls.
And these were interpreted as evidence that the government was providing rations for huge levies of workers or slaves.
Now, in these cities, another emergent property we can describe it as, we find more organized forms of religion very closely linked to institutionalized forms of power.
To maintain the favor of the gods, particularly if you want to maintain the favor of very powerful gods that can look after not just an individual person or household, but an entire city,
it was necessary to build and supply temples such as the Aeana temple at Uruk, which was dedicated to Inana.
Indeed, in many of these Sumerian cities, there are powerful hints that the first real rulers, late in the fourth millennium, may actually been priests of some kind.
It's certainly striking that the first very large buildings we find in them tend to be temples rather than palaces.
One more emergent property, bureaucracies. Tributes, hierarchies, writing and armies, actually these all sort of tend to go together.
Rulers ruled through literate bureaucracies, powerful taxation systems, and paid armies.
These are features that would reappear in all tribute-taking states. Tributes. Let's look at tributes first.
Just as farmers extracted what we can think of as ecological rents from their domesticated crops and animals, by which I mean that in return for protection, they take a part of each crop or each herd,
in return for helping the crop or herd to reproduce next year. In the same way, rulers of Sumerian city-states collected resources from their subjects.
And we call these tributes because, like modern taxes, they were raised at least in part through the threat of coercion.
And we find hierarchies and classes. New hierarchies emerge with the wealthy and powerful at the top, and slaves and war captives at the bottom.
Here is William McNeill's description of Sumer's class system. We've met William McNeill before.
He is one of the doyens of modern world history. And in a recent world history that he wrote with his son, John McNeill, he writes,
Sumerian cities comprised three distinct elements. A group of privileged citizens farmed irrigated land nearby and headed substantial households comprising relatives, a staff of dependent field workers, and a few imported slaves.
Outside the walls, on the riverbank, a harbour community accommodated merchants, caravan personnel, traders, and sailors who came and went, bringing necessary imports to the city like timber, metals, and other precious materials,
while exporting woolen textiles, date wine, and other manufacturers in exchange.
The most distinctive element of Sumerian cities, however, he writes, was the presence of one or more divine households or temples.
These households were much larger than private ones, but the distribution of duties and income among members conformed in essentials to the way tasks and rewards were arranged within private households.
And in a rule, he'd have been referring to the Aana Temple of Inana.
Another crucial emergent property is bureaucracies and writing, the writing on which they were founded.
How did writing emerge?
It seems to have emerged in, we'll see this in all agrarian civilizations, it seems to have emerged out of accounting.
So this is what seems to be the logic for the emergence of writing, and to explain, and this seems to be the explanation for the odd fact that writing appears with agrarian civilizations.
We've seen a sudden buildup of populations and a sudden buildup of resources.
So suddenly we have rulers who control large amounts of resources, large amounts of people, but also large warehouses full of stuff, full of grain, full of precious metals that are being traded, full of stored tributes of various kinds.
Now if they've got these large amounts of stuff, we can call them treasuries in a later terminology, they clearly needed some method of keeping track of this stuff.
If you have only a small amount of stuff, you don't need to keep track of it, but if you're really building up large amounts, you need to keep track of it.
So suddenly, rulers need accounting, and it's these accounting methods that eventually evolve into the first writing systems.
Now how it did so varied from civilization to civilization, but this is what happened in Sumer.
At first it seems accounts were kept using tokens that sort of represented objects.
Now this could be a bit cumbersome, you could actually have to accumulate a lot of these tokens to represent a lot of objects.
Then it became common to cut marks in clay using wedge shaped papyrus stalks to represent objects such as sheep or units of grain.
And very often you can do sort of little cartoon like drawings to do this.
Now that's accounting, and it's quite easy to see how you can develop quite a useful accounting system in this way.
But how do you move from accounting systems to a written language that can convey, say, the epic of Gilgamesh?
The crucial step here seems to be what's known as the Rebus principle.
Here's an illustration of how it worked.
The Sumerian symbol for an arrow, the cuneiform, cuneiform incidentally means wedge shaped.
If you look at cuneiform writing, you'll find that these sliced papyrus produce wedge shaped marks in clay.
So the Sumerian symbol for an arrow in cuneiform looked, of course, like an arrow.
This is easy enough to imagine.
But as it happened, the word for life, which is an abstract concept, which it's hard to know how you could represent it in cuneiform or in a diagram.
The word for life happened to sound almost exactly like the word for arrow, and the word sounded something like t.
Now what this meant was that the symbol for an arrow could be used for the more abstract idea of life.
And this seems to be the crucial move to take you from what begins as an accounting system to a written language that can be used as richly, or almost as richly as spoken language.
By early in the third millennium, such changes meant that writing could record chronicles and even poetry.
And because now, finally, for the first time in human history, we have poetry, I can't resist citing an example of an early Sumerian lullaby.
These sort of documents suddenly allow us to feel that we're really getting into the world and psyche of humans who lived many millennia ago.
Now, don't correct my Sumerian pronunciation. I'm just going to try and give you some feeling of how this goes.
Usan ghanu, usan ghanu, usan ghanu ki dumungashe, usakulu ki dumungashe, i bad badani ukunib.
Now that's just the first four lines. And it means something like this.
Come sleep, come sleep, come to my son, hurry sleep to my son, put to sleep his restless eyes.
I think it's wonderful the way that writing and documents can take us into a world in a way we've not been able to do before.
Okay, let's move on. More emergent properties. Armies.
With such huge resources, rulers could hire paid enforcers or armies.
This is the crucial step from power from below to power from above.
Much early Sumerian writing describes wars fought by well-organized armies and a wonderful Sumerian mosaic of 2600 BCE,
which is known as the Standard of Ur, depicts the army of Ur with its donkey-drawn chariots and large convoys of captive.
It's really worth looking at.
And another crucial emergent property is monumental architecture.
Huge buildings or structures that are designed to impress your enemies but also to impress your subjects.
They're one of the keys to statehood.
The royal tombs of Ur from the late fourth millennium show the spectacular riches that rulers could accumulate
and the extraordinary expense lavished on the creation of awe-inspiring tombs.
As in the royal burials of many agrarian civilizations, servants and relatives of the king were often killed and buried to serve the king in afterlife.
And from late in the third millennium BCE, the typical form of monumental architecture in Mesopotamia would become the ziggurat,
a stepped pyramid-like temple dedicated to the gods of which the best preserved today is that of Ur.
The Tower of Babel has often been interpreted as a reference to the ziggurat of Babylon, which was dedicated to the god Marduk,
and the Babylonian word Babili meant Gate of God.
Now, two more significant things occur about 1000 years after the appearance of the first states,
and I'll describe these just very briefly.
The first is the appearance late in the third millennium under a rule called Sargon of the first multi-city state,
the first imperial state in the region, and it's based on a city called Akkad in northern Sumeria.
We actually have busts of Sargon.
This is one of the first great rulers whose names we know.
And finally, there's another crucial development that would recur in many agrarian civilizations,
and I'll call this ecological overreach.
The cities of Sumeria frequently experience catastrophic floods,
and these are the basis of the stories of biblical floods, but there was an even greater danger.
In around 2000 BCE, there's a massive crash of populations in Sumer,
and eventually it destroys Sumerian civilization, and civilization will drift north in Mesopotamia.
The fundamental cause seems to be an over-irrigation that led to an increase in salts of various kinds in the soils,
and then reduced the fertility of the soils, sharply reducing productivity of agriculture,
leading to a sharp decline in production, and eventually undermining Sumerian civilization.
This was a sign that these wonderful, complex structures that appeared were also extremely fragile,
and we see this is true of most agrarian civilizations.
So, voila, a whole series of linked features have come together to establish the first agrarian civilizations
with all their complexity and also their fragility.
Thank you.
Lecture 31
Agrarian Civilizations in Other Regions
Lecture 30
Lecture 30 described the appearance of the first agrarian civilizations in Sumer.
What I'd like to ask now is how typical that process was, and how typical Sumer was of agrarian civilizations.
If we're going to deal with the idea of agrarian civilizations as a larger category of human societies,
we need to try and get a quite precise idea of the degree of difference between them and the degree of similarity between them.
So, we can't just assume that Sumer was typical, though I will argue that in many ways it was.
Indeed, in a remarkable number of ways it was.
And I'll argue that these similarities are easier to see through the wide-angle lens of big history
than through the narrower lens that's normally used in historical scholarship.
Nevertheless, having said that, it's also important not to overlook the many significant differences that existed between particular civilizations.
And what I want to do in this lecture is note some of the more significant differences between civilizations
and the slightly different ways in which they appeared in region after region.
The nature of historical scholarship has tended to ensure that describing these differences,
the specific features of particular regions of agrarian civilization,
has been one of the dominant preoccupations of historians.
Partly, this sort of scholarship has been driven by forms of nationalism.
The history profession has been shaped profoundly by nationalism as it became more professional in the 19th century.
And what states did, of course, what states expected of historians was that they would write nationalist histories.
They would write about our people.
And so this is one of the powerful things that steered historians towards the idea of describing particular civilizations in their own terms.
But there's another factor as well that's driven historians in this direction.
That's the typical structures of the history profession since history became a professional scholarly discipline later in the 19th century.
Historians tend to train specialists in particular areas, either their own country or some other country.
And there's a lot of skills and techniques to be acquired in order to become a specialist.
You have to learn the language, you have to get familiar with the archives in a particular region.
So if you're a Chinese historian or say a Russian historian, you've already invested a lot in that civilization, that culture.
And this tends to steer historians towards questions about the distinctive nature of the particular civilization they're looking at.
So in this course we're going to be trying to resist the sort of gravitational pull of these questions and stand back and look at the general features.
But meanwhile, let's try and get a sense of the important differences that did exist drawing on this extraordinarily rich body of scholarship that has been built up in the last century or so.
So here we'll touch on some of the more striking differences between civilizations.
Agrarian civilizations we've seen were constructed using the huge human and material resources generated in regions of flourishing agriculture.
So one of the factors that undoubtedly led to differences between different civilizations was the precise geography of the regions in which they developed and the precise nature of the types of agriculture on which they were founded.
We've seen that regions of flourishing agriculture in general were a bit like the hotspots created by stars.
But as with stars, the precise nature of the end product could depend on the size and nature and the precise nature of the raw materials from which they were created.
Each region of agrarian civilization, therefore, was shaped by the particular type of agriculture that emerged and the geography of the region in which it emerged.
Now there's one important exception to the types of rules we've seen.
And I'd like to describe that first before looking at some of the main areas of agrarian civilization.
And this is tropical areas such as Papua New Guinea and perhaps the Amazon Basin.
Areas where agriculture may have emerged sometimes quite early as in Papua New Guinea but was based on root crops.
That is to say on crops that couldn't be stored as easily as you could store grains such as rices or wheats or maize.
The result in these regions was that the transition from flourishing agricultural systems to regions of agricultural civilization seemed at some stage to get blocked.
Here is W. H. McNeill's description of how this blockage occurred and this helps us understand why so few agrarian civilizations appeared in tropical regions or in regions such as Papua New Guinea
and why in Papua New Guinea, despite 10,000 years of agriculture, you don't get an agrarian civilization.
This is from the book he wrote with his son John McNeill called The Human Web.
This is what McNeill writes on agriculture in tropical regions.
Even if tropical gardening, that is the growing of root crops using techniques of horticulture,
anti-dated grain fields by thousands of years and it certainly did in some regions,
it remained comparatively insignificant for human history as a whole.
That is because tropical gardeners leave roots and fruits where they grow until ready for consumption.
Grains that ripen all at once must be harvested and stored and the consequent availability of concentrated supplies of food in farmer's storage bins and jars made the rise of states and cities possible.
Priests and soldiers could demand and get part of the grain harvest from those who had raised it as a price for protection from supernatural and human harm.
But without storage, massive and regular transfer of food from farmers to city folk was impracticable.
Inhibiting social and occupational differentiation, consequently he concludes,
the specialized skills of urban life could not arise on the basis of tropical gardening, however productive it might be.
So this is the one great exception to the rule that where agriculture developed,
it tended to accumulate to build up large populations and provide the basis for the eventual appearance of agrarian civilizations.
Now I want to go on and look at six different areas where agrarian civilizations appeared fairly early.
These are areas where agrarian civilizations seemed to have appeared either completely independently of influences elsewhere or perhaps under very limited influence from other regions.
I'll begin with the Afro-Eurasian World Zone.
Here what is striking is that agrarian civilizations emerged along fertile river systems in four different regions.
We've already seen this happening in Mesopotamia.
Now we've seen why fertile river systems were so strategic.
When irrigated, such regions could support the rapid development of very large populations.
They could generate population explosions as soon as you introduce viable systems of irrigation.
Let's begin with Sumer where we were in the last lecture.
We've seen how Sumerian civilization arose in the Euphrates Tigris Basin.
In the form of a cluster of competing city-states all dependent on irrigation.
Now what's striking is that it doesn't actually arise in those areas where rainfall agriculture is possible.
Here you see a very slow, gentle build-up of population.
It arises in the south where you get a very sudden population explosion caused by the fact that irrigation is introduced into a fairly arid region.
So it's the sudden population explosion that seems to have been crucial here.
And these rivers are also crucial because as we've seen they tend to bring silts down and generate very fertile soils.
So in this situation you can suddenly get very highly productive agriculture.
Here priests and temples seem to have played an important role in the emergence of tribute-taking states.
And states emerged primarily in the form of small city-states in the third millennium.
Though by the late third millennium secular rulers such as Gilgamesh have become more and more important.
And eventually by about just before 2000 BCE we find an overall ruler Sargon ruling several of these cities, in fact ruling the whole of Sumer.
So that's the broad pattern we've seen in Sumer.
Now let's look at Sudan and Egypt.
In modern Sudan and Egypt an agrarian civilization appears at about the same time based on the remarkable natural irrigation system of the Nile River.
The annual floods of the Nile, which is probably the world's longest river, brought, I say probably incidentally because there's competition with the Amazon for this title,
but it's certainly one of the world's longest rivers.
The annual floods brought nutritious silts from the south and sort of spread them over the lands to either side of the river.
After about 5000 BCE the Sahara Desert which before that had been a lot wetter than it is today and had supported quite a large number of small farming populations began to get drier
and people squeezed out of the Sahara and into the Nile Valley.
So as in southern Sumer populations appear to have built up quite rapidly and at least one of the factors involved was climate change.
But in this case, unlike Sumer, populations grew not in tiny concentrated cities but in a long ribbon of villages along the Nile.
Wheaton Barley is introduced probably from Mesopotamia about 5000 BCE.
They both flourish as did watermelons and other crops from Sudan, from the south.
And by 4000 BCE we have village communities stretching from the Nile Delta in the north to Nubia in modern Sudan.
Then small kingdoms begin to appear.
These were then quite rapidly united late in the fourth millennium into a single large state.
This is a process that happened much quicker here than in Sumer.
In just before 3000 BCE and perhaps 3100 BCE a southern ruler called Menez or in some sources Nama unifies the region north of Aswan into a single empire.
If you go to the Egyptian Museum in the centre of Cairo and I had the chance to visit that just two years ago.
This is the great museum that also contains the remains of Pharaoh Tutankhamun.
You can see the Nama Palette. It's a beautiful engraved slab of stone with images and hieroglyphic writing.
And it was probably engraved at the time of Nama.
It shows the Pharaoh very typically for this sort of royal propaganda smiting his enemies.
Cities were less important in Egypt than in Mesopotamia though Menez did establish a capital at Memphis.
There were cities south of modern Cairo.
So here power was based on a long almost continuous ribbon of irrigated villages extending along the Nile.
This was not strictly a city but it was a large area of almost continuous settlement.
A sort of almost city, a colossal assemblage of many closely linked villages.
Unlike the rulers of Sumer who seemed to have been either priests or kings, Egypt's pharaohs from very early on seemed to have been treated as gods.
Their tombs, the pyramids reflect their high status.
When I went to Egypt for the first time I had the chance to see the pyramids at Giza and I have to say that they were far more impressive seen directly than any picture I had seen.
And they really are awe inspiring.
If you want to inspire awe in your population it's a wonderful way of doing it.
So if they can awe a modern visitor they must have been astonishing to contemporaries.
The largest, the pyramid of Kyops was built between 2500 and 2600 BCE.
It used about 2.3 million limestone blocks each weighing about 2.5 tons.
Don't think of the labour involved in building this thing, it's staggering.
Despite occasional periods of political breakdown, Egyptian dynasties would rule the region for almost 2600 years.
They show remarkable stability, much more than in Sumer or Mesopotamia.
And the geography of Egypt may help explain some of its more distinctive features.
And perhaps the crucial thing here is the regularity of the Nile floods.
They may explain why Egyptian civilization avoided the sort of ecological collapse experienced in Sumer towards the end of the third millennium BCE, just around 2000 BCE and as we'll see in many other early agrarian civilizations.
Here a hieroglyphic writing system developed early, possibly under Mesopotamian influence, but it's so different that that influence can't have been overwhelming.
Here writing took the rather different form of hieroglyphics rather than the cuneiform writing of Sumer.
There were developed trading systems. The Nile was a wonderful river along which to trade. Trade winds heading south and river currents heading north made sailing up and down the river relatively easy.
And we know that Egyptian rulers sent expeditions for ivory and gold, for example, to Nubia and Punt in modern Ethiopia and also to Lebanon for its famous cedars.
We still have fine illustrations of a fleet that was sent by Hatshepsut, one of the few female pharaohs who ruled soon after 1500 BCE.
The expedition to Punt returned with many exotic goods including gold, ebony, baboons and myrrh.
So I hope that gives a very general impression of some of the distinctive features of Egyptian agrarian civilizations.
Now let's cross to the east to the Indian subcontinent.
Early in the third millennium, cities and states appear in the north of modern Pakistan and India in what has come to be known as Harappan civilization.
Here too there was a distinctive geography but once again a large fertile river system plays a crucial role.
This region was dominated by the presence of the Indus River. The Indus River brought very rich silts down from the Himalayas.
But its flooding was much less predictable than the Nile so the Induses are more dangerous river quite frankly than the Nile as the Tigris and Euphrates incidentally were also more dangerous than the Nile.
In this region too population seems to have built up quite rapidly and the appearance of the first agrarian civilization seems to have been the result of some sort of a population explosion.
By 2500 BCE in an area where there hadn't been huge populations before you quite rapidly find a lot of small towns and at least two huge cities.
These are now known as Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro. They are the best known archaeological sites in this region but there are many many other sites.
Each of these cities had probably and you'll understand that this is there's some guesswork involved here but probably it's been it's been estimated about 40,000 inhabitants making them about the same size as a rook.
And as we've seen for the time these are these are colossal megalopolises. Houses and streets were built along a grid system using prefabricated bricks.
Now here we get much more of a sense of urban planning than we do in the higgledy-piggledy streets of a place like Uruk.
The cities seem to be more spacious and more carefully planned.
We know there were water and sewage systems. There were apparently uniform systems of weights and measures.
There were also all the other things we see. Highly specialized crafts and markets and a quite significant quite significant evidence of international trade.
We know that Harappan civilization traded with Central Asia.
In fact evidence has been found of communities of Harappan merchants in Central Asia late in the third millennium and they also traded with Mesopotamia.
And again we know this because we find trade goods from these regions.
So that's one powerful reminder that none of these civilizations was entirely self-contained.
In Harappan civilization too a writing system evolved. However the Indus writing system has never been deciphered.
So our knowledge of Harappan civilization at the moment is rather rudimentary. It depends on archaeology.
We cannot read the inscriptions that survive from this region which is very frustrating.
And it limits our ability to understand how the political system worked.
The fact that there seem not to have been large palaces also makes it really hard to get a handle on how the politics of these systems worked.
So here the inability to use the written records really is extremely frustrating.
It greatly limits our understanding of aspects of this world such as its religious traditions and also its political traditions.
One of the questions we'd love to ask of Harappan civilization for example is to what extent did its traditions survive in later Indian subcontinent traditions?
For example some of the surviving sculptors from Harappan civilization seem to show figures in yoga positions. What does this mean?
The Indus Valley civilization collapsed early in the second millennium and it collapsed very rapidly indeed.
We're not absolutely certain why. It used to be thought that invasions from the north were an important part of this.
But now the tendency is to stress ecological factors.
Overpopulation may have caused ecological collapse through deforestation, erosion, flooding and desertification.
So here we have a second spectacular example of ecological overreach leading to an almost total decline of agrarian civilization in the region for many centuries.
A very powerful reminder that the complexity of agrarian civilizations like all forms of complexity may be associated with fragility.
Now let's move further east. This is the fourth region, East Asia and China.
The earliest evidence of agrarian civilizations in China emerges along the Yellow River whose fertile, lurse soils, that's L-O-E-S, were formed from dust blown in from Inner Asia.
If you go to Beijing today you'll see haze which has a lot to do with cars but the other thing it has to do with is the Gobi Desert kind of blowing in and settling in Beijing.
Agriculture along the Yellow River in northern China was highly productive but flooding was always a problem.
And as a result, finding ways of controlling water flows seems to be one of the earliest problems tackled by Chinese rulers.
Chinese traditions and written traditions go back a long way or they allude to very ancient periods.
They describe two ancient dynasties, the Xia and the Shang.
A possibly mythic King Yu was the legendary founder of the Xia dynasty and it's symptomatic that he spent a lot of his time finding ways of preventing flooding.
Cities and states, many states begin to appear along the eastern Yellow River late in the third millennium.
This is about the time when Saigon unified much of Sumer.
The Xia dynasty was probably one of several regional kingdoms but the only one to which we have written references.
Its capital at a city called Erli Tao has been recently excavated.
The Shang dynasty ruled for much of the second millennium.
Bronze metallurgy becomes important and horse-drawn chariots are used in warfare that chariots probably arrived from the west, from the steplands, maybe even further west, as well as wheat and barley.
One of the great unresolved issues in Chinese archaeology is the extent of diffusion from the far west, from Mesopotamia or perhaps even from India.
The Shang rulers controlled many cities.
They had large armies equipped with mass-produced weapons and armor and they built massive royal tombs and palaces.
So we're clearly dealing with very substantial states.
And there may have been other similar kingdoms, kingdoms of similar scale in other regions of second millennium China.
Writing emerged here too.
But here it seems to have emerged by a slightly different path from in Sumer.
It's not clear how crucial a role accountancy played.
It probably did play some role, but attempts to divine the future, attempts at divination seem to have been a crucial role here.
Shang writing appears using symbols carved on tortoise shells or other bones.
And some of these symbols can still be read today.
Here we have remarkable continuity in the writing systems.
And writing, as I said, was closely linked to divination.
One of the forms of divination involved taking a shell, heating it up, looking at the cracks and using the cracks to forecast the future.
The rituals clearly played a very important role, both in family life and in political life.
But deities and priests seem to have played a somewhat smaller role than in Mesopotamia or Egypt.
Now, this brief survey may give some sense both of the similarities and some of the more important differences between the great civilizations of Afri-Eurasia.
But of course, I'm not even pretending it can do justice to the many detailed nuances that distinguish cultural or religious life in these different regions.
Now I want to move on to the Americas.
And let me remind you that now we're crossing to an entirely separate world zone.
So the appearance of agrarian civilizations in the Americas is quite distinct.
There's no evidence at all at the moment of any form of diffusion from Afri-Eurasia.
In the Americas, agrarian civilization appears independently in two distinct regions.
We'll survey these civilizations in much more detail in lecture 37.
So here I'll just mention some of the crucial features.
The first of these two regions is Mesoamerica.
Mesoamerica includes southern Mexico and parts of Central America.
The first, let's call them incipient civilizations because there's plenty of room for debate about whether we should call these agrarian civilizations yet or not.
But they're certainly well on the way to being agrarian civilizations.
Appear among a people that archaeologists call the Olmec during the second millennium BCE.
In the first millennium BCE, we get very clear evidence of cities and states.
And the first ones appear in the Oaxaca Valley where Monte Alban is widely regarded as the first major city to appear in the Americas.
Incidentally, I'll come back and talk about Olmec in a later lecture.
They are absolutely fascinating and they produce these wonderful basalt heads that you will have seen.
Okay, back to the first millennium BCE.
This is when the first clear evidence appears of agrarian civilizations in the Oaxaca Valley.
By the first millennium CE, that is to say we're about between 2000 and 1500 years ago, there were cities and states throughout much of Mesoamerica.
In this region, great river valleys appear to have played a less important role than in the great civilizations of Afro-Eurasia.
Though here too in each region, you can identify techniques that allowed agricultural productivity to rise.
These included the clearing of forest lands, particularly in the regions that would become the heartlands of Mayan civilization in the Yucatan later on.
And they also included the planting of crops in artificial swamp lands.
This is a quite distinctive American form of irrigation and this would provide the basis for the rapid population growth around what later became the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan within the last millennium.
So that's Mesoamerica and we're going to look at Mesoamerican civilization in much more detail later on.
Finally in the Andes, state cities, state systems emerged in the first millennium BCE along the arid coasts of Peru and up into the highlands.
Along the Andes, in this region, the crucial thing seems to have been the linking by trade and through political systems of different ecological regions.
And along the arid coasts of Peru, there were abundant fisheries.
In the Andean uplands around Lake Titicaca, for example, you could grow maize, potato and quinoa.
And here anthropologists argue that it's the flows of wealth and trade between these regions that generated the commercial flows and the energy flows on which the first agrarian civilizations were formed.
Exchanges of crops and other goods between lowland and upland regions therefore laid the foundations for the first large empires.
And the first really large empire in this region is probably the Inca Empire which flourished in the 15th and 16th century CE.
And finally, let's note the negative. In other words, let's note where agrarian civilizations didn't appear.
Above all, the fact that they don't appear in the Australasian zone.
Papua New Guinea had agriculture. It might have supported flourishing populations except, as we've seen, its agriculture was based on root crops.
And in Australia, you never get agriculture until it's brought there by European migrants in the 18th century.
Now we'll see in a later lecture that forms of intensification certainly occurred here.
The trajectory even in Australia is towards intensification, but you don't get agriculture, you don't get agrarian civilizations.
Okay, this brief tour, I hope, of the earliest agrarian civilizations has hinted at some of their variety, but we've seen there were also striking similarities.
And I'm going to explore those more carefully in the next lecture. Thank you.
Lecture 32. The World That Agrarian Civilizations Made
The previous two lectures described the emergence of agrarian civilizations in several different regions.
And we saw that they had some distinctive features. Now what we're going to do is focus once more on their similarities.
We want to understand agrarian civilizations as a distinctive phenomenon in human history, one of the emergent phenomena, if you like, generated in the course of human history.
Such phenomena can tell us a lot about our nature as a species, which is why it's important to stand back and try to see them clearly and not get too tangled up in the specific details of specific civilizations.
Why were all agrarian civilizations so similar, despite the limited contacts between them particularly early on in the era of agrarian civilizations?
It's very important to appreciate that the similarities between them, and there are a lot, as we'll see, are in fact odd.
Why should humans not have developed, for example, utterly different types of communities, as each region went its own merry way, so that we'd have seen absolutely no similarities between human history and different parts of the world?
What pressures might have steered human history in different regions along loosely similar parts?
Of course, the question is particularly striking if you contrast the Afro-Eurasian and American zones, because at present we have no evidence of any significant contact between these regions.
So as with the history of agriculture, this odd simultaneity suggests very powerfully that though our gifts as a species did not rigidly determine the course of human history,
what they did do was they tended to nudge it in distinctive directions, and very loosely we can even define the nature of that direction.
Collective learning ensured that over time humans would control more and more resources.
That would allow populations to grow. That would allow for denser and inevitably more complex types of communities.
Now once these more complex, denser communities have emerged, people in quite different parts of the world will likely to find themselves facing many of the same challenges.
How to organise large groups so as to achieve collective goals, goals they all shared?
How to prevent excessive conflict within and between groups?
How to defend themselves when conflict was unavoidable?
How to deal with garbage? How to deal with disease and so on?
All these problems were bound to emerge once denser, more complex communities appeared.
And the fact that the challenges were rather similar may explain why there are so many interesting similarities in the solutions that humans came up with quite independently in different regions.
So the many striking similarities between agrarian civilisations, even where there was no significant contacts, count as one of the most interesting and important factors about human history.
Because they provide powerful reasons for thinking that human history is in some sense directional, that it was shaped by large general factors that you can only see if you look at human history on a large scale.
And in the next few lectures we'll be looking at some of these similar features and trends.
This lecture concentrates on some of the general structural features of the 4000 year era that was dominated by the presence of agrarian civilisations.
Instead of discussing each civilisation in turn, we'll discuss these large features that they all seem to have shared.
As Robert Wright puts it, if we relax our vision and let the details go fuzzy, then a larger picture comes into focus.
As the centuries fly by, civilisations may come and go, but civilisation flourishes, growing in scope and complexity.
Now let me take a little time out to be clear about some definitions and labels.
Though labels for eras and types of societies are inevitably artificial, we need them.
Because to understand the past and particularly to see the large patterns that we look for in big history, we have to break the past into manageable chunks.
Now remember that we're using two linked labels for the epoch from 3000 BCE to about 1000 CE.
Essentially they're synonyms. One is the later agrarian era and the other is the era of agrarian civilisations.
If I use one of these labels, I'm implying the other. They mean the same thing.
The later agrarian era, or era of agrarian civilisations, was dominated. It was the era dominated by agrarian civilisations.
And agrarian civilisations we've seen are large networked regions with cities.
It's the word cities, incidentally, that explains the word civilisations.
Civilisations is related to the Latin word for citizen and tribute taking states.
And all of this is sustained by the labour of millions of peasants or small farmers.
Now there's a second piece of terminology we need to clarify, although we've used it already, and that's the idea of world zones.
Before the modern era, human history played out in four separate world zones.
These had virtually no contact with each other, though within the zones there was at least some degree of contact right across them.
So it was as if human history took place on four separate planets.
Now this we've seen is a direct result of the fact that geologically speaking, we live in an era of the planet's history when the continental plates are scattered.
Scattered over the surface of the earth. So that's what generates this parallel history in different world zones.
And it's the parallels between the different histories of different world zones that raise some of the deepest questions about the driving forces of human history.
Now let me just briefly summarise some of the main features of each of these zones.
The zones incidentally existed of course in the Paleolithic era, but they become really, really significant and helpful as a conceptual device in the agrarian era and particularly in understanding the later agrarian era.
So let's look at them. First, the Afro-Eurasian zone, the zone that includes Africa and Eurasia, these two huge land masses.
The Afro-Eurasian world zone includes not only Africa and Eurasia but also offshore islands such as Britain and Japan.
It was the most ancient of the world zones because this is where humans evolved in Africa.
It was also the largest and the most varied of the world zones. It reaches from the tropics to the Arctic and it reaches almost around at least a third of the world.
And this may explain, this combination of age, diversity and size may explain its dominant role in world history.
This we've seen is where agriculture first appeared as well as the earliest agrarian civilisations.
So in some sense the pace of history is also speeded up, at least in some parts of this world zone.
The Americas are the second world zone. Since the two American continents touched each other a few million years ago, this has counted as one world zone in a slightly different geological environment they might have counted as two.
So the American world zone, North American, South America, was the second largest, though it was settled quite late, probably within the last 13,000 to 15,000 years, although it's conceivable as we've seen, that some settlement was earlier.
This was the second world zone in which agrarian civilisations appeared quite independently, though they appeared as we've seen significantly later than in Afro-Eurasia.
The third world zone I've called Australasia. The Australation world zone includes modern Australia and Papua New Guinea, as well as offshore islands such as Tasmania.
And one justification for linking those three areas is that as we saw during the last Ice Age, they were indeed a single land mass when world sea levels were lower than they are today.
Now this was the second of the world zones to be occupied by humans. Humans arrived here probably as early as about 50,000 years ago.
But in this world zone, the striking and interesting thing is that though agriculture did appear in Papua New Guinea, it was based there on root crops which could not be stored easily and did not therefore provide the foundation for a flourishing agrarian civilisation.
And in the main part of this zone, in the Australian continent, agriculture itself did not appear, so here no agrarian civilisations emerged.
That's the third world zone, the Australation zone.
The fourth often gets omitted in surveys of this era. It's the Pacific zone.
It was settled within the last 4,000 years by seafaring communities from Southeast Asia who brought the elements of agriculture with them.
So here in this zone, some elements of agrarian civilisation or probably we should say sort of embryonic signs of agrarian civilisation did appear.
They appeared on some of the larger islands such as Hawaii.
But in general, the islands of the Pacific were too small to support communities large enough to count as major agrarian civilisations.
So in summary, we can say that agrarian civilisations appeared in only two of our world zones, the Afro-Eurasian and American zones.
Though humans had appeared in all four zones and in some sense agriculture had appeared in all four zones.
Now before we return to agrarian civilisations, we need to remember one more thing about them and that is that they never included all human societies.
Do you remember the bar scenes in Star Wars?
Here you find odd, somewhat dangerous looking people who are clearly from the edges, from the margins. They are barbarians.
All agrarian regions, all agrarian civilisations were surrounded by regions that their elites tended to look down upon and regard as barbarians.
For the Greeks, incidentally, the word barbarian may have been a way of conveying the sort of stammering noise that they heard when listening to foreigners.
So not everyone lived within agrarian civilisations, even in the era of agrarian civilisations.
What other types of communities were there?
Well, getting a clear list of this will help because it will help us get a sense of the major types of human communities that coexisted in this era.
This area we'll see is one of the most varied eras in human history.
Okay, one of the major groups that continued to exist on the borders, usually on the borders or sometimes well beyond the borders of agrarian civilisations were communities of independent farmers.
Many people continued to live in small farming communities with rudimentary political structures.
Now, these are survivals, if you like, of the villages of the early agrarian era.
So these communities represent the survival of the world of the early agrarian era.
Much of northern Europe, incidentally, consisted of communities like this in the time of the Roman Empire.
This was the barbarian frontier that the Romans fought in northern Europe.
Now, second type of community are pastoral nomads.
In arid regions of inner Asia, parts of North Africa and parts of East Africa and in the Middle East, there were communities of pastoral nomads.
Some of them, like the Mongols in the 13th century, would pose very serious threats to neighbouring agrarian civilisations.
And the reason for this is that the life way of pastoral nomads inculcated military skills, the capacity to move through the landscapes,
the ability to hunt, the ability to manage large animals, endurance, so that pastoral nomads were ferocious and dangerous enemies.
You could simply mobilise most of the men and you've got an army.
I've done a fair bit of reading about pastoral nomads and they absolutely fascinate me and I wish I could justify devoting more time to them in this course.
But the only thing I'll say is that these pastoral nomadic communities, particularly the ones in inner Asia,
would form very, very powerful rivals to greater agrarian civilisations.
On the North Chinese border, for example, conflict with pastoral nomads was probably the dominant issue in foreign policy for some 2,000 years.
So pastoral nomads are immensely interesting and immensely important, but reluctantly I'm going to have to move on.
The third major type of human community that we need to remember about throughout the era of agrarian civilisations is foraging communities.
That is to say, communities that lived with the sort of technologies that we saw in the Paleolithic era.
In some regions, such as Australia, everyone continued to live in foraging communities.
Foraging remained the dominant technology, the dominant life way in Australia until modern times.
And foraging communities could be found in Australia and many other parts of the world, indeed right into the 20th century.
So when we talk about agrarian civilisations, we must never forget that there are also these other communities and though they were less numerous than the populations of agrarian civilisations, they occupied very large areas of the world.
So now the typology of different types of human communities that we're slowly building up has four main members.
Kin based foraging communities typical of the Paleolithic, the communities of farmers living in villages or very small towns that was typical of the early agrarian era.
Third, the pastoral nomadic communities of the steppes and of arid zones.
And finally, the large complex communities of agrarian civilisations.
This typology gives us a good idea of the range of different types of community that our species could live in.
And it's striking to contrast this range, by the way, with the much more limited range we find in our close relatives, the Great Apes.
This is one more reminder of the astonishing variety of ways in which our species has lived in the course of its history.
Now, now let's turn finally to agrarian civilisations.
And I want to summarise some of the crucial structural similarities between them.
Wherever they appeared, whether there was contact between them or not, agrarian civilisations showed some similar features.
The first is size.
Agrarian civilisations are very large communities compared to all earlier human communities.
They were huge and complex, with hundreds of thousands or millions of inhabitants linked by religion, trade, economics and politics.
So the appearance of agrarian civilisations marks a sort of quantum leap in the size and interconnectedness of human communities.
That's the first feature, size.
Secondly, what supported them? What sustained them?
They were supported by the surplus labour and produce above all of peasants, of peasant farmers who made up most of the population.
Now, peasant life was tough in agrarian civilisations.
And to illustrate this, I want to use some wonderful vivid passages from an Egyptian document written about 3,200 years ago at the end of the 2nd millennium BCE.
This document consists of advice, advice to a young man about the types of careers to take up.
And the first piece of advice you'll see is, do not be a peasant.
It's a reminder that within agrarian civilisations, peasants didn't just feed themselves.
That alone was tough enough. But like domestic animals, they also had to support others.
And forcing peasants to support others could be a brutal process.
So, let's look at this document.
The document begins by describing the trials of being a peasant.
By day it goes. He cuts his farming tools. By night he twists rope.
Even his midday hour he spends on farm labour. In other words, being a peasant is endless. There's always something to be done. It goes on.
He equips himself to go to the field as if he were a warrior. The dried field lies before him.
He goes out to get his team, his team of draft animals.
When he has been after the herdsman for many days, he gets his team and comes back with it.
So, first he has to go and locate his team, which has got lost.
Then the document goes on to describe how the team of oxen may have drowned in a swamp.
He's lost his oxen, one of his most crucial capital assets.
So, he has to borrow a team from someone else.
He scatters seeds they're immediately eaten by snakes, according to this document.
And because his seeds are eaten, he has to borrow seed as well as a team of draft animals.
Now, finally, he gets in trouble with an official, the all-powerful scribe.
And at this point, we see how the state, the tribute-taking system, also causes headaches for the peasant.
So, here's how this section goes.
Now, the scribe lands on the shore.
He surveys the harvest.
Attendance are behind him with staffs, nubians with clubs.
One of them says to the peasant, give grain.
That conveys very nicely actually, the fundamentally arbitrary and brutal way in which tribute-taking states often demanded resources.
Give grain.
There is none, says the peasant.
The document continues.
He is beaten savagely.
He is bound, thrown in the well, submerged head down.
His wife is bound in his presence.
His children are in fetters.
His neighbors abandon them and flee.
When it's over, there's no grain.
Now, this is a vivid, literary and heightened account of the world of the peasantry.
But as someone who spent a fair bit of time studying the life of 19th century Russian peasants,
I have to say, I don't really think it's over-drawn.
The peasant in the era of agrarian civilizations really was tough.
Now, another general feature of agrarian civilizations is specialization and a division of labor.
This is a world in which, unlike the world of the early agrarian villages,
where most people lived roughly the same.
You get in agrarian civilizations a vast range of different specializations, different professions.
Minorities, particularly in towns and cities, supported themselves by exchanging specialist skills.
Now, the Egyptian document I've just used describes several of these professions.
So, let me quote it again.
And once again, this is, remember, is warning to a young man not to attempt these professions.
The potter, it goes on, is smeared with earth like a person one of whose folk has died.
His hands and feet are full of clay.
His like one who is in the mire.
Then it goes on to describe another profession, the sandal maker, someone who works with leather.
The sandal maker mixes tan.
His odor is conspicuous.
His hands are red with matter, like one who is smeared with his own blood.
There's a whole range of professions, a great diversity of professions.
Now, here's a fourth critical feature of agrarian civilizations,
and that's the existence of tribute-taking states.
At the core, these were the organizing centers of agrarian civilizations.
At their core, we find tribute-taking states.
I've defined why I use this term already.
States exacted resources in labor, goods, or cash.
Tributary rulers and their servants claimed that they had the right to exact resources.
They often claimed that that right was based on religious sanctions, that they had the blessing of the gods.
But they could always back out those claims with the threat of force, and we call such exactions tributes.
Their coercive power depended always on the existence of organized armies or the minimum retinues of some kind
that could defend against external attacks and could also suppress internal resistance,
or as in the case of the scribe we've just seen, could impose their will on resistant taxpayers.
Administrative tasks within tribute-taking states, such as the collection and storage of tributes
or the administration of justice and law, were handled by organized groups of literate officials.
Now the document we've been quoting portrays the life of a scribe, and now its author gets to the point,
because what the author is going to recommend to the young man it's being written for is be a scribe.
This is a much more attractive life than that of the tribute-paying classes,
because now you're entering the elite world of tribute-takers.
So here's the description of being a scribe.
You call to one and a thousand answer to you.
You stride freely upon the road and do not become like an ox to be handed over.
A tired in fine raiment with horses whilst your bark is on the nile,
you're provided with attendance moving freely and inspecting.
A villa has been built in your city and you hold a powerful office by the king's gift to you.
Male and female slaves are in your neighborhood,
and those who are in the fields in holdings of your own making will grasp your hand.
This gives you some feeling for being a lord in this world, a member of the elite classes.
Writing, of course, is crucial to the work of the scribe,
and writing in some form appears in all agrarian civilizations,
though in some cases, as in the case of the Inca, it assumed fairly rudimentary forms.
In most cases, it seems to have begun as a form of accounting or record keeping,
and then eventually turned acquired a literary form.
Tributary rulers in all tributary states built monumental architecture,
tombs, palaces and temples designed to show their majesty and power.
These were a sort of form of pre-modern propaganda.
They were designed to impress enemies and to impress their own subjects,
but they were also a demonstration of their power because it took a lot of organization to build these things.
And at lower levels, rulers depended on local nobles or officials
who duplicated their power on smaller scales, such as the scribe we've been describing.
Now, here's a fifth general feature of agrarian civilizations,
is the existence of hierarchies, and often quite rigid hierarchies.
It's tempting to think of the word caste when we describe them.
Hierarchies very often based on birth, but not exclusively.
There were steep hierarchies of wealth and power.
Class hierarchies ranked groups by their lineage and social status.
Aristocracies were distinguished by their lineage, power, lifestyle and wealth.
And this was a world that was acutely conscious of rank and status.
Members of ruling elites generally despised the peasants who generated most of society's wealth.
And again, you can pick that up from the passages I've just been reading.
They also tended to regard those outside agrarian civilizations as inferior or subhuman,
uncivilized in fact, as in the following document from an 18th century Qing dynasty emperor Yongzhen.
Emperor Yongzhen writes in 1730,
What makes humans different from animals are the principles of morality.
The five relationships are the basis of human morality.
If you defy one of them, you are not human.
The primary relationship of these is that of ruler and subject.
In other words, if you don't exist within an agrarian civilization, you're not really a human being.
How can we call people human if they have no rulers?
Those who want to get rid of rulers are just like animals.
Those who are given rulers by heaven's mandate but try to defy heaven, in other words, rebels,
cannot avoid being exterminated by heaven.
Now, this was his polite way, or not so polite, of saying that the pastoral nomads on China's northern frontier,
with whom he'd engaged in a major war, barely counted as humans because they lived out, they were beyond the pale outside of agrarian civilizations.
Another group that the elites of tribute-taking societies often despised were merchants.
Though merchants were sometimes very wealthy and powerful, they were often deeply despised by aristocrats.
Now, here's a document that illustrates this, and it again comes from China, but this time from China in the Han era, the 2nd century BCE.
And this writer clearly sees merchants as standing below peasants because they didn't seem to do anything very useful.
This was a conventional Confucian idea of the nature of social hierarchies.
Well-to-do merchants writes our source, Chao Zou.
Well-to-do merchants accumulate goods and redouble their profits, while the less well-to-do sit in their shops and sell.
They control the markets and daily enjoy their ease in the cities.
They take advantage of the pressing needs of the government to sell at twice the normal price.
Their sons do not plow or hoe, in other words, they don't do anything very productive or useful.
Their daughters do not raise silkworms or weave.
They have fancy clothing, and they stuff themselves on millet and meat.
This conveys quite well a sort of derisional scorn of merchants that is characteristic of tribute-taking elites.
Power hierarchies also shaped gender hierarchies, as most rulers were men.
Women rulers were generally regarded as exceptional, which is why, incidentally, the pharaoh Hatshepsut is often represented wearing a fake beard.
However, women often ruled indirectly through husbands, lovers or fathers.
We shouldn't think that women were absent from these power structures at all.
The Byzantine historian Anna Komnena, whose dates are 1083 to 1153, describes very vividly the immense power wielded by her mother.
And here is a description from her history that conveys well the power of her mother.
It was composed, her history of the reign of her father.
Alexis Komnena, incidentally, was composed in a monastery where she'd been exiled after an unsuccessful plot.
And she modeled her work on the great Greek historians.
She writes,
She was, argues Anna Komnena, one of the most expert politicians of the time.
And I think that account suggests that we should always look for powerful women in the background when we're thinking of tribute-taking states.
Though women formerly were subordinate, very often they were crucial in traditional power structures.
Okay, now let's summarize some of this.
In this lecture, I've tried to survey some of the general structural features of agrarian civilizations.
In the next lecture, we start looking at how agrarian civilizations evolved over the 4,000 years since their first appearance.
Thank you.
Expansion and State Power.
For the next group of lectures, it might help if we imagine ourselves in a sort of combination time machine and space machine orbiting the Earth somewhere
and looking down during the era of agrarian civilizations over 4,000 years.
And what we're going to be looking for is a sort of pattern of spread and rise and fall over those 4,000 years.
So that's what we're going to do.
We're going to accelerate the pace of history very much and we're going to look at it from outside the Earth.
Take the view from space.
The previous lecture described some general features of agrarian civilizations as if agrarian civilizations were static.
Now what we do is we start looking for long-term changes over 4,000 years.
What were the main changes in this era that was dominated by these huge, complex societies we've called agrarian civilizations?
Can we stand back from the details and focus on the major changes?
Can we see them as if from space?
That's the question we tackle in this and the next few lectures.
So we ask how did agrarian civilizations change during the 4,000 years of the later agrarian era?
In this and the next two lectures, I'm going to focus on the Afro-Eurasian world zone.
It's by far the largest, it's by far the oldest and by almost any criteria, it's the most influential of the four world zones.
And then after these three lectures, I'm going to look at the rest of the world and that will allow us to try to get a sense of how typical the experience of Afro-Eurasia was,
how great the variety was of historical trajectories in different parts of the world during this era.
And beneath this comparison of different world zones, there lurks this deeper question that we've touched on already.
Do civilizations or do human societies more generally change perhaps in somewhat similar ways?
Do they evolve in roughly similar directions? Or do they for the most part go their own ways?
This question has a bearing on the even deeper issue of whether or not there are long-term tendencies in human history that have shown up wherever conditions were somewhat similar.
And by now, you'll not be surprised to find that I will be arguing that there were indeed some striking similarities.
Human history is not just a story of random change so that every society can go entirely in its own direction.
There are these long-term steering factors that seem to have driven human history, even in very different regions, along roughly similar trajectories.
So we want to get a sense of both the similarities and the differences between different agrarian civilizations and different world zones in this period.
And we'll see that one of the reasons for some similarities is diffusion.
The fact that over time, agrarian civilizations in some regions began to touch on each other.
They began to exchange goods, ideas, and people, and eventually they began to affect each other.
So that's one of the reasons for the similarities.
But when we look across world zones, we'll be comparing regions which had virtually no contact at all with each other.
So that is the real test of the long-term similarities and the trajectories of history in different regions.
Okay, so what we're going to see is that there are indeed a lot of differences, but underneath them we're going to find some striking and I think deeply interesting similarities
that can tell us a lot about the nature of human history and indeed about the nature of being human.
Okay, now, on to Afro-Eurasia and the Afro-Eurasian World Zone.
What I want to do in this lecture is to describe two distinct ways in which agrarian civilizations in Afro-Eurasia expanded during almost 4,000 years.
So this is very much the view from our combination space and time capsule over 4,000 years, but we're focusing on Afro-Eurasia.
The first is expansion.
I want to look at the way agrarian civilization, this new type of human community, spread around Afro-Eurasia, how it occupied larger areas and occupied incorporated more and more people.
So the expansion of agrarian civilizations.
Secondly, I want to look at the increasing power and reach of tribute taking states.
States are at the core, the core of all agrarian civilizations and we'll see that over 4,000 years their power expands, their capacity to control resources, their capacity to control people.
As rulers became more skillful at their trade and more knowledgeable about how to rule.
That knowledge, political knowledge, if you like, accumulated over 4,000 years.
So there's an emerging political technology.
As knowledge and understanding of governments and the nature of power began to accumulate within the elite groups that ran tribute taking states, we'll see their reach increased and so did the power of these states.
So these states got larger and they seem to have got better at the task of organizing and ruling these large and complex societies.
So first expansion, I want to look at the way agrarian civilization as a type of community expanded in the Afro-Eurasian world zone over 4,000 years.
During this period, agrarian civilizations of some kind spread to incorporate most of the population of the Afro-Eurasian world zone.
We begin 5,000 years ago in 3,000 BCE.
5,000 years ago agrarian civilization existed in Sumer, in southern Mesopotamia and also in Egypt and that's it.
4,000 years ago, in about 2,000 BCE, we can add one or two new areas.
Agrarian civilizations, we can say, also seem to have existed in the north of the Indian subcontinent and along the Yellow River in northern China.
Now I need to qualify that of course by saying that there is no absolutely rigid marker of the appearance of agrarian civilization.
So once again, these are rough sketch map dates I'm giving.
Agrarian civilizations light up in the Harappan region along the Indus Valley in the north of the Indian subcontinent and in northern China along the Yellow River.
By 2,000 years ago, agrarian civilizations were also flourishing around the Mediterranean Basin.
This is the era of the Roman Empire remember.
In south China, the Chinese Han Empire is now dominating not only the north of China but also the south and also in parts of southeast Asia.
And then by 1,000 years ago, agrarian civilizations have spread to Africa, south of the Sahara and to both western and eastern Europe.
We can get a slightly better sense of what this really means if we try roughly speaking to measure the expansion of agrarian civilization.
And here we're talking not just about the states but the whole, the areas they controlled as well.
None of them had rigid borders.
So again, there's a fair amount of guesswork here.
But there's an Estonian scholar who has attempted to make these some very rough calculations about the area incorporated within agrarian civilizations over this 4,000 year period.
And this is the Estonian-American scholar, Ryan Targipera.
And here are some of his figures.
He estimates the area included within states in square megameters.
To get a sense of what we mean by a square megameter, a square megameter is probably roughly the size of modern Egypt.
So now we need to upload a sort of mental map of Egypt to get a feeling for what a megameter is.
These are very rough calculations, of course, like Eric Chason's calculations of energy flows.
But what we'll see is that they do help us to get a sense of a larger pattern, even if there's plenty of wriggle room on the details.
And here are the results of his calculations.
In 3,000 BCE, states controlled just 0.2 square megameters.
Now, Targipera calculates that this represents about 0.2% of the area of Afri-Eurasia controlled by modern states today.
And of course that essentially means the whole of Afri-Eurasia.
This is a tiny area.
Today, states control virtually the entire region.
So what these figures show, what this first set of figures show, is that when agrarian civilizations first appeared in Sumer and Egypt, they were quite remarkable.
They were exotic.
They were very rare.
They affected a tiny number of people initially.
The vast majority of people 5,000 years ago, and we need to remember this because agrarian civilizations are so exotic, they'll kind of, they'll tempt us to think about them and to forget everything else.
We need to remember that most people still lived in the types of village communities that had become the dominant type of human community during the early agrarian era.
In 1,000 BCE, we've now moved on 2,000 years, agrarian civilizations control almost 10 times that area, almost 2.5 square megameters.
But even that's only about 2% of the total area of Afri-Eurasia that's controlled by modern states.
Now, this is a very significant expansion, but it's still a reminder that most of Afri-Eurasia remained outside agrarian civilizations.
Then, 2,000 years ago, with the appearance of huge empires in Persia, China and the Mediterranean, agrarian civilizations covered about 8 square megameters.
This is about 6% of the area under modern states.
This is about 40 times the area controlled when states first appeared.
So this gives us a pretty good feeling for the expansion of agrarian civilizations, even if it also reminds us of how much Afri-Eurasia remained beyond their borders.
And by 1,000 CE, agrarian civilizations, according to Ryan Targapera's calculations, covered about 16 square megameters.
Now, that's still only about 13% of the area controlled by modern states, but it's about 80 times the area controlled by the very first states just 4,000 years before.
So that gives us a very rough way of measuring this process of expansion, measuring the area controlled by agrarian civilizations.
Now, on the assumption that these figures are not too wildly inaccurate, what do they mean? Let's try and summarize what they're telling us.
One thing they clearly mean is population growth.
Agrarian civilizations included the most flourishing and the most productive regions of agriculture on Earth.
So these were the regions in which we should expect populations to be growing most rapidly.
And the growth of populations is therefore a key ingredient in the growth of agrarian civilizations.
Now, unfortunately we can't measure precisely the growth of populations within agrarian civilizations.
So we're going to have to use a sort of surrogate, and that is plausible estimates of world populations.
As the agrarian civilizations of Afro-Eurasia incorporated probably an increasing proportion of world populations,
this may give us some very rough idea of how the spread of agriculture continued to sustain population growth
and how the spread of agrarian civilizations parallels growth in populations.
So here are some figures for world populations.
Again, of course, they're very rough estimates. They're probably the best we can do at the moment.
But this is the story they tell.
Ten thousand years ago, world populations are estimated to have been about five or six millions.
By three thousand years ago, by five thousand years ago, I should say, by three thousand BCE,
there were probably about fifty million people on Earth.
And what this means is that in the early agrarian era, human populations had multiplied by about ten times.
Then by one thousand years ago, at the end of the later agrarian era, there may have been about two hundred and fifty million people on Earth.
So let's just think about those figures for a moment.
What that means is that populations had multiplied by five times in four thousand years.
They've multiplied by ten times in five thousand years in the early agrarian era.
What's this telling us?
Well, I suppose we can say these rates of growth are roughly comparable.
If anything, they suggest that rates of population growth may have been slightly slower in the later agrarian era.
And that's slightly surprising.
It suggests that population growth was not more rapid in this era than in the early agrarian era.
It's curious and it's a fact that we're going to pick up later on,
because it may be telling us some quite important things about the nature of agrarian civilizations.
Okay.
Tiger Paras figures also remind us of the limits of agrarian civilizations.
They remind us that until quite recently, many, many people in Afro-Eurasia still lived outside agrarian civilizations in small communities of pastoralists, foragers, or independent peasants.
We must not let ourselves get so dazzled by them that we lose sight of these many communities.
But what they do do is chart a fundamental transformation in human society.
Five thousand years ago, most humans in Afro-Eurasia lived outside of agrarian civilizations.
Three thousand years later, it's probable that most humans lived within them.
This is at the time of the Roman and Han empires.
And by two thousand years ago, agrarian civilizations had become the normal type of community for human beings in Afro-Eurasia and probably throughout the world.
The role and significance of agrarian civilizations in human history had been transformed in this three to four thousand year period.
From a new but rare and atypical type of community, they had become, by one thousand years ago, the most important, powerful and numerous of all human communities.
And most humans on earth almost certainly lived within the borders of one of them.
Now I want to look at the second major change in the later agrarian era.
And that is the increasing power of states.
States lie at the hub of agrarian civilizations.
They're the crucial organizing structures of agrarian civilizations.
The area under agrarian civilizations expanded at least in part.
One of the factors was because tributary rulers learned to control larger areas.
So what I want to look at now is as it were this evolution in statecraft.
As tributary states became, on a long trend, more efficient at doing what they did best, which was control large areas and exact tributes.
In three thousand BCE, tributary states were new phenomena.
They were novelties and their rulers were still unsure of the best ways of managing such vast and complex communities.
But over the next four thousand years, a lot of political, military and economic skills accumulate.
And as a result, so the reach and power of tributary states expanded.
The basic challenge was to maximize the resources rulers extracted from populations that consisted mainly of small, holding peasants.
And we've seen that we call resources that are extracted in this way always with the threat of coercion in the background.
Though often through claims that states have the right to exact them, we call them tributes.
And we do that to contrast them with two other ways of moving resources.
One is gifts.
That is a situation in which someone freely and willingly gives resources to someone else.
And the second is profits. Profits are transfers of wealth that are generated through exchanges on competitive markets.
And profits are going to become a very important form of wealth generation in the modern era.
Tributes could be exacted through the crudest of coercive methods, but we'll see that states like disease parasites in general
found that they could actually extract resources more efficiently and for much longer periods if they use subtler methods where possible.
And these methods included claims to legitimacy, the blessing of the gods for example, and claims to provide services such as protection from foreign invaders.
One reason why rulers so often portray themselves on monumental architecture as killing the soldiers of foreign armies is presumably to inspire confidence that they can do this, that they can protect you.
It's a way of encouraging people to join their team rather than the other one in return for tributes.
Now the trick of being a successful tributary ruler is to maximise resource-exaction without exhausting the capacity of peasants to keep paying.
That's the general trick.
Now Rhine Targapera has tried to estimate roughly changes in the areas controlled by particular states.
Now we're no longer looking at agrarian civilisations as a whole, we're looking at the areas controlled by particular states.
So let's look at his calculations.
His calculations highlight four main eras in the expansion of state power.
The first city states covered tiny areas.
Uruk covered about 2.5 square kilometres.
That's a tiny fraction of a square megameter, though its rulers also controlled nearby villages.
The first Mesopotamian state to include several city states that have Sagan of Akkad may have controlled 0.6 square megameters.
So these are rather small states.
Sagan's state is significantly bigger than that of, say, Uruk.
It includes several city states.
In the 2nd millennium BCE, the very largest states, those of Egypt at its height and Shang China, probably controlled a maximum of about 1 square megameter of territory.
That, let me remind you, is about the size of modern Egypt, and most states controlled much less.
So 1 square megameter seems to have been a sort of upper limit for empires formed before about 1000 BCE.
Then we get a huge leap forward, and it seems to be associated with the Achaemenid Empire, which was founded by Cyrus II in Persia, 2500 years after the appearance of the first states.
It was founded in 560 BCE, and it was then overthrown by Alexander the Great in 330 BCE.
The Achaemenid Empire covered at its height about 5.5 square megameters.
For the next 1500 years, the larger states that appeared would range from about 4 square megameters.
That was probably the size of the Roman Empire, up to about 10 square megameters, the size of some of the earliest Islamic empires.
In the last 1500 years, much bigger empires have appeared, starting with the Mongol Empire, which briefly controlled about 24 square megameters.
Now again, this is a sketch. These are very large trends.
And what these figures hide is eras of collapse and decline, such as the decline of Mesopotamian states early in the second millennium, which we've talked about already.
And we need to remind ourselves that contemporaries almost certainly did not experience history as a prolonged expansion of agrarian civilizations.
They were much more likely to be aware of the slow rise and fall of dynasties and empires.
And that's a phenomenon we'll look at in Lecter 35, when we look at factors that checked growth in the era of agrarian civilizations.
Nevertheless, with the benefit of hindsight and Targapera's calculations, the long trend towards increasing state power seems unmistakable.
Now what was going on? What was it that states did that increased their reach and power?
Clearly there was a slow learning process going on, as each ruler learned new techniques of rule, and as these techniques slowly diffused between different states.
Let me just look at some of what seemed to be in the critical changes here.
One is simply improved military techniques. These are states that do rely to a considerable degree on coercion.
They seem to have been engaged in warfare of some kind almost continuously.
So military improvements may be part of this. Rulers learned to recruit and equip larger armies.
They learned to use auxiliaries such as pastoral nomads from the Eurasian steppes.
They introduced increasingly sophisticated weapons such as chariots and siege weapons.
Some of the more important innovations in this area actually came from the inner Asian steppes, a region dominated by pastoral nomads.
Where mobile cavalry warfare was practiced with great efficiency by nomads such as the Scythians.
Chariots with solid wheels were drawn by oxen are depicted in Mesopotamia as early as 3000 BCE.
But the first evidence of light, rapid and highly mobile war chariots drawn by horses and with spoked wheels appears in tombs in the steppes of modern Kazakhstan about 2000 BCE.
That technology spread rapidly both east and west. It spread to China and it spread to Mesopotamia and to the Indian subcontinent.
In the Indian Rig Veda we learn that chariots were used either for the hurling of spears or in ritual races.
They become both symbolically and in real terms crucial to warfare.
Improved communications are also part of it.
The most powerful and the most successful rulers often spent a lot of effort road building in establishing large roads along which armies and messengers could be sent.
And they also established courier systems or post horse systems which allowed probably the most rapid transmission of information of anywhere in the world.
Let me briefly describe one of the most famous of these roads. It's known as the Royal Persian Road and we have a wonderful description of it from the Greek writer Herodotus.
It was built between 550 and 486 BCE by Cyrus II and his successor Darius I and it was about 1500 miles long.
It ran from Sousa in southern Persia through Babylon and Nineveh to Izmir and Ephesus on the Aegean coast of modern Turkey.
It probably followed the path of an earlier road which was really a track that may have existed as early as 3500 BCE.
In 475 BCE Herodotus said that it normally took about 90 days to travel the entire route, though royal post riders could travel it in as little as 20 days.
It was guarded along its entire length and Herodotus writes in book 5 of his history is that,
Royal stations exist along its whole length and excellent caravanserize, stations where you could stay overnight restaurants, hotels, motels we'd call them today.
And throughout he continues, it traverses an inhabited tract and is free from danger.
In chapter 898 of his histories he describes how the system of roads and post houses was used to transmit royal messages.
Let me quote this passage.
Nothing he writes, nothing mortal travels so fast as these Persian messengers.
The entire plan is a Persian invention and this is the method of it.
Along the whole line of road there are men stationed with horses in number equal to the number of days which the journey takes, allowing a man and horse to each day.
And these men will not be hindered from accomplishing at their best speed the distance which they have to go either by snow or rain or heat or by the darkness of night.
The first rider delivers his dispatch to the second and the second passes it to the third and so it is born from hand to hand along the whole line like the light in the torch race which the Greeks celebrate to Vulcan.
A wonderful description and it shows that the most intelligent and farsighted rulers could do a lot of work on what today we might call infrastructure.
There are also improved systems for collecting tributes.
In all agrarian civilizations, tributes seem to have been collected through chains of intermediaries with local power brokers extracting local taxes and then passing them on to regional governors.
Regional authorities governors or satraps they were called in Achaemenid Persia who passed them on to the central ruler.
Once again from Achaemenid Persia we have a wonderful literary and visual description of the system by which tributes were exacted under the rule of Darius.
In 518 Darius created 20 distinct provinces each headed by a governor, a satrap and a separate military commander.
And Herodotus in his histories lists the amount of tributes paid by each province.
For example Babylon and Syria two of the core provinces in the empire both in Mesopotamia and probably the richest of the provinces each paid a thousand talents the equivalent of about 30 tons of silver.
And the trading provinces of Phoenicia, Palestine and Cyprus paid about 350.
Some of this wealth was turned into coins which was the first to circulate in central Asia.
And the empire as a whole was run from a central bureaucracy in Sousa.
There were subtler methods of skimming off taxes also developed.
As their reach increased states created large zones of relative stability within which peasants and merchants flourished so that both populations and available resources increased.
And in such times the interests of rulers, peasants and merchants probably came closer together than ever before.
And the most skillful rulers recognized the fact that if they looked after their people it might eventually benefit them like the most intelligent disease parasites.
Here's a nice quote from an 11th century Persian prince writing to his son.
He says, Make it your constant endeavor to improve cultivation and to govern well for understand this truth.
The kingdom can be held by the army and the army by gold and gold is acquired through agricultural development and agricultural development through justice and equity.
Therefore be just and equitable.
And finally rulers often use their wealth to enhance their power in other ways.
Today we might call this propaganda.
They bound ruling elites together through distributing wealth.
They overwrote their subjects by displays of religious monuments or other monuments.
In an age before newspapers these were powerful forms of propaganda.
And once again there's a wonderful example from the Achaemenid Empire.
It's the Behi Stooning inscriptions carved by the Achaemenid Emperor Darius in 515 BCE on a cliff face in Kermanshar province in Iran.
Darius proclaims on these inscriptions high upon a cliff, I am Darius, the great king, king of kings, the king of Persia, the king of countries, the son of Hestaspes, the grandson of Asames, the Achaemenid.
And accompanying the inscriptions are wonderful vivid bar relief depictions of ten captured subordinate rulers.
Wearing the appropriate dress, they're tied, they're tied, they're clearly captives, they wear the appropriate dress of peoples from different regions.
These inscriptions incidentally were the key eventually to deciphering ancient Persian, ancient Elamite and ancient Babylonian.
Okay, we've seen therefore, we've seen a lot of ways in which agrarian civilizations expanded and spread and we've seen also how tributary states became more powerful and better at their job over a period of 4,000 years.
Now the next lecture is going to ask a slightly different question.
Is this growth that we're looking at, to what extent is it dependent on innovation?
Did agrarian civilizations encourage or discourage the capacity for innovation that is such a distinctive feature of our species?
That's our next question. Thank you.
Lecture 34 Long Trends, Rates of Innovation
Growth and constant innovation are often thought to be quite distinctive features of the modern world.
And in consequence, all earlier ages of human history are all too easily thought of as eras of stagnation.
This is a phenomenon we've seen, we've encountered several times before.
In comparison with today, this is certainly true. Growth and innovation both occurred extremely slowly in all earlier eras of human history.
Yet we've seen that even in the Paleolithic and the earlier agrarian eras, plenty happened and there was indeed plenty of change.
And plenty of that change took forms that we can describe as growth, either a spreading of humans into new areas or an increase in human populations.
Indeed, we've also seen that growth in some sense, the capacity to get more resources which allows population growth, is intrinsic to our species.
It's built into the very idea of collective learning.
And that's why change, and in some sense we can call it growth, was always more rapid in human history than it is in the animal world.
Nevertheless, it is also true that rates of growth and innovation have varied significantly in different eras of human history.
At the most spectacular example is, of course, modern society. Today, growth and innovation are much, much faster than ever before.
And this we'll see as one of the defining features of modern society.
So now I'd like to ask, what's the difference?
To understand these differences, we need to ask the sort of questions economists ask.
We need to ask, what are the drivers of growth?
I've argued in very general terms that collective learning is a sort of general driver of growth throughout human history.
But in different epochs, collective learning may take different forms.
So we need to ask, what specific drivers shaped innovation and growth in particular periods?
And here we look at the later agrarian era.
We ask, did agrarian civilizations accelerate the pace of change?
Did they tend to stifle change?
Were they moving in their structures that had a tendency to increase or retard patterns of growth and innovation?
And we'll in fact find both.
But in this lecture, I'm going to focus on structural features of agrarian civilizations that tended to stimulate growth.
And we'll see, there were quite a few of them.
So the previous lecture described the long-term expansion of agrarian civilizations and states.
And what we're doing here is we're trying to look at some of the drivers that lay behind that long-term process of expansion.
So we'll see that several structural features of agrarian civilizations did clearly encourage growth and innovation.
This is not an era of stagnation at all.
What were they?
This lecture discusses four features of agrarian civilizations that could stimulate innovation.
This is not, of course, a complete list.
One can imagine many other factors that might have stimulated innovation, including, for example, the extent and scale of educational systems,
which are generally very limited in agrarian civilizations,
or government investment in innovation, also extremely rare,
with some remarkable exceptions, such as the famous Library of Alexandria, which was founded about 300 BC,
with the support of a Roman Egyptian ruler Ptolemy II.
But with these exceptions, the factors I'm going to describe probably counter some of the main structural features of agrarian civilizations that tended to encourage innovation.
So let's look at them.
The first is population growth.
Could population growth itself drive innovation?
The second is expanding networks of exchange and increase in the area over which humans and different societies exchanged information.
The third is increasing market activity, and the fourth is the role of states.
So let's look at each of these possible drivers in turn.
First, population growth as a source of innovation.
In previous lectures, we've taken population growth as a sort of indicator of growth,
but it's also possible to treat it as a possible driver of growth.
This idea is associated often with the work of a Danish economist Esther Bozerup, whose dates are 1910 to 1999.
She argued famously that population growth, particularly in agrarian societies, can itself stimulate innovation,
as those at the edges of society are forced to seek new ways of feeding and supporting themselves.
Now, this is a mechanism we've already touched on in looking at the early agrarian era.
During the 4,000 years of the later agrarian era, human populations multiplied a lot by about five times we've seen from about 50 million to about 250 million people.
Clearly, this meant a growing need to feed larger and larger numbers of people,
and that implies that there had to be innovations to do it.
Now, to what extent did population growth itself drive these innovations?
It almost certainly drove at least some innovation.
We know that throughout this era, peasants or their masters were seeking out new lands to farm.
There's plenty of evidence in the spread of agriculture of farmers, peasants, sometimes with the help of overlords,
incorporating new land into their farms, settling new regions and so on.
That meant always tiny bits of innovation.
It meant adapting to new soils.
It meant getting used to new rainfall regimes.
It meant dealing with new types of pests, new types of predators.
So always settling new areas meant innovation of some kind.
We can imagine villages where populations grew so that younger people wanting to set up a household no longer could do so in the village.
They had to spread to a neighbouring region, and that too might involve tiny modifications of traditional techniques.
Now, this is micro-innovation, but it's going on over a huge area and millions of people are involved in the process,
and it may have been one of the key dynamics of agrarian civilisations.
A lot of their expansion may have been driven by this steady, constant trickle of micro-innovation,
similar to but much more rapid than the micro-innovations that sustained migrations in the Paleolithic era.
Now, if this is true, if this idea is right, it suggests that in this era a lot of innovation was coming from peasant farmers.
Occasionally, of course, their overlords may have helped them with projects such as the building of dams,
or helping them to migrate to new regions.
Examples of such innovations might include new strains of crops.
For example, we know that the regions between the Urals and Eastern Europe that are now parts of Russia and Ukraine
weren't farmed extensively, didn't have large populations of farmers until about 1500 years ago,
and then relatively suddenly we get migrations from Eastern Europe into this region.
Now, we're still not absolutely sure what causes this, but almost certainly, once again, it's a series of micro-innovations.
Now, one of them might have been the development of new strains of rye.
Rye is crucial for this migration that laid the foundations for the first medieval state of Russia,
and that may have allowed farmers to begin settling these lands 1500 years ago.
Another example is the new types of horse yokes that appear in medieval Europe.
Earlier horse yokes in medieval Europe sort of were fixed around the necks of horses,
and the result is, if the horse pulled too hard, it tended to choke.
New yokes evolved that actually were attached to the shoulders of the horse,
and this meant that the horse could exert its full force without choking.
And that, of course, meant that you could plow deeper, you've got more draft power available,
and that can allow you to plow lands you couldn't plow before, and so on.
So a lot of these micro-innovations could make a lot of difference.
One more example may be the slow spread of windmills.
We first get evidence of them in Persia, late in the first millennium CE,
and then they start to spread quite widely throughout the Mediterranean, eventually in Europe.
So that's the first factor.
Population growth itself may have driven lots of micro-innovations as peasants,
particularly at the margins of society, sought out new lands and new techniques
to enable them to survive in a world of expanding populations.
The second is expanding networks of exchange as sources of innovation.
The idea of collective learning implies, of course, that the foundation of innovation
in human history is exchanges of ideas between different individuals and different populations.
So here we're building on that idea.
If it's true that exchanges of ideas between different populations
are an important source of the accumulation of new technologies,
then it should also follow that as people exchange ideas, goods, technologies,
migrants over larger areas, this expansion in exchange networks
should itself generate a new synergy in collective learning.
So it makes sense to assume that increasing exchange networks themselves drive innovation.
So we're saying that, roughly speaking, we assume that the larger and more diverse the networks of exchange,
the larger the pool of ideas they contain,
that the greater the chances for the spread of significant innovations.
So the question is, can we sort of track an expansion in exchange networks?
And indeed we can throughout the later agrarian era.
And essentially what we can show is that though agrarian civilization appeared first
in a series of distinct regions, slowly, over 4,000 years,
those regions become more and more integrated internally
and then eventually more contacts develop between them.
Perhaps the best known example of this, or illustration of this, is the famous Silk Roads,
which crossed most of the Afro-Eurasian world zone,
leading from the Mediterranean right across Eurasia to China,
and there are also North-South branches that led into Northern India.
Pastoral nomads play a crucial role in the evolution of the Silk Roads.
Pastoral nomadism is itself a product of the Secondary Products Revolution
and it begins to spread in the inner Asian steppes,
certainly from about 3,000 BCE and by about 2,000 BCE,
that's to say about 4,000 years ago,
pastoral nomads occupy much of the inner Asian stepp.
So here you have a zone of immense mobility,
so that ideas and technologies can move through this zone much more easily than in more sedentary regions.
And there's very good reason to think that a number of technologies such as horse riding
and many of the technologies that go with it,
and also the use of chariots diffused from regions of pastoral nomadism in inner Asia
through to the Mediterranean, in the West and to China in the East.
The first clear evidence of chariots is actually found in Kazakhstan in about 2,000 BCE.
And pastoral nomads may also have played a crucial role in the spread of languages,
in the form of exchange of populations and ideas.
Indo-European languages quite probably, this is not yet certain,
developed somewhere on the border between modern Russia and Kazakhstan,
amongst populations that would eventually become pastoral nomads.
And as pastoral nomadism spread, it seems that it carried with it early forms of Indo-European languages.
So pastoral nomadism itself did a lot to connect different regions,
different agrarian civilizations of Afro-Eurasia.
By about 2,000 years ago, these connections are becoming tighter and having a much greater impact.
Trans-Eurasian exchanges begin to become much more common.
We'll see that the Chinese government is beginning to trade with Central Asia
in the last century of the 1st millennium BCE.
Chinese silks start entering Mediterranean markets.
Roman coins begin to be carried in the opposite direction.
A Mediterranean glassware as well.
And Buddhism begins to travel to make its epic journey from India to China.
So ideas, religions, technologies, goods begin to be transmitted
between all the great regions of agrarian civilization in Afro-Eurasia,
certainly from about 2,000 years ago.
And this is when the silk roads really begin to flourish.
Now, let me try and illustrate this process a bit less abstractly.
This talk of exchange networks all sounds very abstract,
but if you associate it with, say, the travels of a Marco Polo in the 13th century
or the campaigns of an Alexander the Great, it's much more vivid.
So I'd like to give one wonderful example of what processes lay behind
this gradual integration of Afro-Eurasian agrarian civilizations
into a larger network of exchange.
This comes from the Han era of Chinese history,
from the 2nd and 1st centuries BCE.
And I'm going to describe an immensely important episode in Chinese history,
which is described by the imperial historian Su Maqian,
whose dates are 145 to 85 BCE.
In 139 BCE, the great Han emperor, Wu Di, whose dates are 141 to 87 BCE,
was engaged in a prolonged campaign against a pastoral nomadic empire
known as the Xiongnu, who were precursors of the Mongols.
And they were based like the Mongols in Mongolia.
He decided to try to outflank them by finding if he could find allies to the west.
But the Chinese government at this time knew very little about what lay off to the west.
So what he did was he sent an envoy, an official called Chang Chen,
to contact another group of nomads, the Yuejue,
who had migrated westwards after being defeated by the Xiongnu.
So Wu Di sends Chang Chen westwards to try and find allies against the Xiongnu.
Now, this was an extremely dangerous mission.
The Xiongnu still controlled the Gansu Corridor.
This is the Corridor, the Gobi Desert, runs through a lot of it,
and it reaches from China, western China, over to Central Asia.
The Xiongnu still controlled much of this area, through which Chang Chen would have to travel.
Now, he sets out in 139 BCE with a Xiongnu slave and interpreter,
Can Fu, and an embassy of a hundred men.
But he's captured pretty soon in the Gansu Corridor,
and he's captured by the Xiongnu, and he's held by them for ten years.
But eventually, with Can Fu and a Xiongnu bride, he escapes,
and he travels on through modern Xinjiang to the kingdom of Ta Yuan,
which is modern Ferganar, in modern Uzbekistan, in Central Asia.
With help from the ruler of Ta Yuan, he travels on to the kingdom of the Yuejue,
who are now settled in the north of modern Afghanistan and in southern Uzbekistan.
And he finds that they're not at all interested in an alliance.
They've escaped from the Xiongnu, they're happy in southern Uzbekistan.
And so he returns, but he returns with a lot of new information.
He returns through the Tarim Basin, this amazing circle of trading cities
that Marco Polo would travel through more than a millennium later.
And he's captured once more by the Xiongnu on his way back.
He escapes again after another year of captivity.
And then in 125 BC, 13 years after he'd left,
he finally returns to China with only his wife and his slave.
Changxin's trip was an event of great significance in the history of Han China,
and even in a sense of Eurasia as a whole.
For it marks the beginning of the first successful attempts by China and Chinese governments
to establish official diplomatic, political and commercial links with Central Asia.
In his report to Emperor Wudi, Changxin described the walled cities of Faigana,
the region's famous wines, and its heavenly horses that seemed to sweat blood.
And he also passed on indirect descriptions of other lands about which the Chinese knew almost nothing,
including India, Parthia and Mesopotamia.
This, remember, is just over 2,000 years ago.
And the fact that they knew nothing is a reminder of how limited contacts were
between different regions of Afro-Eurasia.
So his expedition vastly expanded Chinese knowledge of other regions of Afro-Eurasia.
Knowledge of the wealthy lands of Central Asia encouraged Wudi
to attempt to establish Chinese alliances with them and maybe suzerainty over them.
In 117 BCE, Changxin, though now in disgrace for his failures in a campaign against the Xiongnu,
is given a chance to redeem himself by leading a second expedition westwards.
He establishes regular diplomatic relations with nomadic communities on the route to Central Asia,
potential allies against the Xiongnu.
And eventually, a later expedition, a massive expedition sent from China under a Korean commander,
finally manages to conquer some of the kingdoms of Central Asia.
Now, we can imagine many such episodes in different parts of Eurasia,
each of which has the result of slowly, slowly integrating the agrarian civilizations of the entire landmass
and massively increasing the information that is exchanged between different regions.
Early in the 1st millennium CE, sea routes also began to flourish around the south of Eurasia.
Sea trade increased rapidly between the Mediterranean, India, Southeast Asia and China,
at the same time as land contacts were multiplying along the Silk Roads.
And this was partly because mariners from the Mediterranean region finally learned to exploit the monsoon winds of the Indian Ocean.
Now, the result of all of this was that by about 2,000 years ago, as the late Andrei Gundar Frank has argued,
most of Afro-Eurasia belonged to a single world system.
The term world system is derived from the work of sociologist Emmanuel Wallstein,
and it refers to a large region in which several different agrarian civilizations are linked within a single network of commercial and intellectual and political exchanges.
So what this means is that goods, ideas, religions and technologies are now being exchanged across the largest of all the world zones.
So I hope you get a sense of the sort of power of this integrative process.
It's an early stage of what today we call globalization, and it has a similar stimulating effect on innovation.
Now here's a third factor, commerce and trade as sources of innovation.
The expansion of commerce and trade was undoubtedly a very powerful source of innovation throughout this era.
Since the time of Adam Smith, whose dates are 1723 to 1790, economists have understood perfectly well, and this is really Econ 101,
that competitive markets encourage innovation, and the essential reason is this.
Tributary rulers have the power to exact resources by force in the form of tributes.
Merchants, by and large, lacked the power to generate wealth by force.
Instead, they had to generate wealth by finesse, and this normally meant that they had to produce and sell goods as efficiently and cheaply as possible.
They had to produce them more efficiently, they could distribute them more efficiently, they could find new markets, but however they did it,
most methods of making a profit required an openness to innovation.
This is what we can call Smithian growth, innovation driven by commerce on competitive markets.
And we need to be very clear about the logic of this. Tributary rulers will see normally despised commerce,
but they also needed goods such as rare stones or silks or horses such as the blood-sweating horses of Fergana that Emperor Wudi was so keen to get hold of.
And if these goods lay beyond their frontiers, you could only really get them through merchants.
So very often we find governments' Tributary rulers supporting the activities of merchants because it's the only way of getting certain goods.
However merchants, though sometimes they found sponsors amongst Tributary rulers, tended to flourish best in the cracks between agrarian empires,
such as in small city-states that traded with or between agrarian civilizations.
Venice and Genoa in the last millennium are a spectacular example of such systems.
Earlier on, Phoenicia in modern Lebanon was a very good example of highly developed small commercial city-states that flourished in between great and wealthy Tributary empires.
Urbanization also stimulated commerce in this period because cities sucked in goods, techniques and people from large hinterlands.
So urbanization undoubtedly stimulated commerce too.
In 3000 BCE few cities had more than 30,000 inhabitants.
Most were in Mesopotamia or Egypt.
By about 1200 BCE it's been estimated large cities had also appeared in India and China.
And by about 100 CE there may have been over 70 large cities in Afro-Eurasia.
So we can sort of track the spread in the number and size of cities in Afro-Eurasia.
And this undoubtedly stimulated commerce and as we've seen it's a very good presumption that as commerce spread it encouraged innovation.
Now a fourth driver of innovation in this period is Tribute taking states themselves.
Tribute taking states were immensely powerful organizers so we really need to look carefully at them and their impact on innovation.
Could they stimulate innovation or not?
Well here we're going to see the stories a bit ambiguous.
By and large Tribute taking elites tended to be quite hostile to commerce, they tended to despise commerce.
They didn't need to negotiate for wealth, they took it.
Nevertheless there were various ways in which they could stimulate innovation.
One we've seen already is by encouraging commerce in areas where they needed to get strategic foreign goods.
But generally Tribute taking states and the elites that ran them had less incentive to innovate than merchants.
And there's a very simple reason for this.
They could extract resources coercively.
They could take resources by force.
And this is a very powerful general rule.
In an era when growth was painfully slow by modern standards it often made more sense to capture wealth through war if you had the ability to do so than to produce wealth through investments that might take generations to mature.
Now that I think is a fundamental reason why most rulers in the later agrarian era thought of themselves primarily as warriors rather than producers as takers of wealth rather than generators of wealth.
They admired warfare and they found fulfillment in it and that's an attitude which it's not that easy to appreciate in a world committed formally at least to the virtues of peace.
Let me just quote a very short passage which conveys this kind of exuberant, unashamed delight in warfare and slaughter, the bloodiest parts of warfare.
From, it comes from a 12th century French writer who's describing, we have to call it the joy of battle.
And this is what he says.
I tell you that I never eat or sleep or drink so well as when I hear the cry up an atom from both sides and when I hear the neighing of rideless horses in the brush and hear shouts of help, help and see men fall and the dead pierced in the side by gaily pennoned spears.
Now it's a literary example but I think it conveys an entire world in which warfare was seen as fulfillment, as self-expression and as what rulers did.
There's a lovely quote also from Machiavelli, in The Prince he's very clear about this and he writes that if you're a prince what you need to think about all the time is war.
War is the key to success.
A prince therefore he writes should have no other object or thought nor acquire skill in anything except war, its organization and its discipline.
The art of war is all that is expected of a ruler.
Now I have to say that Machiavelli is writing a time at a time and then a place where these rules are changing.
So he's really describing this kind of archetypes of the tribute taking world.
The first way to lose your state he writes is to neglect the art of war.
The first way to win a state is to be skilled in the art of war.
And this fact that taking wealth is the key to success in a world of tributary states and tribute taking states has lots of consequences for elite culture.
Machiavelli describes them well.
The prince he writes should never let his thoughts stray from military exercises which he should pursue more vigorously in peace than in war.
These exercises can be both physical and mental.
As for the first besides keeping his men well organized and trained he should always be out hunting.
This I think suggests why hunting has always been such an admired skill amongst the elites of tribute taking states.
By hunting he's accustoming his body to hardships and also learning some practical geography.
How the mountains slope, how the valleys open, how the planes spread out.
So the basic skill of being a tributary ruler is military.
It's knowing how to handle warfare.
Nevertheless having said all of this sometimes to succeed tributary rulers had to encourage innovation.
For example, sometimes in some situations heavy taxation could encourage innovation by forcing peasants to raise production in order to feed themselves and pay taxes.
We've understood we've seen that some rulers knew perfectly well that they could increase tributes by stimulating production and maintaining infrastructure.
That meant protecting peasants, building and maintaining irrigation systems and avoiding excessive taxation.
And finally military and strategic factors encouraged rulers to undertake large projects that often encouraged trade and commerce.
In the Roman Empire military needs simulated innovation in road building, bridge building, the construction of aqueducts, the building of elaborate military catapults and siege engines.
And such innovations could have a significant trickle down effect to use modern jargon.
Joel McKeer writes in a history of technology, the Rome of 100 AD, 100 CE in our terminology, had better paved streets, sewage disposal, water supply and fire protection than the capitals of civilized Europe in 1800.
Finally the building of monumental architecture, the building of pyramids for example, could provide employment, any courage innovation in areas such as architecture, engineering and mathematics.
So there were several areas in which the activities of tribute taking states encouraged innovation, particularly areas of direct interest themselves such as architecture, building and warfare.
So in all of these ways agrarian civilizations could drive growth.
These are some of the specific mechanisms of growth in agrarian civilizations.
And yet we know growth was nothing like as fast as today.
Why not?
We'll ask that question in the next lecture.
Thank you.
