For example, we know that the regions between the Urals and Eastern Europe that are now parts of Russia and Ukraine
weren't farmed extensively, didn't have large populations of farmers until about 1500 years ago,
and then relatively suddenly we get migrations from Eastern Europe into this region.
Now, we're still not absolutely sure what causes this, but almost certainly, once again, it's a series of micro-innovations.
Now, one of them might have been the development of new strains of rye.
Rye is crucial for this migration that laid the foundations for the first medieval state of Russia,
and that may have allowed farmers to begin settling these lands 1500 years ago.
Another example is the new types of horse yokes that appear in medieval Europe.
Earlier horse yokes in medieval Europe sort of were fixed around the necks of horses,
and the result is, if the horse pulled too hard, it tended to choke.
New yokes evolved that actually were attached to the shoulders of the horse,
and this meant that the horse could exert its full force without choking.
And that, of course, meant that you could plow deeper, you've got more draft power available,
and that can allow you to plow lands you couldn't plow before, and so on.
So a lot of these micro-innovations could make a lot of difference.
One more example may be the slow spread of windmills.
We first get evidence of them in Persia, late in the first millennium CE,
and then they start to spread quite widely throughout the Mediterranean, eventually in Europe.
So that's the first factor.
Population growth itself may have driven lots of micro-innovations as peasants,
particularly at the margins of society, sought out new lands and new techniques
to enable them to survive in a world of expanding populations.
The second is expanding networks of exchange as sources of innovation.
The idea of collective learning implies, of course, that the foundation of innovation
in human history is exchanges of ideas between different individuals and different populations.
So here we're building on that idea.
If it's true that exchanges of ideas between different populations
are an important source of the accumulation of new technologies,
then it should also follow that as people exchange ideas, goods, technologies,
migrants over larger areas, this expansion in exchange networks
should itself generate a new synergy in collective learning.
So it makes sense to assume that increasing exchange networks themselves drive innovation.
So we're saying that, roughly speaking, we assume that the larger and more diverse the networks of exchange,
the larger the pool of ideas they contain,
that the greater the chances for the spread of significant innovations.
So the question is, can we sort of track an expansion in exchange networks?
And indeed we can throughout the later agrarian era.
And essentially what we can show is that though agrarian civilization appeared first
in a series of distinct regions, slowly, over 4,000 years,
those regions become more and more integrated internally
and then eventually more contacts develop between them.
Perhaps the best known example of this, or illustration of this, is the famous Silk Roads,
which crossed most of the Afro-Eurasian world zone,
leading from the Mediterranean right across Eurasia to China,
and there are also North-South branches that led into Northern India.
Pastoral nomads play a crucial role in the evolution of the Silk Roads.
Pastoral nomadism is itself a product of the Secondary Products Revolution
and it begins to spread in the inner Asian steppes,
certainly from about 3,000 BCE and by about 2,000 BCE,
that's to say about 4,000 years ago,
pastoral nomads occupy much of the inner Asian stepp.
So here you have a zone of immense mobility,
so that ideas and technologies can move through this zone much more easily than in more sedentary regions.
And there's very good reason to think that a number of technologies such as horse riding
and many of the technologies that go with it,
and also the use of chariots diffused from regions of pastoral nomadism in inner Asia
through to the Mediterranean, in the West and to China in the East.
The first clear evidence of chariots is actually found in Kazakhstan in about 2,000 BCE.
And pastoral nomads may also have played a crucial role in the spread of languages,
in the form of exchange of populations and ideas.
Indo-European languages quite probably, this is not yet certain,
developed somewhere on the border between modern Russia and Kazakhstan,
amongst populations that would eventually become pastoral nomads.
And as pastoral nomadism spread, it seems that it carried with it early forms of Indo-European languages.
So pastoral nomadism itself did a lot to connect different regions,
different agrarian civilizations of Afro-Eurasia.
By about 2,000 years ago, these connections are becoming tighter and having a much greater impact.
Trans-Eurasian exchanges begin to become much more common.
We'll see that the Chinese government is beginning to trade with Central Asia
in the last century of the 1st millennium BCE.
Chinese silks start entering Mediterranean markets.
Roman coins begin to be carried in the opposite direction.
A Mediterranean glassware as well.
And Buddhism begins to travel to make its epic journey from India to China.
So ideas, religions, technologies, goods begin to be transmitted
between all the great regions of agrarian civilization in Afro-Eurasia,
certainly from about 2,000 years ago.
And this is when the silk roads really begin to flourish.
Now, let me try and illustrate this process a bit less abstractly.
This talk of exchange networks all sounds very abstract,
but if you associate it with, say, the travels of a Marco Polo in the 13th century
or the campaigns of an Alexander the Great, it's much more vivid.
So I'd like to give one wonderful example of what processes lay behind
this gradual integration of Afro-Eurasian agrarian civilizations
into a larger network of exchange.
This comes from the Han era of Chinese history,
from the 2nd and 1st centuries BCE.
And I'm going to describe an immensely important episode in Chinese history,
which is described by the imperial historian Su Maqian,
whose dates are 145 to 85 BCE.
In 139 BCE, the great Han emperor, Wu Di, whose dates are 141 to 87 BCE,
was engaged in a prolonged campaign against a pastoral nomadic empire
known as the Xiongnu, who were precursors of the Mongols.
And they were based like the Mongols in Mongolia.
He decided to try to outflank them by finding if he could find allies to the west.
But the Chinese government at this time knew very little about what lay off to the west.
So what he did was he sent an envoy, an official called Chang Chen,
to contact another group of nomads, the Yuejue,
who had migrated westwards after being defeated by the Xiongnu.
So Wu Di sends Chang Chen westwards to try and find allies against the Xiongnu.
Now, this was an extremely dangerous mission.
The Xiongnu still controlled the Gansu Corridor.
This is the Corridor, the Gobi Desert, runs through a lot of it,
and it reaches from China, western China, over to Central Asia.
The Xiongnu still controlled much of this area, through which Chang Chen would have to travel.
Now, he sets out in 139 BCE with a Xiongnu slave and interpreter,
Can Fu, and an embassy of a hundred men.
But he's captured pretty soon in the Gansu Corridor,
and he's captured by the Xiongnu, and he's held by them for ten years.
But eventually, with Can Fu and a Xiongnu bride, he escapes,
and he travels on through modern Xinjiang to the kingdom of Ta Yuan,
which is modern Ferganar, in modern Uzbekistan, in Central Asia.
With help from the ruler of Ta Yuan, he travels on to the kingdom of the Yuejue,
who are now settled in the north of modern Afghanistan and in southern Uzbekistan.
And he finds that they're not at all interested in an alliance.
They've escaped from the Xiongnu, they're happy in southern Uzbekistan.
And so he returns, but he returns with a lot of new information.
He returns through the Tarim Basin, this amazing circle of trading cities
that Marco Polo would travel through more than a millennium later.
And he's captured once more by the Xiongnu on his way back.
He escapes again after another year of captivity.
And then in 125 BC, 13 years after he'd left,
he finally returns to China with only his wife and his slave.
Changxin's trip was an event of great significance in the history of Han China,
and even in a sense of Eurasia as a whole.
For it marks the beginning of the first successful attempts by China and Chinese governments
to establish official diplomatic, political and commercial links with Central Asia.
In his report to Emperor Wudi, Changxin described the walled cities of Faigana,
the region's famous wines, and its heavenly horses that seemed to sweat blood.
And he also passed on indirect descriptions of other lands about which the Chinese knew almost nothing,
including India, Parthia and Mesopotamia.
This, remember, is just over 2,000 years ago.
And the fact that they knew nothing is a reminder of how limited contacts were
between different regions of Afro-Eurasia.
So his expedition vastly expanded Chinese knowledge of other regions of Afro-Eurasia.
Knowledge of the wealthy lands of Central Asia encouraged Wudi
to attempt to establish Chinese alliances with them and maybe suzerainty over them.
In 117 BCE, Changxin, though now in disgrace for his failures in a campaign against the Xiongnu,
is given a chance to redeem himself by leading a second expedition westwards.
He establishes regular diplomatic relations with nomadic communities on the route to Central Asia,
potential allies against the Xiongnu.
And eventually, a later expedition, a massive expedition sent from China under a Korean commander,
finally manages to conquer some of the kingdoms of Central Asia.
Now, we can imagine many such episodes in different parts of Eurasia,
each of which has the result of slowly, slowly integrating the agrarian civilizations of the entire landmass
and massively increasing the information that is exchanged between different regions.
Early in the 1st millennium CE, sea routes also began to flourish around the south of Eurasia.
Sea trade increased rapidly between the Mediterranean, India, Southeast Asia and China,
at the same time as land contacts were multiplying along the Silk Roads.
And this was partly because mariners from the Mediterranean region finally learned to exploit the monsoon winds of the Indian Ocean.
Now, the result of all of this was that by about 2,000 years ago, as the late Andrei Gundar Frank has argued,
most of Afro-Eurasia belonged to a single world system.
The term world system is derived from the work of sociologist Emmanuel Wallstein,
and it refers to a large region in which several different agrarian civilizations are linked within a single network of commercial and intellectual and political exchanges.
So what this means is that goods, ideas, religions and technologies are now being exchanged across the largest of all the world zones.
So I hope you get a sense of the sort of power of this integrative process.
It's an early stage of what today we call globalization, and it has a similar stimulating effect on innovation.
Now here's a third factor, commerce and trade as sources of innovation.
The expansion of commerce and trade was undoubtedly a very powerful source of innovation throughout this era.
Since the time of Adam Smith, whose dates are 1723 to 1790, economists have understood perfectly well, and this is really Econ 101,
that competitive markets encourage innovation, and the essential reason is this.
Tributary rulers have the power to exact resources by force in the form of tributes.
Merchants, by and large, lacked the power to generate wealth by force.
Instead, they had to generate wealth by finesse, and this normally meant that they had to produce and sell goods as efficiently and cheaply as possible.
They had to produce them more efficiently, they could distribute them more efficiently, they could find new markets, but however they did it,
most methods of making a profit required an openness to innovation.
This is what we can call Smithian growth, innovation driven by commerce on competitive markets.
And we need to be very clear about the logic of this. Tributary rulers will see normally despised commerce,
but they also needed goods such as rare stones or silks or horses such as the blood-sweating horses of Fergana that Emperor Wudi was so keen to get hold of.
And if these goods lay beyond their frontiers, you could only really get them through merchants.
So very often we find governments' Tributary rulers supporting the activities of merchants because it's the only way of getting certain goods.
However merchants, though sometimes they found sponsors amongst Tributary rulers, tended to flourish best in the cracks between agrarian empires,
such as in small city-states that traded with or between agrarian civilizations.
Venice and Genoa in the last millennium are a spectacular example of such systems.
Earlier on, Phoenicia in modern Lebanon was a very good example of highly developed small commercial city-states that flourished in between great and wealthy Tributary empires.
Urbanization also stimulated commerce in this period because cities sucked in goods, techniques and people from large hinterlands.
So urbanization undoubtedly stimulated commerce too.
In 3000 BCE few cities had more than 30,000 inhabitants.
Most were in Mesopotamia or Egypt.
By about 1200 BCE it's been estimated large cities had also appeared in India and China.
And by about 100 CE there may have been over 70 large cities in Afro-Eurasia.
So we can sort of track the spread in the number and size of cities in Afro-Eurasia.
And this undoubtedly stimulated commerce and as we've seen it's a very good presumption that as commerce spread it encouraged innovation.
Now a fourth driver of innovation in this period is Tribute taking states themselves.
Tribute taking states were immensely powerful organizers so we really need to look carefully at them and their impact on innovation.
Could they stimulate innovation or not?
Well here we're going to see the stories a bit ambiguous.
By and large Tribute taking elites tended to be quite hostile to commerce, they tended to despise commerce.
They didn't need to negotiate for wealth, they took it.
Nevertheless there were various ways in which they could stimulate innovation.
One we've seen already is by encouraging commerce in areas where they needed to get strategic foreign goods.
But generally Tribute taking states and the elites that ran them had less incentive to innovate than merchants.
And there's a very simple reason for this.
They could extract resources coercively.
They could take resources by force.
And this is a very powerful general rule.
In an era when growth was painfully slow by modern standards it often made more sense to capture wealth through war if you had the ability to do so than to produce wealth through investments that might take generations to mature.
Now that I think is a fundamental reason why most rulers in the later agrarian era thought of themselves primarily as warriors rather than producers as takers of wealth rather than generators of wealth.
They admired warfare and they found fulfillment in it and that's an attitude which it's not that easy to appreciate in a world committed formally at least to the virtues of peace.
Let me just quote a very short passage which conveys this kind of exuberant, unashamed delight in warfare and slaughter, the bloodiest parts of warfare.
From, it comes from a 12th century French writer who's describing, we have to call it the joy of battle.
And this is what he says.
I tell you that I never eat or sleep or drink so well as when I hear the cry up an atom from both sides and when I hear the neighing of rideless horses in the brush and hear shouts of help, help and see men fall and the dead pierced in the side by gaily pennoned spears.
Now it's a literary example but I think it conveys an entire world in which warfare was seen as fulfillment, as self-expression and as what rulers did.
There's a lovely quote also from Machiavelli, in The Prince he's very clear about this and he writes that if you're a prince what you need to think about all the time is war.
War is the key to success.
A prince therefore he writes should have no other object or thought nor acquire skill in anything except war, its organization and its discipline.
The art of war is all that is expected of a ruler.
Now I have to say that Machiavelli is writing a time at a time and then a place where these rules are changing.
So he's really describing this kind of archetypes of the tribute taking world.
The first way to lose your state he writes is to neglect the art of war.
The first way to win a state is to be skilled in the art of war.
And this fact that taking wealth is the key to success in a world of tributary states and tribute taking states has lots of consequences for elite culture.
Machiavelli describes them well.
The prince he writes should never let his thoughts stray from military exercises which he should pursue more vigorously in peace than in war.
These exercises can be both physical and mental.
As for the first besides keeping his men well organized and trained he should always be out hunting.
This I think suggests why hunting has always been such an admired skill amongst the elites of tribute taking states.
By hunting he's accustoming his body to hardships and also learning some practical geography.
How the mountains slope, how the valleys open, how the planes spread out.
So the basic skill of being a tributary ruler is military.
It's knowing how to handle warfare.
Nevertheless having said all of this sometimes to succeed tributary rulers had to encourage innovation.
For example, sometimes in some situations heavy taxation could encourage innovation by forcing peasants to raise production in order to feed themselves and pay taxes.
We've understood we've seen that some rulers knew perfectly well that they could increase tributes by stimulating production and maintaining infrastructure.
That meant protecting peasants, building and maintaining irrigation systems and avoiding excessive taxation.
And finally military and strategic factors encouraged rulers to undertake large projects that often encouraged trade and commerce.
In the Roman Empire military needs simulated innovation in road building, bridge building, the construction of aqueducts, the building of elaborate military catapults and siege engines.
And such innovations could have a significant trickle down effect to use modern jargon.
Joel McKeer writes in a history of technology, the Rome of 100 AD, 100 CE in our terminology, had better paved streets, sewage disposal, water supply and fire protection than the capitals of civilized Europe in 1800.
Finally the building of monumental architecture, the building of pyramids for example, could provide employment, any courage innovation in areas such as architecture, engineering and mathematics.
So there were several areas in which the activities of tribute taking states encouraged innovation, particularly areas of direct interest themselves such as architecture, building and warfare.
So in all of these ways agrarian civilizations could drive growth.
These are some of the specific mechanisms of growth in agrarian civilizations.
And yet we know growth was nothing like as fast as today.
Why not?
We'll ask that question in the next lecture.
Thank you.
