So that's one of the pieces of evidence that they were pretty sedentary.
And the other, of course, is the piece we've already seen,
that they built these very solid, durable houses,
not the sort of things you build and then leave for 11 months.
A third feature of the Natufians is that they clearly harvested grains.
This is a surprise for a foraging population.
You find in Natufian sites grindstones,
and you can find, you can detect what they've been used on.
And it turns out what they were used on was emma, which is a form of wheat.
That's spelled E-M-M-E-R.
And you also find in Natufian sites, sickles.
They're made by setting flint blades into bone handles,
often made from the jaw bones of gazelles or other hunted animals.
Now, archaeologists can study the edges of these sickle blades through microscopes.
And what it shows is that they had been used clearly to harvest grains.
You can find the remnants of this. You can find clear evidence of this.
Now, all the evidence we've seen so far looks like an agricultural village.
They're sedentary, they have solid houses, they're harvesting grains.
But some of the evidence in these villages doesn't fit in with this picture at all.
And the first thing is that if you analyze the grains that they were harvesting,
it turns out they were not from domesticated, but from wild species.
How can archaeologists tell this?
By studying grain pollen, archaeologists can distinguish,
for the most part, between wild and domesticated species that supplies to plants
and also they can do the same thing by and large by studying animal bones.
So very often archaeologists can distinguish between wild and domesticated species.
The fact that the grains were wild showed that they were not farmers.
Instead, they were sedentary or semi-sedentary foragers.
Later, we'll see how study of the Natufians has helped us to solve some of the puzzles
that surround the agricultural revolution.
But we have already seen examples of sedentary or semi-sedentary foragers.
OK, now let's try to explain the agricultural revolution.
In the previous lecture, we saw that agriculture appeared within just a few thousand years
in many different parts of the world.
So this is actually very odd.
Why, after living apparently quite contentedly as foragers for perhaps 200,000 years,
should humans suddenly start using an entirely new set of technologies?
And why, when they did so, did human communities in quite separate parts of the world
start doing so nearly simultaneously?
The simultaneity of this is very strange indeed,
and any decent explanation of the agricultural revolution must attempt to explain it.
Here's a quotation from two recent researchers on the subject of early agriculture,
Price and Gebauer.
In a book called Last Hunter's First Farmers, they write this.
For some reason, beginning around 10,000 years ago,
hunters became farmers in a number of different places on the planet.
The intentional cultivation of domesticated plants was an almost simultaneous,
yet completely independent development.
In Southwest Asia, by which they mean Mesopotamia, the Fertile Crescent,
Southwest Asia, China and Southeast Asia, Mesoamerica, South America and the Eastern United States,
transpiring within a period of approximately 5,000 years.
That's the problem we have to explain to explain agriculture.
Why this odd simultaneity?
Let's immediately rule out two explanations that might be tempting.
Let's begin with extraterrestrials.
This is one that I found I'm always going to have to deal with when teaching this subject.
The near simultaneity of the appearance of agriculture
certainly tempts many of my students to remember Stanley Kubrick,
suggesting in 2001 that extraterrestrials nudged humans towards the technology of hunting.
So let's just clear this one out of the way straight away.
You remember 2001, you remember the monoliths,
that they nudge humans towards civilization of some kind
by planting ideas in the minds of hominins of various kinds.
Well, we're not going to even look at an idea like this, of course,
until we can find some concrete evidence.
So let's just get that one out of the way.
We have no concrete evidence for this.
We have to find a subtler way of explaining this.
Now, here's a much more serious and much more influential idea
about the origins of agriculture.
It probably dominated explanations of this phenomenon in the 19th century
and for much of the 20th century, and it goes like this.
The idea is that agriculture appeared as a brilliant one-off invention,
a bit like, say, the steam engine or the internet.
And it was such a brilliant invention that once it appeared,
people naturally took it up.
So what it did was it diffused from the center where it first appeared
around the world.
This we can describe as a diffusionist explanation of agriculture.
Such explanations are tempting
because inventions do indeed spread rapidly around the world.
There are many phenomena that do diffuse rapidly.
And these explanations were particularly fashionable in the late 19th century
because they carried some nice implications for European scholars.
In an age of imperialism, they carried the implication that
all the good things diffuse from high civilizations to simpler civilizations.
And that was very much the thinking behind 19th century diffusionists.
And the idea was that agriculture first appeared probably in somewhere like Egypt,
maybe Mesopotamia, and then spread to lower civilizations.
Now, as we'll see, there are very good empirical reasons for rejecting
diffusionist arguments for the initial origins of agriculture.
Diffusionist arguments will be very important
once we try to explain how agriculture spread from these initial points
where it first appeared.
But at the moment, they cannot explain why it first appeared.
And above all, they cannot explain this sort of near-simultaneity that we've looked at.
So diffusionism is now rejected broadly as a general explanation
for the initial appearance of agriculture.
There are several reasons for this.
Agriculture was not a single invention, like the steam engine.
It's actually a cluster of linked innovations requiring entirely new lifeways.
It was not the sort of thing you could have taken a patent on.
Agriculture implied the domestication of crops and animals, techniques for weeding,
elementary forms of irrigation.
It implied discovering the best ways of planting, protecting and harvesting
particular crops, as well as storing them.
It also required new social rules, such as rules about who owned what.
So the puzzle is to explain a whole cascade of changes, not just a single intervention.
Besides, we'll see that agriculture did not necessarily improve living standards.
It was not necessarily so attractive that every foraging community that learnt about it
was bound to take up agriculture.
Modern studies of modern foraging societies have shown that many deliberately reject farming.
They see farmers, they know how farmers live, and they don't want to live that way.
So we shouldn't assume without careful thought that agriculture
necessarily represents an improvement in the way people lived.
Archaeological evidence suggests that those foragers who rejected the agricultural lifeway
may have had some good reasons for doing so, for many early farmers
seemed to have suffered from poor health and nutrition.
We can tell this from archaeological evidence, such as
an increase in the number of stress lines in the bones of early farmers
and a decline in average height.
Now this fact, this indirect evidence that living standards may have deteriorated
in some early agrarian communities affects how we explain agriculture.
If agriculture was not such an attractive lifeway,
perhaps we need to focus more on the push than the pull.
In other words, we need to look for factors that pushed people into agriculture
rather than factors that lured them into it, as in the 19th century diffusionist model.
And the third reason for rejecting that 19th century model is that
as we've seen, agriculture wasn't invented once but many times.
There's not just one point from which it spreads to the rest of the world.
Diffusionism can't explain this near simultaneity we've looked at,
though it will explain the later spread of agriculture.
Now we've seen some of the difficulties of explaining agriculture.
It really is quite a tricky threshold to explain.
Modern explanations include several interlocking factors.
And I have to admit straight away there is as yet no completely uniform consensus
on exactly what is the best way of explaining how agriculture first appeared.
There's still plenty of room for debate on the issue.
However, most explanations refer to the same basic factors,
even if they may link them in slightly different ways.
Here I'll propose a possible explanation in five main steps,
five main steps just to try and clarify the logic of the argument.
Unlike some models you may come across, you should note that this is a push model.
It assumes that by and large humans were eventually pushed into agriculture
rather than lured into it.
Something happened that forced them to take up agricultural lifeways.
It's not a pull model like the diffusionist argument we've just been talking about.
Okay, here are our five main steps in trying to explain the initial appearance of agriculture.
The first of them is pre-existing knowledge,
by which I mean that modern studies of foraging communities have shown over and over again
that they have an immense amount of knowledge about the organisms surrounding them,
the plants and animals, particularly those that they use for food.
They have an immense amount of knowledge,
and very often that knowledge includes knowledge about how to increase
the production of this particular plant or this particular animal.
We've seen that fire stick farming, for example,
is an example of ways that foragers could increase the productivity of a particular area.
The problem, therefore, is not knowledge.
It's not that foragers didn't know many of the things you need to know in order to farm.
They had the knowledge, so it looks as if they simply didn't need to intensify production.
So the problem is to explain why foragers suddenly start applying this knowledge
much more vigorously. The knowledge was not new.
The puzzle is why they begin to apply it on a large scale.
So that's the first step.
A lot of the knowledge you need for agriculture already existed.
Now the second step.
The second step is the distribution of potential domesticates.
Animals, some animals and plants can be domesticated quite easily.
Wheat is an example.
Others can't be domesticated so easily.
Kangaroos are an example of that.
So the exact way that animals and plants were distributed
may help us explain the geographical distribution of early agriculture.
In some regions there were organisms that could be turned into domesticates very, very easily indeed.
In other areas it was tougher.
Jared Diamond has pointed out in his bestseller Guns, Germs and Steel
that the fertile crescent where the Natuthians lived had a remarkable number of species
that can be domesticated with only fairly minor changes.
So this is the second point.
Other regions had fewer easily domesticated species.
The Americas, for example, had far fewer promising animal domesticates.
Now you may remember why.
The reason may be that early humans in the Americas actually hunted them to extinction.
There were very few large mammals in the Americas after the megafaunal extinctions
of the end of the Paleolithic era.
So perhaps the availability or non-availability of easily domesticable species in an area
may help us explain why it appeared in some regions rather than others.
It's surely a matter of luck, the sort of organisms around you.
That's the second factor.
We've looked at pre-existing knowledge and now the geography of domesticates.
A third factor.
Population pressure.
Now here's where the analogies with star formation are most tempting.
Population pressure is similar to the buildup of pressure that created the first stars
in the earlier solar nebulae.
But we'll see that growing population pressure,
we can imagine how it could have driven humans into agriculture.
When you see more population, you suddenly start worrying about starvation,
so you start thinking, well, we must find ways of producing more food from a given area.
So it's a promising-looking argument,
but it probably cannot explain the emergence of agriculture on its own.
It's been proposed in the work of a pre-historian, Mark Cohen,
who's done very important work on the life of early farmers
and on the transition to agriculture.
He's shown that as far as just migrated around the world,
population may have built up in a very loose sense,
in the sense that humans by 13,000 years ago
had entered all the large areas of the earth that were previously unoccupied by humans.
So by about 10,000 years ago,
there are no new continents for humans to enter,
and this may put an end to extentsification, the process I described before,
but to support growing populations, you can simply migrate to a new area.
Now, that possibility is being closed off.
The Paleolithic frontier, if you like, has been closed.
Now, this is a tempting argument, but there's a problem with it,
and the main problem is this.
Studies of modern foragers show that foragers are often very conscious of population pressure.
In other words, they have a very good idea of how much their land,
how many people their land will support,
and that means that very often they systematically limit population growth.
This may mean several things.
It may mean prolonged breastfeeding, which limits fertility,
but it may mean more violent methods such as killing the weaker of two twins,
which seems to have been a fairly common practice,
or allowing the old to die, infanticide and senilecide.
Now, if that's true, it means overpopulation shouldn't have been a problem.
Hunter-gatherers or foragers could adjust by simply limiting population growth.
The argument's tricky in another sense.
By modern standards, the world was grossly underpopulated 10,000 years ago,
but of course, it could still have been overpopulated,
given the fact that foragers needed such huge areas to survive.
So that's the third argument, overpopulation.
It's tempting, but before we can use it, there are problems.
So let's see if we can overcome them.
Here's the fourth factor.
And this may be a way of explaining how population growth worked.
Sedentism.
Sedentism as a cause of population growth.
Here, the natufians may help us solve the riddle.
