A smaller version of this sort of display of power is undoubtedly the stone figures, the ahu,
these astonishing heads that you find on Easter Island.
They also represent a more modest form of power as the Stonehenge in Britain.
So archaeology can tell us a lot about these power structures.
What is hard to tease out from archaeology is exactly how these power structures worked.
And to get some sense of how they worked, we have to go to anthropology.
And in particular to anthropological studies of modern early agrarian societies such as the societies of Papua New Guinea,
parts of Melanesia or the Amazon, societies that still in many ways will like the societies of the early agrarian era.
And these modern studies can suggest ways of interpreting the archaeological evidence.
As always, when we use modern anthropological evidence to interpret the past record,
we must remember that these are modern models and we may be missing important differences between them
and the first early agrarian societies.
Okay, it's no accident that we start looking at power not in the Paleolithic but within the early agrarian era.
For there's a very close relationship as we've seen between agriculture and the evolution of power.
The emergence of institutionalized forms of power correlates very, very directly with the buildup of agriculture,
the spread of agriculture, the growth of populations that we've seen as a central phenomenon in the early agrarian era.
The key was population growth, more people and more stuff.
I defined power as having two elements, control and the stuff that's controlled.
And the key to the buildup of larger, more institutionalized power structures is the buildup of more stuff,
larger communities with more resources, more stored resources, more warehouses full of grain and wealth and so on.
So as communities became larger, more productive and more interdependent,
the possibilities for building power structures developed.
And something else changed too, as they became larger, more complex, more interdependent, new problems arose
which created more need for forms of leadership.
So these two things, an increased need for leadership and increased resources,
help explain why the buildup of agrarian societies, their expansion in size, numbers and resources,
is the key to understanding the buildup of power structures.
Let's look at this issue of leadership. Why a society's got larger did the need for leadership increase?
Whenever complexity increases, you have to have new coordinating mechanisms of some kind.
This is certainly true once we reach the level of life and all further levels of complexity.
You need something like the nervous systems in multi-celled organisms
and something like this seems to be true of human societies.
Like modern families, we've seen Paleolithic communities could deal with conflicts, for example, face-to-face or simply by splitting.
If two people didn't get on, one of them could simply leave and join another group.
It's a very simple method of conflict resolution.
In earlier agrarian villages, relations were often a lot less personal,
but splitting was also more difficult because households has invested labour and resources in crops and farmed land,
and it wasn't so easy just to pick up and move.
So increasingly, to deal with conflicts within the community, leaders were needed to resolve these disputes.
Or leaders were needed to resolve disputes not only within the community, but also within, with neighbouring communities as well.
So here's one function of leadership that becomes more and more important as communities get larger, more impersonal, more complex.
A second function is religious.
In the very personal world of the Paleolithic, we saw it may have been that people thought of the world as animistic.
They thought of the world as people with spirits of various kinds.
Many of them not very powerful or very large scale.
Figures that might have magical powers, but were probably no more powerful than you and me.
But as societies expanded, the gods seemed to have generally become more magnificent.
And as that happened, worshipping them became itself a public task,
so specialist priests began to take on the role of communicating with these rather grand deities.
And their privileged relation with the gods could give priests considerable influence and prestige
that often could be parlayed into real power.
For example, priests were often in a very good position to extract gifts for the gods.
In Sumer, we'll see the temples of Sumer contained huge amounts of offerings from the population at large for the gods,
which of course were not always consumed by the gods, but sometimes controlled by the priests themselves.
And in large communities, other tasks arose, such as garbage collection, wall building,
or the maintenance of temples and irrigation systems, and these two required leadership.
Another reason why leadership became increasingly important as communities become larger, denser, more complex
is the appearance of specialists and a division of labour.
As you start getting small towns, early forms of cities, you start getting a number of people who are no longer peasants.
They are specialists. They may be warriors, or they may be potters, or eventually they may be scribes.
Now these people, to get food and the other things they need, are going to have to swap them with other members of society.
So once you get a division of labour, you need complex systems of exchange of goods.
You need markets, and you need someone to protect the markets.
Here's one more reason why leadership becomes more crucial.
So this is one of the reasons why, as societies become more complex, they need leaders more,
and power from below becomes more and more important.
Populations in these large and growing communities increasingly find that they need to appoint leaders.
They need to delegate power to someone.
So this is one of the mechanisms by which new forms of leadership emerge.
Who became the leaders? How did you get to be one?
Well in the sort of environment I've been describing so far, the crucial quality may be skill.
The people who step into leadership positions are often people who have particular skills.
So someone who is widely respected for their honesty, their understanding of tradition,
their understanding of traditional ethical rules may well be widely accepted as a mediator.
And they'll be conceded a position that today we might describe as a position of judge.
Or someone, for example, who is regarded as profoundly religious,
or someone who communicates very naturally and easily with the gods,
may very easily acquire a leadership position in relations with the gods.
Or someone with particular skill in warfare or organization.
So there are people who step into leadership roles because they have skills.
Now that's one of the way early forms of leadership undoubtedly emerged.
But the other form is birth.
In Paleolithic communities, it was generally not too hard to figure out who was related to whom within kinship systems.
You're dealing with communities of very small numbers of people who have relations with neighbouring communities as well.
But once you have a community of several hundred or a thousand people,
figuring out relationships becomes much more complex so that kinship systems have to adapt to the growing size of communities.
And as communities expand in size, increasingly what tends to happen
is they begin to construct what we can think of as mythological genealogies.
These are genealogies that they often take the following form.
They'll trace everyone in the community, or most people in the community,
to some mythical or semi-mythical ancestor who may have lived several generations in the past.
But once you do this, you start being forced to classify people in different ways.
Because the question that naturally arises within any kinship system is,
OK, so you're related to this distant founding ancestor,
but precisely how are you descended perhaps from the youngest daughter of that ancient ancestor,
or are you descended from the eldest son of that ancient ancestor?
These sort of questions can become very important in a world that thinks of all social relations in terms of kinship.
And so what very often happens is that in such an environment, you start developing aristocracies.
These are people whose lineage is higher.
They are descended from the senior lines of the senior lines of the senior lines
and can trace their way all the way back to the senior lines of the founding father.
So this is one of the mechanisms that can create a sense of aristocracy.
And very often in large communities, those who can trace their descent
directly to these founding ancestors through senior lines
will claim the deference due in a small family to seniority.
So high birth can begin to provide a seemingly natural basis for authority.
One of the archaeological pieces of evidence for this, or for the importance of ancestry,
may be something we've seen already.
That's the decoration of ancestral skulls, which was done so carefully, even in Natufian communities.
And it suggests how important lineage was, even in the very earliest agrarian communities.
Now here's one more question about who becomes a leader.
The question of power and gender.
Why in leadership systems over and over again do males appear disproportionately
in disproportionate numbers in these institutionalized power structures?
Males dominated leadership roles in most early agrarian communities,
laying the foundations for the asymmetrical power relations that are often described as patriarchy.
So what are the sources of patriarchy?
Clearly, it's not because women are incapable of exercising power.
I say this as someone who grew up in a country with a queen who's been in office now for over 50 years,
which was revolutionized in the 1980s under a female Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher,
probably one of the most powerful ruling figures in modern British history.
So clearly, we must look for other reasons.
A lot of research has been conducted into this issue in the last few decades.
And as yet, there's not a perfect consensus, but here are some possible explanations.
One takes us back to the demographic rules of agrarian societies,
and the fact that they were very different from those of foraging societies.
This is something we've seen already.
In foraging societies, there often seem to have been systematic attempts to limit populations.
And there was a very good reason for this.
You, in a nomadic community, you simply cannot carry people who can't carry themselves.
And also foraging communities, certainly modern foraging communities,
are very often very sensitive to the carrying capacity of their environment.
So we've seen that foraging communities seem often to have deliberately limited populations.
But once they settle down, once they become farmers, the rules change and they change radically.
In most of the agrarian societies we know of.
So it's a reasonable bet that this applied also to early agrarian societies.
One of the crucial rules for the success of an individual household was,
have as many children as you possibly can.
And one of the reasons for this is that one of the few factors of production, to use an economist term,
that most households could control, was labor.
They often couldn't control exactly how much land they had, or cash they had, or capital.
Labor was the one they could control.
And maximizing the amount of labor available on your farm may enhance your wealth,
but it may also provide protection in old age.
So having lots of children seems to have been a crucial rule in most peasant societies.
But what did this mean for women?
What it meant for women is that throughout their reproductive years,
they were tied largely to their roles as reproducers and as child rearers.
Consequently, men who weren't tied anything like as closely to these roles
found it much easier to take on specialist roles as societies became more complex,
as a division of labor emerged, and particularly as power roles began to emerge.
So this may explain the initial imbalance in power roles.
But then something else takes over, the symbolism and mythology of power.
Once power roles emerge, and you find that most of the people who occupy them are male,
this can very easily generate the presumption that males were natural leaders.
So I think this may be the source of the sort of mythology of patriarchy,
the idea that males are natural leaders,
even if in most households, power relations in practice were probably quite variable.
Okay, now let's try and look at some small-scale forms of power,
the kind of embryonic forms of power that probably emerged in the early agrarian era.
And here we rely largely on modern anthropological studies.
They offer some very helpful models of how simple forms of power may have emerged.
And I'm going to focus on two of these models.
Let me say immediately that these models are models.
They are sort of tools for thinking rather than necessarily terribly precise descriptions
of what actually happened, because the truth is we don't really know.
So we have to use these models.
And the first is the big man, and the second is the chief.
So let's look at the idea of the big man.
And the big man was, as far as we know, invariably a man.
In a classic 1955 study, Douglas Oliver described the big men,
or the mummies, M-U-M-I-S, of the Solomon Islands, east of Papua New Guinea.
Ambitious young men would go round to their relatives and friends collecting food.
Then they would throw a huge feast.
Now, the feast might include pigs, it might include coconut pies,
it might include sago puddings for local men.
So they throw this huge feast.
At the end of the feast, they're broke.
I mean, everything they've collected has gone.
So at first sight, it's hard to see what they gain out of this.
Those whose feasts were judged impressive enough, however,
could acquire enough of a following to become mummies.
So what they gain out of this is prestige,
and they also gain debts, as it were, that they can cash in later on.
So though they may end up impoverished as a result of collecting all this stuff,
then giving it away again.
A widely used term for this process, incidentally, is potlatch,
from similar practices on the northwest coast of North America.
The result of giving away this stuff is that you create potential followers.
They owe you something, and you can cash in these debts sometime in the future.
This is very like modern so-called pork barrel politics.
Gift-giving is a form of political investment.
So here's a very early form of power that we can describe as a form of power from below.
You've bought powerful allies by giving them gifts.
Now this form of power could be turned quite rapidly into a rather coercive form of power.
Mummies could become powerful war leaders.
One old man in Oliver's study remembered that, and I quote,
in the olden times there were greater mummies than there are today.
Then they were fierce and relentless war leaders.
They laid waste to the countryside and their clubhouses were lined with the skulls of people they had slain.
So this business of giving away stuff to recruit followers was very, very serious politics,
and it could lead quite quickly to quite coercive politics.
So the move from power from below to coercive power could be very swift indeed.
Still, in this sort of world the power to coerce rested mainly on the ability to line up loyal followers.
As Marvin Harris writes in a passage from which I've taken these quotations,
without warfare the potential for control inherent in the egg of redistribution would never have hatched.
And of course the leader to retain their power has to keep finding goods and handing them out.
So this is a fairly precarious form of power.
Now let's look at the second model of power, the chief.
And again, let me just stress that this is a model.
In fact, it's so schematic in some ways that these are labels that many anthropologists are uncomfortable about using.
So I just need to remind you that these are sort of tools for thinking about how power may have worked,
rather than anything more specific.
The concept of chiefs is often used to refer to leaders that normally rule over other leaders.
So here we have two or three levels of power.
They may have little direct contact with most of their subjects.
Their power is often based on high lineage and birth.
Very often chiefs acquire a leadership role because of aristocratic birth.
The Polish anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski, who did very important work in the early 20th century in Melanesia,
once describes witnessing how, and I quote,
how all the people present in the village of Boitalu in the Trabriand Islands
drop from their verandas as if blown down by a hurricane
at the sound of a long drawn out cry announcing the arrival of an important chief.
Unlike the mummies whose relationship with their followers is quite personal,
the chief is a more remote figure.
In fact, much more god-like.
Chiefs in the Trabriand Islands ruled many thousands of people.
They wore special shell ornaments to show their status,
and others were forbidden to even stand so that their heads were higher than that of the chief.
So these are figures that are almost god-like.
Archaeologists suspect the presence of chiefs
when they find large structures such as pyramids or earthen mounds
which required control over not just single villages,
but over hundreds or thousands of workers.
And at their most, most powerful, chiefs can wield very considerable power indeed.
A French explorer, La Parge du Pratz,
lived briefly amongst the Natchez tribes of the Mississippi in 1720.
And in the words of the prehistorian Brian Fagan,
he found himself in a rigidly stratified society
