All right, so this talk is called the Universal Library,
a novel approach to teaching category theory.
So my name is Paul Danstep.
I was an educator at a science museum called
the Exploratorium for about 17 years.
So I'm really interested in public communication
around science, and I started learning category theory
about four or five years ago.
I'm very much an amateur.
I think I take like a journalistic interest
in category theory.
But what was really fascinating to me in learning it
was that it was difficult in a way
that no other mathematics I had struggled to learn
before had been.
It felt like it was really hinged around a kind
of shift in perspective or sort of paradigmatic
like psychological move.
And I'm really curious to understand that better,
and I think as a pedagogical strategy
to try and come up with ways of assisting people
and sort of scaffolding them through that transition.
So I want to present, I think, a pretty experimental idea
for how you might approach trying to explain category theory
and how I think it might help with some of the typical
problems a person encounters.
So one way to characterize it,
or the difficulty of learning category theory,
this is from the beginning of Emily Reels' textbook.
It is difficult to preview the main theorems
of category theory before developing fluency
in the language needed to state them.
And I think this is very true.
Like the early stages, you're being given a lot
of abstractions which aren't even necessarily complicated.
They're just really peculiar relative to what you're used to.
And you've got to get through a pretty long onboarding
of these abstractions.
So in terms of learning category theory,
you have books like Emily's and these other ones.
And I would consider these hard introductions
to categories just in the sense that they presume,
the presumptive audience is mathematicians.
You're expected to know a good deal about algebraic topology
and logic and abstract algebra.
And then this language is going to be explained to you
in terms of those subjects.
And that is an excellent way to show category theory off
at its best because it's showing exactly
how powerful and versatile it is.
There are some other more friendly introductions,
Conceptual Mathematics by LaVeer and David's book,
I feel take a somewhat broader sense of who their audience is
and really do try to do more to sort of equip the learner
with what they need as they go along.
And then I was saying the only real general audience book
I know that really treats category theory is
Eugenia Chang's How to Bake a Pie.
And this book's kind of amazing because it is a totally great
adequate explanation of what category theory is,
but it doesn't explain anything about the contents
of category theory.
You don't learn what a functor is.
You don't learn what a natural transformation is.
I would say it's a category theorist's explanation
of her subject, which is that she doesn't reveal
any of the contents.
She just specifies it by saying how it's related
to everything else like math and logic and cooking.
So what I'm proposing today is that I think
there's room for another sort of class
of instructional material that's somewhere between these
that on the one hand is not really trying to make
a mathematician out of the reader
or the person interacting with it, whatever it is,
but is really just trying to inform them
about the big ideas of an important subject.
And really more like the books on the right
does really take the abstracts,
or the structures of elementary category theory
like limits and co-limits and adjoinness
as the objective to try and give people
some meaningful contact with.
Some books that I think go in this category,
there's a book by Raymond Smollion
called To Mock a Mockingbird,
and it's basically a toy treatment
of combinatorial logic.
The story is you're going through a forest
and there's all these birds which are technically
combinators and they have a way when they hear
one bird call, they have another bird call that they say.
And with the benefit of this toy model,
Smollion is able to go through all kinds of stuff
from computability theory and like Gertl's theorem
and other things.
Another one I really like is that is also similar
to what I'm gonna present today is Serial Numbers
by Don Knuth.
Supposedly John Horton Conway came up with
Serial Numbers while studying mathematics
and he told the axioms to Don Knuth
who then like went into a reverie
and like got a hotel room and like wrote this book
in a few weeks, and the whole thing is just a dialogue
between a man and a woman who find the axioms
of Serial Numbers etched in stone and then spend the book
like problem solving and figuring it out together.
So this is kind of bespoke, self-contained strategies
for dealing with a technically sophisticated subject
in a fun kind of recreational way.
So the model I wanna propose for trying to explain
elementary category theory, I first learned about
from a story by Jorge Luis Borges called
the Library of Babel.
The premise of this story is that the universe
is just this seemingly endless series of rooms
filled with books, it's a big library.
And if you look at any of the books, they're all just
gibberish, it's just like random letters.
And what they gradually figure out in the story
is that they're sitting on like every
combinatorially possible book that could be written.
So somewhere out there there's AAAAA,
somewhere else there's AAAAA with just a B at the end
and so on.
So the story kind of trips out on all the weird stuff
that must be in there, there's a detailed history
of the future, a faithful catalog of the library,
thousands and thousands of false catalogs,
the proof of the falsity of those false catalogs,
the true story of your death, the translation of every book
into every language, the interpolations of every book
into all books.
So it's a great little philosophical object,
it's a beautiful story, but it also
has a lot of sort of mathematical value.
There's a lot of people who have taken this up
in different ways.
The logician, Willard von Ormann-Quine
has a really nice little essay in this book
where he sort of stages a mock discovery of binary notation
by thinking about how to make the library smaller.
This book has a explanation of the Banach-Tarski Paradox,
which is kind of a paradox from set theoretic geometry,
where you can take a sphere and divide it
into a finite number of parts and reassemble it
into two spheres of the same volume as the first.
Ian Stewart kind of takes the library
and describes a dissection method based on the letters
that sort of matches the Banach-Tarski dissection.
There's actually a whole book by the mathematician William
Block, which just goes through Borges' library
from the perspective of number theory, topology, I think.
You can make a little mathematical meal out
of all of the different ways of looking at this library.
What I've been thinking about for the last year or so
is that there actually is a way to look at the library
and embellish it a little bit and turn it
into the category Fin set.
So it's the category of finite sets and functions.
And kind of my claim is that I think that this metaphor,
this analogy is actually an adequate setting
within which to characterize basic category theory.
So the plan for this talk is I'm just
going to explain how to think of the Universal Library
as Fin set, and that's actually the whole talk it took me.
It's going to take me as many slides.
As much talking as I can do in one sitting
is what it's going to take.
So at the end, I'll just make some overtures about where
I think this could go.
I have some outline about how you
might be able to show limits and co-limits,
adjointness, and representables using this mental model.
I should say that my motive in bringing it,
I've just kind of had this thought to myself
for the last year or so, and I thought
it was mature enough that it would
be interesting to put in front of some actual category
theorists to see what they would say.
But I also appreciate that this might be a highly
idiosyncratic way of thinking about it,
or that it may be totally overextending this metaphor.
So I mostly am interested in honest feedback.
But it is also kind of an invitation.
I have gotten a lot out of thinking about this.
It's helped me and my own understanding a great deal.
So if anyone finds this amusing,
I'd love to have people to talk to about how to stage
these sections, which are still kind of under development.
OK, so we're going to be given every book of every length
written in every alphabet.
So this is the main object we're going to be working with is a book.
Book is characterized by two ingredients.
Every book has an alphabet of letters that it draws from,
and every book also has a specific length.
So a certain number of those letters
that it contains in sequence.
Well, Borges' book had all the books were a fixed length.
They were all 410 pages, and they all
used a single alphabet of 25 letters.
We are going to be a little bit more expansive in that we
are going to have books of every length
and alphabets of every length as well.
So we actually have an alphabet with no letters.
We have an alphabet with one letter,
an alphabet with two letters, an alphabet with three letters,
and so on.
So these are the first eight, but we have an infinite sequence
of integer length alphabets to choose from.
The important thing is that the symbols representing each letter
need to all be distinct so that we can tell them all apart.
And it's actually nice if you have one letter from a given
alphabet that it bears some family resemblance
to the other letters in that alphabet just so we
can know what we're looking at when we see one.
And the other thing is that these don't come with any sense
of order.
So these are non-ordered alphabets.
So they're just basically sets of letters.
And so that's what our books will be written in.
And then on the other end of things,
we have books of every length.
So we have a kind of format or a template for each book length.
This is a book with no spaces, so it can contain no letters.
This one you can see has available space for one letter.
We have two letter books, three letter books.
So these are empty book templates that we will fill
in order to make a real book.
So if I take a full, sorry, is that a question?
It's just one page.
It was a bit of a trick to figure out
how to depict this without having to have animated pages
turning.
So let's write a book using this alphabet of this length.
Basically, each space freely chooses one of these letters.
So we have triangle, square, triangle, circle is our book.
So this is an example of a four-space, three-alphabet book.
There are several others.
In fact, there are 81 different combinations
you can make with this particular type signature.
So we'll call this a collection.
This is the collection of all books
that can be written, the four-space length,
the three-space alphabet.
And when we receive the library for investigation,
it's going to come to us separated into these collections.
So each collection is going to be housed
in a big rectangular warehouse like this.
So imagine this is a big chamber you can walk into,
and it's full of books.
We're going to have infinitely many of these
laid out in a big array.
And the logic of it is that we have
our various alphabets in sequence along the right
and our various books of various lengths
associated along the left.
So every chamber in this aisle is
going to be filled with books that
have been written in a three-letter alphabet.
And every chamber in this aisle is
going to consist of books that are two spaces long.
So if we zoom in on the intersection, for example,
we can see that in the two-space three-alphabet
collection, we have nine books.
We don't have an order on the alphabet,
so there's therefore no presumptive order
on these books either.
So when we go into these chambers,
the books are just kind of like in a pile on the floor.
But in the back of every chamber,
there is a shelving unit, and it has exactly as many slots
as there are books in that chamber.
So we could put these books into some kind of order
if we chose to.
That seems to be kind of the expectation.
And this is the situation in every one of these chambers.
We've got a big pile of books.
The piles get quite big as you go off in the direction.
And what we want to do is try and figure out
a way of shelving them.
So the way to do this systematically
is we're going to go back to our set of alphabets,
and we're just going to go through them one by one,
and we're going to choose an alphabetical order on these sets.
And it turns out it really doesn't matter what order we choose.
In the end, we'll figure something out,
and we'll be able to look back at this moment
and realize that we would have discovered the same thing no
matter what we did here.
But in order to make that discovery,
it does appear to be necessary at this point
to make a provisional commitment about what
order we imagine these symbols are coming in.
And then to make it a little more legible,
I'm going to swap out these letter forms with something
a little bit more consistent.
So we'll just say, if an alphabet has a first letter,
it'll be shaped like an A. If it has a second, it'll be a B.
And we'll just use color to distinguish
between the different alphabets.
So these two books both contain all As,
but this one's clearly written from the singleton alphabet,
whereas this one's from, I think, that one.
So what do we get from alphabetical order?
So we actually get three kinds of organizational principle
from having made these choices.
The first thing is it allows us to put the books on the shelves
in a consistent way.
So here we are back in that two-space-three-alphabet
library.
It's no longer circles, squares, and triangles.
We've changed it to yellow, A, B, and C.
So these just contain pairs of A, B, or C.
And the contents of this one is A, A.
That's alphabetically the first volume,
and that followed by A, B, A, C, and so on.
So any books which use this as their content alphabet
now have a natural alphabetization
for how they should be put on those shelves.
The second thing we get is an internal coordinate system.
So we don't just organize the books relative to others
in the same collection.
We actually have a labeling system
for the contents of each book.
So this book has four spaces, and they're presented in order.
So I could say that's the first space,
that's the second space, and so on.
But I also have a handy set of four-ordered elements
that I can use as a labeling system for these spaces.
So I can say that's the green eighth letter of this book,
the green B, the green C, the green D, and so on.
So one thing this does is, well, I should say, OK.
So we basically now have two alphabets associated with each
book.
There's the content alphabet, and we think of that
as the content that the book came with.
It's indelibly printed into the page.
And then we have this labeling alphabet,
and this is really something we've imposed on this book.
So we've come up with an order.
Maybe we wrote it into the books, or maybe it's
in the eye of the beholder.
Like, this is just a notion of literacy.
But anyway, each book combines now two alphabets.
Here's six books from that chamber.
It's all still gibberish, but it's now consistently
indexed gibberish.
But the main thing is that this setup
is associating each letter in the labeling alphabet
with some letter in the content alphabet, which
is the definition of a function between finite sets.
So each book really is a function.
And I want to emphasize how this library-based model of set
is psychologically different from a traditional bag of dots
characterization of set, which is that when you're learning set
theory this way, the things in question, the things you handle
and think about primarily, are the elements and the sets.
And the functions are these more abstract, structured
relationships between those things.
And so when you're going to category theory,
you have to make this transition from what
is an object's first example to a morphism's first formalism
that you're trying to get to.
So if you think about these books,
there's almost a perfect figure-ground switch
in terms of thinking of a fin set in this way.
Now the thing you're handling is a book.
And the book, by its structure, contains all the data
for a function.
And meanwhile, the objects, the alphabets in question,
these are a little bit more subsidiary structures.
It's a little ambiguous.
It might be a labeling alphabet or a content alphabet,
depending on how it's being used in a given book.
So the foreground thing you have to think about
is the books, which are the morphisms.
So I think it kind of puts you on a better footing
for a discourse that's going to head into category theory.
So you just wanted to hear, say, that would that book
would be in the aisle for the next one?
Which one?
Forward.
That book is in the aisle four, because it has four left
spaces, and it's in the six, row six.
Yes.
Yeah, it's four space, six alphabets,
and this is the six-letter alphabet that it's drawing from.
So does that make sense?
Can I keep moving?
OK, so the third thing you get is a law of composition
on these books.
And this brings it to another thing
that I think is perhaps useful about this metaphor,
because books are common objects.
So there's lots of storytelling or motivated
narration you can do around things you would do with books.
So this is a decoder ring.
There's a kind of activity where you can encrypt stuff,
codes are fun to play with.
So you can kind of tell a story where I'm going to take this
book, and maybe I'm going to apply a letter substitution
code using some kind of decoder ring that takes it from the
green four-letter alphabet to the purple seven-letter
alphabet.
So some setting of that ring would take A to G and B to D
and C to F and so on.
But actually, once again, this data is precisely a way of
associating a labeling alphabet with a content alphabet.
That is, we can take the book, GDFA, and use it as a
letter substitution code for books which have this content
alphabet in common with this labeling alphabet.
So what that substitution looks like is I've got B in that
first slot.
So my substitution code tells me to replace it with a
purple D. I've got green D gets replaced with purple A, and
green A gets replaced with purple G. So this book turns
that book into that book.
But if we look at it on an elements and sets level,
this is just function composition.
So we have now a kind of code-based way of introducing
function composition.
And now we have fin set, right?
And we have all possible functions and a notion of what
it means to compose them.
One thing you can do with this is now you can start to talk
about what the different kinds of morphisms in a category on
the basis of this metaphor.
So like an identity morphism is one that has every labeling
letter as its content letter as well.
But with the benefit of thinking about it in terms of
codes, you can also say this is a letter substitution code
that doesn't do anything or that is unaffected by any other
letter substitution code.
Things like isomorphisms are excellent codes.
They can only be decoded one way, and the decoder can be
used as the code, and the code can be used to decode that.
There's some other things you can get into about
monomorphisms and epomorphisms and things.
But I think the main thing that's actually really
interesting to me is that this model of fin set gives you a
way of thinking about composition in two different ways.
So let me take these two books.
I'm going to just apply the letter substitution.
So the a's get f's and the b's get c's.
And so now we have three books in a
compositional relationship.
And the question is, is this actually an important
relationship?
It might seem like it isn't because it actually seems to
depend critically on what choices of alphabetical order
I've made.
So I've chosen to imagine that a is the first letter and b is
the second letter of this content alphabet and this
labeling alphabet.
But if I change my mind, if I decide that maybe b is the
first letter and a is the second, then what changes is
that now I have to reconsider how I've labeled the contents
of my letter substitution code.
Now I'm thinking the first slot is b and the second slot is a.
And that's going to change the effect of the
letter substitution.
Now the b's get f's, the c's get a's, and now the result of
application doesn't match anymore.
So it might seem like a pretty superficial kind of
relationship, this composition.
But let's remember that, well let's put this back to a b
and let's remember that one of the first organizational
principles we got from choosing alphabetical orders is that
it put all the books onto shelves.
So these three books are sitting on three shelves
somewhere.
This book, ABBA, is actually the seventh book alphabetically
in a 16 book chamber.
This one is the 33rd book out of 36 books.
And the final one is the 1170th book alphabetically in a
chamber containing 1296 books.
So another way to describe this exact composition is to say
that the book in slot seven, composed with the book in slot
33, is the book in slot 1170.
So when I change my alphabetical order from AB to BA, this
actually affects the alphabetization of the books
on these shelves that use it as a content alphabet.
So here I have ABBA in slot seven.
Let me back up.
So this is the whole alphabetized shelf from AAA on
the left to BBB on the right, under the assumption that
this is alphabetical order.
So when I change that, it's now exactly wrong.
BBB should be the first letter and AAA should be the last
book.
And so in fact, all of these books are in the wrong place.
So we're going to have to move all of them around in order
to achieve alphabetization according to this new rule.
And in the process, ABBA, which was in slot seven, has been
moved out of there.
And a new book has been moved in.
And this is BAB.
So to recap, the effect of changing our sense of
alphabetical order changes the labeling on those two slots.
But it also puts an entirely different book into slot seven.
And these two changes actually cancel out.
If I apply this letter substitution code, now B's get
F's, C's get A's, or whatever, the books come out the same.
So my alphabetical order switch has had two effects, which
have canceled out.
And it remains true that the book in slot seven, composed
with the book in slot 33, equals the book in 1170.
There's also this content alphabet in this book and the
output book.
If I change that by, say, putting A at the end, now I get
a new 33rd book in that library and a new 1170 book in
that library.
And once again, those are in compliance.
So if I apply the letter substitution code, I get the
same thing as I would have had before.
It remains true that the book in slot seven, combined with
the book in slot 33, is 1170.
So there's this notion that composition is actually well
defined at the level of the slots in the shelves.
And any alphabetization I choose is just an implementation
of that compositional structure.
So if I could go through and just mark these slots and keep
track and kind of memoize what all of the compositional
structure was at the shelves, I wouldn't even need the
books anymore.
You wouldn't need to do this arbitrary business with
alphabetization.
So this is a representation of FinSet that really does
support two concrete alternative points of view on
what composition is.
And I would argue that this one's really compelling,
because it's almost a static, universal
characterization of composition.
And then you have all these different ways of implementing
it using these books.
Any two of them are different only by change in the
permutation of the alphabetical order.
So in some sense, it's composition that is unique
up to unique isomorphism.
So when I was first thinking about this, I thought it would
be compelling to try and switch back and forth between
these views as a way of talking about
categorical structures.
And I found that it was still really hard to think about
shelf-based composition.
So I have found that it's really psychologically helpful to
introduce a new character into the story at this point, who
I call the librarian.
So the librarian is best to think of them as being kind of
like these demi-gods you meet in these weird logic puzzles
where they can only say yes or no, and you have to try and
figure out which is which.
In the sense that the librarian is an
interrogative partner, they're sort of omniscient, and they
have a limit in what they can say, and they're not going to
volunteer anything.
So you've got to ask all the questions.
So the deal with the librarian is that it cannot see the
books.
This is a being you can talk to who doesn't know what
letters are or what the library's contents are.
All it sees is all of the compositional data on all of
the slots on the shelves.
So we've sort of outsourced that knowledge to a fictional
being who we might trust to just possess it in our kind of
hypothetical discussion.
It can't talk, but it can understand requests.
And I'll explain what that means in a minute.
And it can also learn new vocabulary.
So you can develop a rapport and a vocabulary with the
librarian for the purposes of investigating the library.
These are some librarians from my notebooks, which are just
fun to draw as little guys with no legs that can see
everything about the library.
So essentially, when I say it can take requests, like if I
want to compose two books, instead of going through all
the work myself, I can just see which slot numbers they're in.
And I can go to the librarian and be like, hey, what's the
composite of these two?
And the librarian sort of sees all of the compositional data
at once, so it can very quickly pick out that you want the
book in this particular slot.
Maybe the librarian starts out only knowing what composition
is, but we can invent new terminology.
Like if I want to think about commutative squares, I can
explain to the librarian that I'm interested in four books.
These have the same length.
These have the same alphabet.
They're composable in a certain way.
This is describable in terms of what the librarian knows.
I haven't done many applied examples, like in conceptual
mathematics and in David's book, there's a lot of reading
meaning into the category of sets.
So for example, we can talk about directed graphs.
This is a diagram in fin set.
This object is the number of arrows.
This object is the number of points.
This is standard construction, where the first arrow takes
the arrows here to their sources, and the second arrow
takes the same arrows to their targets, and that provides
the characterization of some graph, which in book terms
means I can go into any chamber and grab two books.
And those two books can be interpreted as a graph.
If I grab another two books, I get a different graph, and
then it's a compositionally meaningful
embedding of graph into fin set, because if I can find two
arrows, which are commutative on the sources and commutative
on the targets, that effectively gives me some graph
homomorphism between my graphs.
So a way you could imagine using the librarian is to say,
I have this graph I'm interested, this graph I'm
interested in, and my librarian knows what a
commutative square is.
So if I'm like, give me all the pairs of books, which can
make commutative squares out of these, that's the kind of
thing that the librarian can instantaneously offer up.
So you can kind of use it as a look-up butler, which is a
fun fantasy, but not really.
You're never going to actually have the benefit of that
service, so there's a limit to how valuable it is to think
about it.
What's really valuable is that if the librarian can see
this, then the librarian can also see universal mapping
properties.
So if I can define something like a limit with the
librarian, I can give them a graph like this and be like,
give me the limit over this, which is, I guess, like an
equalizer.
But really, it's a cone, and the idea is that this arrow
composed with this gives this arrow and same with the
targets.
And this is exactly what the librarian would be able to see.
You'd be able to look at this diagram, see all of the spans
in the entire category, and see that an isomorphism class of
them were essentially central.
There's one arrow coming in from the tip of every other
compositional cone.
And of course, this has an internal meaning.
It picks out the fixed points of the graph, and you can also
define co-limits the same way.
But kind of the concept is that by having a series of
sessions and talking with the librarian and trying to imagine
that the librarian's point of view reveals patterns and
structures in the library that you can't see that would be
useful for you to know, but would be very hard for you to
infer by considering the contents of the books
themselves, you have a sort of synthetic situation where you
could stage a mock discovery of some of the concepts in
category theory.
So I think I'm going to, yeah.
I want to just say, so this is as much as I got done.
But I think what I wanted to say is that what makes this
interesting is how it proves itself in terms of its ability
to learn about limits and co-limits, adjointness,
and representables.
So I'd almost imagine these as three chapters or three
sessions with the librarian.
I think the arc of these would be like you try and do
something with the books by considering their contents.
You have a somewhat unsatisfying experience.
And then you close the books, you put them on the shelf, and
you try and imagine this from the librarian's point of view.
How would you characterize something using only the
compositional data?
So in the case of limits and co-limits, you might ask,
how would you summarize two books?
Or how would you summarize a collection of books?
And you can try and do that by thinking about their contents.
But it's actually a very disappointing process.
And then from the librarian's point of view, you end up with
these more universal structures like limits and co-limits.
So anyway, like I said, this has just been kind of a fun way
of talking to myself about category theory.
But I think there is some interesting value.
It's been helpful to me.
And I would like to imagine it might be helpful to others.
So this is sort of a pet project of mine, just thinking
about it.
So if anyone wants to talk someday about how to talk
about limits and co-limits, adjointness or
representables in terms of the library,
I'd be happy to do that.
And that's it.
Are you thinking of turning this into a class or a book?
So I have no idea.
So yeah, this isn't really a project
proposal.
And I have a very open mind about these things.
So I've done a lot of digital interactives.
Online videos, I think, are an effective way of
disseminating this kind of thing.
But I think form could follow function in some nice ways.
Like there's something about making it into a book that
feels kind of appealing to me.
It is very self-referential.
It's also maybe not obvious from these slides.
There's a library here.
It's so trippy.
But I do think as a project, it has some availabilities
that I think it could really be done beautifully in a
certain number of ways.
It does have an embedded typographic design problem.
There are a lot of people who design fonts and things who I
think could really make a meal out of designing a
parametric generative font system for the books of all
the different lengths.
I would love to do it tastefully.
But there is this character design problem regarding the
librarian.
And I think there are a lot of people who do excellent work
with regards to compelling characters and things.
So a lot of what sold public science talks at the
Exploratorium was putting a lot of visual interest into them.
And I think that can really keep people cozy while the
bigger ideas are sort of coming into focus.
So I think I'm partial to the idea of a book.
Although I think animation does kind of help get the point
across.
So I think I'm open to other concepts as well.
So this is sort of a presentation to category theory.
So if your idea ever had to explain things to non
category theorists, how would you change this for non
category theorists?
Well.
Slow it down by a factor of 10.
Was it too fast?
No, it wasn't for us.
It wasn't for them, but for me.
OK.
No, no, no.
Well, I think you are actually.
I mean, this is kind of my point is that creating, like
I was saying this earlier, this book would put some
demands on you.
And I think in the same way that Serial Numbers or Tomoko
Mockingbird really, they're not quite textbooks.
But they do require a certain amount of studiousness.
And there's a certain amount of cognitive endurance needed to
get through those books properly.
And I really don't think there's any way of conveying
category theory that isn't going to put some demands of
that sort on the learner.
I think my hope is that the reason, I show those three
books that talk about the library.
I've done talks where I've invoked a library in other
contexts before.
And I just find that the library itself is a really good
hook.
It's a nice swap out for more abstract mathematical
considerations.
And there's something very congenial about just hanging
out in your imagination in a big Borgesian library and
thinking about books and things.
So I think that's my main offering to try and make this
a little more human in terms of its surface of contact.
You're not a category theorist.
So Scott, how do you do with it?
Not very well.
You talked about limits and co-limits.
Yeah, I knew I would.
So I just take it on faith.
I knew I was not going to be accommodating you
particularly well.
I know, but you're talking to me.
Sure, sure.
That's the right level for this audience.
What about before the limits and co-limits?
The library was appealing.
And then after that, it's like, and why am I here?
There was no purpose.
The story needs a, you know, it's just going to say that.
It's not a story.
It's not a story, but even for category theorists, it's not a
story.
And I think that's part of the problem with category
theory itself.
No, no, no, in itself.
The way that it's being presented.
Because it's often, you see, it arose inductively from
people who effectively were doing it, say, in
algebraic theology, and then realizing that this is
generalizable.
So that point was already known to the people, and they
were just abstracting it away.
But now when we're describing the abstract thing, it's not
clear why we're doing it.
So there is no catch to the story.
Like, why are you doing it?
Is this yet another representation of inset?
That's how you, OK?
And so we can fill in the gaps.
But why would you bother doing it?
So I totally see what you're saying.
No, and I, so there's a few things you could do.
And I think a lot of it's like how, like part of it is I'm
trying to do a presentation that is not strictly
mathematical in the way that it's normally phrased in
category theory textbooks.
Again, there's a way of reading graphs into a fin set.
There's also a way of looking at any span and thinking of it
as a matrix.
There are ways of looking at a section of it and seeing the
natural numbers.
So there's a bunch of reading interpretations into the
library.
And the beauty of it is that when you come up with this
notion of a limit, you have this, like the librarian
doesn't know what a graph is or a matrix or even a letter.
But this notion that you share with the librarian of a limit
has meaningful applications to all of those interpretations.
So that interpretive layer might be a way to ground this
in actual mathematical concepts.
And then I think it's just really breathtaking to see that
the fixed points of a graph obey the same structure as you
can get.
It's so satisfying to work out using co-limits to multiply
two matrices represented as spans and to find that that
crazy number weaving you do gives the same result as this
universally defined thing at the level of compositions.
But then you can go into numbers and get products or what is
at least common multiples or min or max.
There's a lot of standard ways.
I feel like conceptual mathematics is almost a
textbook of ways to read different models into set.
So anyway, I don't know.
That's one thought about how to get.
Can you do something more easily in this representation
than that would surprise one of us?
That would say, oh, that's really cool.
Do you see what I'm saying?
I sure hope so.
Interesting story.
To me, this is a setting for a story to be told.
But you need to have a language that you sort of
tell your story.
Paul, you began vexing in the pedagogical and the
difficulties as a learner of category theory.
There's something interesting about a shift in perspective.
And to me, I mean, I don't think much of it
captures that appropriately.
But to me, there's something in your introduction to the
character of a librarian that is about the universal
perspective or something like that.
Yeah, and I was going to talk about that, and I kind of
blew through it because I was just getting tired.
But yeah, so here's the thing I remember.
I tried to learn category theory probably three or four
times before it worked.
And all those times, it was just like trying to eat
something that wasn't food.
Like it truly was a peculiar sensation.
And I just couldn't, OK, I'm being asked to pretend that
I don't know what the objects are, even though I do.
So I'm pretending something.
And I'm being asked to pretend that I know that this
morphism composed with this morphism is this morphism,
even though it's hard for me to imagine how I would
possibly know that other than by paying attention to the
internal details, which I'm pretending not to know.
And then you get all these definitions on the basis of
those compositions.
So I get this cancellation law for monomorphisms, where I
got two arrows.
If two arrows coming in composed with this arrow equal the
same thing, then these two must be the same for all such
pairs in the entire category.
And this feels like a completely
inactionable definition.
I'm used to it's a one-to-one map.
I can look at a given function and decide whether or not
it's one-to-one.
Am I going to check composition with every single pair in
the entire category?
It feels weirdly non-operational.
I can read the definition, I can understand it, but I can't
imagine that happening in real life that I would use.
I have the wrong expectation about what it's for.
So I think what's valuable to me about the librarian is that
it gives you a place from which to suspend your disbelief.
So to speak, it sort of embodies that cognitive
dissonance in a fictional character and sort of invites
you to indulge this long enough to see that there is
actually useful deductive reasoning that can be carried
out with the benefit.
With the benefit of knowing that point of view is coherent,
even if you yourself don't have it.
And I feel like my hope is that that could separate out a
tension that I think I was really feeling when I was
first trying to learn category theory.
So I don't know if that makes sense.
I can try to say what I'm getting out of this, which is
that a whole bunch of examples of categories people often
tend to learn are what are called concrete categories,
where the objects are sets with extra structure.
Amorphisms are functions that preserve this extra structure.
And so but the definition of the category says nothing
about it being concrete.
The objects aren't sets.
And so there's a kind of cognitive dissonance in
learning category theory if you're in an unfortunate
situation, where all the examples that you know about
are concrete categories.
But the definition is not about concrete categories.
And so in some ways, you're using the librarian as the
passage from the concrete category to the definition of
an abstract category.
So there's this concrete way to compose books, where you
actually look at the letters and you do this stuff.
And then you know what you're doing.
But then there's this librarian who all they can tell you
is basically when one morphism is composed with another
morphism is another morphism.
And so you could try to phrase that as a kind of, you
could try to pose some kind of gains or puzzles like what
you figure out just by asking questions of the library, just
the questions that can be answered using the abstract
approach to category theory, not the concrete one.
I don't know if it's a normal person that this is like a
worthwhile pursuit.
Why should you limit yourself in this funny way of only
asking yourself so you can answer abstractly?
My own way to try to sell categories is to start in very
early on with a bunch of examples of categories that
aren't concrete.
And often very small categories, like categories with five
objects or two objects or something like that.
To really break away from the dissonance of only knowing
concrete examples and also this other aspect, which is that
most of the examples and categories that most people
get told are these enormous categories.
Even all finite sets is already pretty low.
That's like really small concrete.
The kind of definitions normally meet.
So this is a feeling directly to enormous categories I find
makes people sort of scared.
Whereas I can do lots of examples where I can draw the
whole category and apply for it.
It makes it a little less scary.
Yeah, I always like to draw a house.
It's a commutative triangle on a commutative square.
And this is my go-to small category.
Yeah, that's good.
That's what I kind of do.
So people who like graph theory and think that they
will like these smaller categories, I think.
I think that's something that you can actually see.
David, you were?
Yeah, I just thought about the library represents the
category theory that you didn't understand first, in some
sense, like the guy who understands the whole thing
but doesn't know what you're talking about, in some sense.
And I thought of making this to have a dialogue with them
where you explain what a letter is, for example.
And a letter is just that first column of the books.
It's all about having one space in it.
And then the guy's like, oh, there's five letters in this.
Yeah, that's interesting.
I'm going to explain it in the language of the library.
The library doesn't give us the books.
That's OK.
Everything you say when you say letter, the library will be
able to converse with them, even though you have
translated them.
It's an interesting thought.
I was kind of like, sorry, I'll go back to this.
I was thinking about that definition of a monomorphism
is exactly what the librarian can see.
It can see that everything impending on the back of this
arrow gets a unique composite.
And the librarian's interesting because that's the kind of
definition that would be obvious to it.
And I was kind of saying that, whereas the librarian finds our
definition super crazy, because we're using this ridiculous
assembly language and this unnecessarily sequential
reasoning.
But yeah, I like, yeah.
So I love co-discovering with the librarian.
It feels like a way friendlier style of engagement.
That is how a mathematician is not a category here.
There's a you character in the talk of a librarian.
The librarian speaks this language, but they can do all
these crazy stuff, but they can't understand the book.
They can't understand the book.
So to understand, like in the book Shogun, you go in and
you're the English person, and you go into the foreign culture
and you're like, crazy people.
And by the end, you are Japanese, and you think people
are crazy people.
And you'll be able to do that reversal where you enter as
a person who doesn't understand my librarian, anything at all
interesting, and leaves thinking of the librarian as a genius
or something.
It might be a kind of a way to make a story out of it.
Well, another thing, getting back to what Joseph said,
is that for somebody like me, who I am going to try and
understand it only because that's what it's like.
So something about why I would want to know, what would get me
excited about it?
Yeah.
And I would say that that remains the outstanding problem
with category theory in general, is that it's very hard
to get excited about something that you can't preview what it's
about until after you've learned it.
I don't think it's that.
I think there are ways of making it more accessible.
I don't know how to put it.
There is an origin story.
What was it?
The story of the origin.
And you don't have to tell me the details of that field,
but you can tell me the emotions and what they were
and give me the flavor of what they were.
That's almost the initial origin, but there are many things
that happen in the development of category theory that are
amazing results and discoveries that you can talk about
without getting into all the many, many details.
And so I think that any particular approach to
category theory like this one can only really work well
if it's part of a bigger mix of different introductions
to category theory.
I'm trying to learn physics or explain physics.
The history of physics is equally important to physics.
You cannot just say, okay, the universe is made out of three
kinds of quarks and eight luons and stuff like this.
It doesn't mean nothing at all to be one.
The only way you could ever understand it is through the history
of it, along with other options.
This is a non-historical approach, but it could be blended with
the history of it.
Well, we all drank some food.
And you talk about the beauty of this and the other.
And if you can somehow up front get fat across.
Here's my turn.
The reason I...
I want to drink the cool thing.
You're pretty close.
I know, but I'm working here two years.
Here's what I've known so far, and it might be wrong.
There's levels of abstractness in mathematics.
And abstraction is an extremely powerful idea in mathematics.
And a category theory sits at the top of that.
That's what I think.
That's what I think.
That makes me want to understand what that thing is.
You know the idea that there can be variables.
There's some you can have, say, the temperature and the temperature
can change, so it's a variable.
You have the length of things.
You're drawing a rope and then it can get longer as you pull it out.
So that's the variable with the amount of sunlight you can change.
And a category theory has a brilliant idea.
It's not just that you have these variables all around you,
but you know two things about them.
What they are, what kind of thing they are.
So a temperature, if you're measuring on a little thermometer,
it might be this position of a definite thermometer.
So you know that the temperature variable is that thing.
And then you also know what other kinds of things in the world are going on
that matter to that variable, that that variable actually varies with.
So if the temperature in the room is different in different parts,
like if I go over there in the sun, it gets a little warmer.
And if I'm over here in the shade, it's a little cooler,
that I know that as I move around the room, the temperature varies.
So not only is the temperature where I know what it is,
it's a little position on my thermometer,
but also I know that it varies specifically over where I am in the room.
And so if I have another variable, which is where I am in the room,
and that's changing, and I get up and I walk around,
and I know what that depends on, say that depends on,
I'm going to take a planned walk as a very boring person,
I'm going to take a planned walk around the room.
And so the way I go around the room is kind of coordinated with the stopwatch
and where it is on my hand.
My stopwatch goes around, and around I'm walking around the room.
So now I know that where I am in the room is a variable,
it's a position in the room, that's what kind of thing it is,
and the kind of variable it's depending on is where my stopwatch is.
And so I can predict from that that I'm going to,
where my thermometer is going to be up and down,
which is the thing that goes up and down,
is going to be depending on where my stopwatch is,
and I don't have to remember in the middle where I was going to the room.
And that's the idea.
That's kind of an example that if you can make that into something really,
really relevant and interesting.
You told me a model and you didn't tell me.
What's the insight?
I guess the insight is that if you,
so we're interested in the variables,
but we're also interested in the kinds of angles variables are,
so we're not just interested in one temperature,
we might be interested in all the possible temperatures
and what temperature means.
And what category theory tells you is that what temperature means
is all the ways you can have variable temperatures
and all the ways that can depend on every other variable.
So what I heard in that would be the question...
You haven't answered a good question at all.
I'm not interested yet.
Scott, can I try to answer it?
Well, that's different than my answer.
So for me, listening to that,
I hear, oh my God, the world is much more complex than I was thinking.
But it can be expressed using these two parameters.
Matt, Matt.
I don't know what the relationship is.
It's a cool example, but I don't know what the relationship to the category theory is.
The type of variable is important.
The type of variable is important.
The way they depend is important.
A variable is a morphism.
And the thing that was sort of invented in algebra of the category there
has made use of, fundamentally,
is that you have a domain of the morphism in the cotomane,
which didn't appear at the books, it's like disinferring it as well.
I mean, historically, it started with a variable
and then later on people were like,
oh, this is a variable of something that depends on something else.
Only then can you have the actual category.
So the idea is that you have the variables
and then substituting in one variable in another is composition.
I mean, category theory says that you can do effectively anything you want in math
without fundamental idea.
But also, I guess, it's good to actually do that.
I don't know how to say that.
Yeah.
One of the reasons, oh, sorry, I'm just going to say this,
one of the reasons this is so passionate for me is
we've got to be able to explain that,
not just to explain the topos,
which we started with every single day,
but what category theory is.
Yeah.
And why it should be more recognized
and incorporated into our lives and lives.
Yeah, so the obvious question is,
so why as a public member do I care?
What problem would I solve?
Why don't we save that till after all's up there?
Oh, sorry.
Sorry, Paul.
This is a version of dinner we discussed.
I mean, like, category three, we're probably
at least for me.
I got it.
Okay.
Sorry, Paul.
Nelson?
Yeah, so I guess what I wanted to say is,
I'm probably just reflecting what you already said back at you,
like, part of this is about how to get people engaged
in category theory.
And I think this already, you can set it up in a way,
if you use a game, for example,
you can set it up in a way that people will already feel
kind of motivated by playing this game.
And you can set up this game like,
hey, I'm this person who understands this letter formulation here,
but I have to communicate these commands
or these instructions to this librarian
in a way only the librarian will understand,
but the librarian understands some really weird stuff.
And so I have to kind of figure out
how to get the idea of a letter across.
And some, like, the insight that I come across
is like, oh, the librarian will understand
if I say that it's a morphism, a morph, right?
Or, like, the equivalent of what it would be in the story.
And I can see that set up as, like, a game
that, like, progressively gets harder and harder.
And, like, you would, I think I would, like,
I'm just imagining people, right?
Like, I think people would like playing that
and, like, trying to figure it out.
And it would be a certain type of person
who would like playing that,
but, like, I think people would get engaged in that
and just find that interesting sort of for its own sake,
which doesn't obviously answer the question
of, like, how do you actually, like,
convince people that category theory is actually important?
But it does get, like, people, like, playing it with it already,
which I think is the first step.
But I do, I am also curious of the second step,
which is how do you actually, like, sell this perspective?
How do you actually show that this project
I think that's almost answered in your question, though,
because as you learn to express yourself in this language,
you begin to see, you know, you can express these crazy things
that you do not express in, like, other languages.
And then that just expressive power of languages
ultimately, what sells it.
I think that's an example of a game.
Well, can I just say, like, I love the characterization.
I think it is, I think, yes, the spirit of it
should be as a game.
It doesn't just get harder, though.
It's that these are the concepts you're going to work through.
So this is the real payout, right?
The problem is, like, it's hard to preview at the beginning
what's going to come out of this.
But these are, like, there's a really great way
of implementing representable functors using this metaphor.
Limits and, like, I don't know.
There's a lot of meat here to dig into.
You know, what we saw today was the setup
and that was sort of the preamble to the actual main course.
I nonetheless think that how you preview it
and how you frame it is important for inviting people in.
But I just do want to make the disclaimer
that there is more under the hood in the premise.
What was your name?
Christian.
I just wanted to say, I think this is a fantastic metaphor,
a fantastic story.
And we don't have a wealth of these kind of metaphors yet.
We don't have a wealth of these kind of interpretations.
And I think this is a really novel one
that is going to change how I think about Vincent.
And it seems like one that can genuinely spark
students' imagination.
I mean, tons of things in school do not need
some application in mind to justify them.
I really believe that that.
Some of the deepest value of education
is in just sparking imagination for its own sake
and giving people these ways of thinking.
And that's already a label on it.
And yeah, I just wanted to say this is a really nice way
of looking at this category.
And one of the things is how the metaphor, like you said,
makes the morphism a fundamental thing rather than the objects.
I think that's huge because that's one of the deepest lessons
about category theory is focusing on processes rather than things.
So yeah, I just think this is awesome.
And I bet that all of these constructions
are going to be meaningful within this metaphor.
And you can get students thinking about how to represent real-world languages
or what it means to translate between things
and all kinds of games that you can play.
And especially when you brought in the librarian
about how to represent that kind of cognitive distance
that you've built and make it just this external thing
so that you don't have to assume both roles.
All that stuff, I just think it's great.
It's fantastic. Thank you for saying that.
So the selling point is that this is really trippy.
Clearly, you're all like surreal.
Joshua?
I want to mention that Emily Wheel and two other category theorists
were on Science Friday, maybe you heard it.
No, off theory.
And you know what happened is...
Emily Wheel.
It's an NPR show, it's fantastic.
And the host was somewhat skeptical
if there'd be interest in the phone rang off the hook
for a category theory.
Amazing.
Because it's the same thing I feel.
There's something really cool there.
I want to understand it.
Even if I don't know what it is.
I just sense there's something cool there.
So I do want to mention it's 5.30.
I'm happy to keep talking, but...
Can we do one more question?
Joshua said his hand up.
The last question.
Okay, so yeah.
I think that this is a great stepping stone
to how students make some of the major conceptual shifts
that are needed for category theory.
The idea of looking at morphisms rather than objects
is great, but we're building that in with the idea
of both morphisms and now these physical objects.
And objects are not even a thing really.
Objects are really just like, I don't know,
alphabets I guess.
But yeah, the conventional perspective
does focus on books rather than alphabets.
So that's weird in how category theory
focuses on morphisms rather than objects.
So that's great.
And then the librarian,
just knowing how everything's combined
so that I can know what anything is.
It's great. That is the perspective.
So this really helps students make those shifts.
One potential challenge
when teaching this, I think,
would be to explain what composition means.
But it's not really a natural thing to do with two books.
Yeah.
They have very small alphabets.
People are used to doing things like...
A lot of Cotor rings.
Yeah, a Cotor ring is pretty cool.
Yeah.
With small alphabets.
You don't do that with an alphabet
that's like thousands of characters long, generally.
Because how are your figures?
Yeah.
You can't explain it.
It's some kind of challenge.
Also, another thing you can...
Another next thing you can do in the story
is you can have the person visit a library
where they don't even get to see the books at all.
And they just talk to the librarian
and it's just some other category.
They ask the librarian how many books are there.
And the librarian's like five.
And they have to understand the structure of the list.
Well, so where this wants to go
is that you have the librarian
and you and the librarian share a fin set
in that I can look into the books
and he can see what the continental
compositional structure is.
But then the librarian should also be able
to offer the same service for other categories.
And we think like this...
These are graphs.
This is the domain graph.
And this book represents a homomorphism.
This is a post-set.
This is a post-set morphism.
So I can have these libraries
and the thing is what does the inside of this look like?
How have I encoded
that these graphs are homomorphed
into each other or whatever?
And the answer is who cares
because I'm just going to use my vocabulary
with the librarian.
We're going to keep these books on the shelves.
We're never going to look inside of them.
Like the value of having the librarian
is that you start in this place
where you do inspect the contents of the book
and ultimately you want to set up functors.
So you're going to need the librarian
to be able to say like,
I see the entirety of this category
and I see copies of it inside of this one.
And those are my functors.
What do you think I'm going to say?
I don't think that you have to
justify everything in the beginning
ahead of time.
Because part of the moral
of the story should be
at first it seems like this librarian
is completely out of their minds
but then you realize
the stories you kind of teach to a lesson
that sometimes will meet somebody in real life
who seems completely crazy
but then you have to take the time
to have a conversation with them
and try to understand the perspective
you realize that their perspective actually
is very useful.
And I've had this experience in real life before
and it might be a valuable lesson.
It's a good secondary intent.
Anyway, that's all I've got.
Thank you.
