Hi, welcome to this episode 7 of my series on Seren Kierkegaard, The Poet of Existence.
This is the third and final episode on Kierkegaard's theory of the stages.
I covered the aesthetic in episode 5, the ethical stage in the last episode, episode
6.
Today I will discuss the complexities of the religious phase, and that will lead into
my concluding lecture, and that concluding lecture, when it publishes, will be the launch
date of my audio course sponsor in Kierkegaard, which is part 2 of this course.
And if you've appreciated this free material, I would encourage you to check out my website
and see where it all started with the Becoming Human Origin series, which lays out my general
vision about philosophy, religion, and science, and why we need a philosophical revolution
in our own time.
And much of that vision that I lay out that came after over a decade of my own work in
graduate school was birthed originally in my study of Seren Kierkegaard.
And so as I've mentioned in this series, Kierkegaard is a personally very important person for my
life as a philosopher.
He changed my life, he transformed my life, and he, in a way, damaged my life.
I don't blame him for it.
It's not his fault, but I had a nervous breakdown connected with his work as the occasion.
There's a lot of, I guess, light changing there.
And the reality of Kierkegaard's importance is why I'm bringing this series to the public
and why I wanted to make this introductory part of it free, because Kierkegaard is someone
who's so important that whether you ever read him or not, I hope you've seen that we can
learn a great deal about our own lives and about the history of philosophy, of religion,
and theology.
And so today we're going to take on this huge topic, and this is a very difficult topic,
which is the religious phase.
And how are we going to approach it?
In the last lecture, I gave a fairly tightly structured presentation of the ethical phase
in relationship to fear and trembling.
And what I want to do in this lecture, and particularly because the nature of this episode
as a transition to the series finale, and that series finale is then the origin of the
new second part of the series in the audio course, is I want to explain what we don't
understand about the religious phase and why we don't understand it.
And that's about as good as one can do with the religious phase.
And I'll explain why that is in the course of it.
So in order to do that, to kind of give this seemingly negative, but I hope it's going
to be very positive and illuminating presentation of the religious stage, we have to understand
why we don't really understand it.
And that should begin to make some sense existentially.
So I want to introduce the framework of the significance of what we don't understand in
relationship to the significance of what we can't understand.
And in order to do that, I'm going to start by characterizing what I would just broadly
call existential ontology.
And that's always one of those $10 philosophy words that just comes from two pretty common
Greek words in philosophy, ontos, which is a word that comes from a participial form
of being refers to existing things, being things.
And so the on top, for example, in ancient Greek philosophy are an existing thing or
the existing thing in the neutral case.
And this is a very important word from which we then get ontology, ontology, which is the
discourse or interlogic or rationale of the things that exist.
And there's a technical distinction that sometimes emerges between metaphysics and ontology,
but I would contend this distinction is either very clear in the minds of the one using it
and useful, or it's not clear at all, and it's usually not clear.
And therefore it's very unproductive.
So when I say ontology, I'm not distinguishing it from metaphysics as a field or a category.
I'm rather referring to a specific heightened focus in metaphysical reflection, which is
on things under the aspect of their being things and of their being existing things.
And what we'll see very briefly, I can't explain this because it's not a metaphysics course,
is there's actually a tension between the idea of a thing and the idea of existing.
And so existing things are a very pregnant philosophical category, and they're very important
to Kierkegaard.
And we may think of existential ontology primarily in terms of Heidegger, but even though as
you know, I have some modest expertise in Heidegger's work, I don't think Heidegger's
a really good ontologist in any sense.
And I don't find his ideas about ontology particularly useful as a framework.
So when I talk about existential ontology, my dad started Kierkegaard into the medieval
tradition, and then to my own development of those ideas.
So you could say, Sam, why does this matter?
Well, let me ask you a question.
Are you an existing thing?
This is a very important question.
And the aesthetic phase and the ethical phase have two very different perspectives on this
question and the sort of question that this is.
Now let me explain what may seem very enigmatic.
First of all, there's a type of perspective in human life that you may live through.
You may be inside of currently, you may know people who are inside of it, or you may read
books that depict it or that portray it unintentionally.
In this perspective, the person looking at the world is a person looking at a world full
of things.
And those things are seen in fundamental contrast with themselves.
They view themselves as fundamentally a viewer, an observer, someone looking in upon something
that they are separate from.
Now this is the perspective of a person who generally considers themselves to be particular,
to be existing.
And an existing is a manner or a mode, but it's not a manner or a mode of equality.
So it's very difficult to describe.
This is the metaphysical part.
In other words, if I say you're running, we understand running as this kind of, it could
be a gerund or participle, but we're using the participle sense in English grammar, the
idea of an active, ongoing, verbal process, something's happening.
This ongoing, active process of running is a process, and we can say what quality it's
a process of.
It's a quality of running or the capacity to run when it's actualized.
You could say it's manifest in this state of existence, which is the process of running.
That's actually very important to understand.
This kind of, you can seem very pedantic, but for example, if you read Plato's great
dialogue, the Euthyphro, this type of apparently subtle and meaningless grammatical distinctions
in language are very important for making clear certain distinctions about existence.
So there's a person who looks on the world as full of things, and they feel themselves
to be in contrast to those things real or existing.
And so here's the initial psychological root of the contrast between existence and thingness.
We feel that there's a difference between an existing and a thing.
Now we would say real things are things that exist.
So I have my copy of either or, which I'm going to talk about today in terms of the
ethical stage and the transition to the villages.
But you could say this is a book.
The book is a thing, but Kierkegaard is not a thing.
But we also know Kierkegaard is a thing.
Kierkegaard as a thing is, for example, a kind of fashionable, pretty cool existentialist
philosopher who it's cool to know something about.
I'm very aware of that.
It wasn't why I studied Kierkegaard, but I'm perfectly aware that Kierkegaard, for example,
has a cachet that someone like Gabriel Marcel doesn't have, even if Gabriel Marcel should
be much better known than he is, which he should be.
He's in a way, I think, a very great disciple of Kierkegaard's existential ontology.
But Kierkegaard has cachet, Heidegger has cachet, right?
And Neil Bruner doesn't have cachet, if you're in theology, compared to Karl Barth.
So there's a thing-ness to this quality of things.
So we know there's a difference between people and things.
We know that some people looking out on the world see the world as primarily things, and
we therefore can now accept something very uncomfortable, which there is a real sense
in which what we call persons have aspects about them that we can't easily separate that
are thing-like, like cool people are a thing.
If you're in a club scene, and you're in LA, or you're in New York, or you're in London,
and you're in society, depending on what that means for you, it means you want to be associated
with whatever the thing is.
If you're in New York and you're part of society, and you don't know what was recently written
in the New York Times, or in the New Yorker, or you're not familiar with what's going on
on Broadway, then you might be considered out of it.
What is a person who's out of it?
They're a person who kind of doesn't know what the things are.
What is the thing in a situation is a sense of where there's some gravitation of energy
and objectivity, and we're excited by things.
I can't get into the economic dimension, but you can immediately, I think, begin to understand
that what we call consumer capitalism, you really have to describe in the standpoint
of existential ontology, consumer capitalism is a state of the human being in which it
is fundamentally oriented towards things, but it does not understand what things are.
That's a very simple way of describing consumer capitalism, simple in the sense it's concise,
it's brief to say, but it's profound and difficult to make sense of philosophically.
Sometimes you know what it means, it can seem just no maker, secretive in that sense, but
it's true.
That is what consumer capitalism is, and you need, therefore, a blend of what in contemporary
academia we would say is a social psychological standpoint in philosophy, what we would say
is a metaphysical standpoint.
You'll see that for me, as a student and disciple in some ways of Kierkegaard's insights and
person who's built on them throughout my work and career, existential ontology is where
metaphysics and history, and metaphysics and sociology, and metaphysics and psychology
converge and are inseparable.
You can't do existential ontology without an actual lived ability to experience and express,
crucially, express the lived experience of the human being.
So the seducer sees the person that they seduce as a thing, but the pleasure of the seduction
is in the existence and the existing of the thing.
And there's, therefore, a profound contradiction in seduction between the pleasure that the
seducer gets from seduction and the act of seducing.
The act of seducing as a category requires the reduction of a human being to a category,
and a category becomes a thing.
You can classify, compare, oh, this person was much better than this person.
That's what I call sex.
And in my philosophy of eros, I always tell people I don't believe in sex.
Sex to me is like a religion, and it's one I don't subscribe to.
Not that I don't enjoy eros or intimacy, but I don't, that's not sex.
Sex is the opposite of intimacy.
So I can't get into this here, but this is connected to a development of the seducer.
The seducer is a person who's interested in sex, and sex is connected to power.
And power is connected in the sexual way, specifically with domination.
And domination and sexuality converges towards the whole categories of crimes for which we
know very well the proper words.
And one of the reasons our culture is very conflicted about how to deal with those horrible
crimes is because in reality, they're so pervasive.
And the pervasiveness has to do with the conjunction of sexual appetite and thinghood.
And if you become erotically attracted to things, when you're with people, the part
of you that's attracted to them will always be in a type of contradiction, because part
of you is attracted to the actual unique individual in front of you.
And to the extent that you're not attracted to them, you're having to ignore their literal
uniqueness.
You have to ignore their person, not look in their eyes, not think about how they're
going to feel the next day, not think about how you know you're going to treat them after
you're done with them.
And so there you have to think of them.
And then you maybe focus exclusively, not that it's not natural to be attracted to a
beautiful body, for example, but the seducer focuses exclusively on the qualities of the
person that can be think of, that they can enjoy, that they can contemplate the person's
social relations, maybe they're from a very wealthy family, and the seducer is excited
to have access to this, or to know that they're in the 19th century, highly gendered form
of seduction.
Kierkegaard is depicting that they're deflowering some daughter of a noble family.
That's a very, you could say, wicked from the Kierkegaard's cultural morals standpoint.
But today, that's less the issue in seduction is not a particular gendered thing.
But seduction is this thingification of the erotic and therefore the sexualization, you
could say, of existing ontology.
So the existing thing distinction actually is organic to everything we've been doing
in the stages.
The aesthetic person desires deeply to be unique.
They consciously feel this desire, and they want to be extraordinary.
And I'll read in a bit of time from this very powerful passage, near the end of either
or by Judge Wilhelm about the desire to be extraordinary, because this sets up the religious
phase.
Now, you said, Sam, okay, you're thinking, why does this have anything to do with understanding
the religious?
Well, I said, I'm going to explain why we can't understand the religious and how that's
related to why we don't understand the religious.
And I said to explain the relationship between things we don't understand and things we can't
understand, we need existential ontology.
And so here's the first reality, a person who sees things exclusively as things cannot
ever interpret or understand their existence.
A person who sees things exclusively as things cannot ever understand or interpret their existence.
Now I can't get into here why this is connected to nominalism, which is the most misunderstood,
misrepresented position in the history of philosophy.
It's kind of made up position by enemies of the position.
But what the position called nominalism for those who know this term in history of philosophy
ultimately has to do with is the attempt to do existential justice to individuality, okay?
That's what it's about.
Plato is actually very concerned about this and his theory of forms is actually about
individuality, but people who don't understand what it's about literally turn it into the
opposite of that.
And they think it's about how everything is common with everything else and that is not
what it's about.
It has to do with how the commonality of everything is real and how through immersion and commonality
you discover the roots of individuality.
That's what the phase is also about, the theory of stages.
So the aesthetic person can't exist unless they're different from the things around them.
But the nature of living with existing things is you have to thinkify them.
You have to regard them as things and treat them as things.
Well, you cannot separate the effects of your actions on yourself from the effects of your
actions on your environment, okay?
Think about that in your own spare time and you can see why it's necessarily true, but
I won't explain it, but it's the case and the aesthetic person does not understand this.
The aesthetic person thinks you can treat people differently than you yourself want to
be treated and they really actually regard this as an unproblematic way of life and they
don't think it's a contradiction.
It existentially is a contradiction.
If you thinkify everyone around you, you thinkify yourself.
In other words, your identity and so far as you perceive it becomes incredibly contingent
or hinged on external comparisons, but we don't know how other people see us exactly.
We only know how they perceive us based on the way we read their social cues, based on
the way we're treated.
And so an aesthetic person becomes deeply anxious and there's an enormous existential feeling
of emptiness or displacement that underlies the aesthetic phase.
And therefore the aesthetic person is looking for distinction.
They want to stand out amongst all of these damn things.
And that's a reasonable human desire, but I'm pointing out Kirchhoff is trying to help
us see that in that phase by itself because it doesn't understand itself.
Because the aesthetic person doesn't ask, what does it mean that I am existing?
And what does it mean for anything that I behold to be existing?
They don't regard the existing reality of the thing in front of them.
So now the ethical standpoint is completely different seeming with regard to this point.
In the ethical standpoint, there is this birth of freedom that Judge Wilhelm is talking
about throughout his side of the exchange of letters in either or.
And in the birth of existential freedom, what happens is, and this is very important, what
I'm about to describe is the ethical standpoint's perspective on itself.
Very important.
I'm not telling you it's Kirchhoff's standpoint, I'm not telling you it's my standpoint as
an interpreter.
I'm telling you what I'm about to say is the ethical standpoint on itself.
The ethical standpoint on itself is that you only are a mature human being when you embrace
the ethical life and you therefore embrace what is universal.
And embracing what's universal means embracing things as real, existing things.
And what's very important is, for Kierkegaard, the concept of duty and the concept of existence
are profoundly connected.
And again, existence is not finally a concept, but insofar as we have a word existence and
it refers to a concept, the concept existence is trying to get us to grasp something that
for Kierkegaard has to do very deeply in the ethical phase with reality itself and therefore
with the exercise of freedom.
So just as you don't truly become a self in a new particular sense for Kierkegaard until
you enter the ethical phase, so too you don't become a free person until you recognize the
legitimacy of existence as a claim on you.
And because you can't separate ultimately how you treat your environment or people that
you think of as not yourself from how you treat yourself, the claim of existing itself
is the fundamental claim that is operative in the ethical and it manifests itself under
the form of universality or commonality, which is to say, for example, I ought to treat you
as another being with the same respect that I myself feel I ought to be treated with regardless
of whether I'm treated the way I feel I ought to be.
We all know when someone's treating us badly and it incenses us, it outrages us, and we
would rightly defend that outrage if someone insults you for no reason, no provocation,
they degrade you, they enslave you, they oppress you, they make you feel what they feel about
you, which is that you have no value, they make you feel that your existence doesn't
have a right to be.
I mean, I felt that for lots of complicated psychological reasons I felt the sort of what
I would now say is the sense of existential nullification that you have no right to exist.
And so for people who have this sense, which is not exclusive to any one group or class,
that it is distinctive of oppressed groups in a society, because the nature of systemic
oppression is to create this very profound psychological existential feedback cycle where
you make the person you're oppressing feel as if their existence doesn't really matter
and it only matters for the oppressor.
It's optional, essentially.
I need my servant when I need service.
When I don't need service, I don't need my servants.
So you could treat servants really well as humans, and I'm not saying many people haven't
done that.
Or you could treat servants like slaves, which is the person only matters to you when you
need them and you treat them like they're their function.
And even if that person is a servant who could quit at any point, you're treating them like
a slave in the sense that you're dehumanizing them, you're thingifying them.
You're turning them into a thing in your environment that's relevant only to your perception of
your own needs, your own value, and you're therefore nullifying the reality that they
are existing, even as you are existing, that as you are existing and having occasional
needs for them, so they are independently existing.
And the aesthetic person does not really recognize the independent value of existing.
They don't see the value of other people's existing as a claim upon them.
And this is, again, for those of you who are fictitious scholars, that this is very important.
This is connected to an idea of a kind of summons that fictive develops deepening Kant,
but that you could argue, depending on how you interpret the fact of reason, and I won't
get into that.
I'm going to do a series on Kant, I think, pretty soon, but you could see it as even
in Kant himself.
Paul Franks, for example, has an interesting argument about the fact of reason in his book
All or Nothing, which would be connected if you're interested in that point.
And so, for Kierkegaard, becoming ethical is responding to the summons of freedom.
And responding to the summons of freedom is accepting a duty to existing reality.
And in particular, it's accepting a duty to freedom.
And the result of doing this is you look boring to the aesthetic person.
And this perception of boringness is very important.
When the aesthetic person sees real existing, they don't recognize it as existing.
They recognize it as not existing.
They think it's boring because there's nothing to see.
There's nothing to see.
Maybe you just see a happy couple at a theater, and your eyes look at them, maybe some contempt,
like, ah, the bourgeois.
And then you notice they're really fashionable or a very interesting dandy or the person who's
single and in some fantastically distinctive outfit, or whatever.
I'm not saying this is good or bad.
I'm just saying there's a perspective in which things that are existing don't perceive to
be significant.
And things that are only things are everything that you think of as significant.
And so the result is when you try to hoard your existing status as if you created it
and impose it upon a world of things, what you find is you turn all of your own existing
reality into a type of thing that you don't understand and you don't control.
So this is key to the religious phase.
This is key.
So now we're in a position to begin to understand what the religious phase is.
Kierkegaard will internal to the religious phase, distinguish religiousness A and B.
I will not discuss that because it doesn't make sense until you've transcended the ethical
phase, which even just from an intellectual pedagogical standpoint, we need a lot more
material to even intellectually pretend we could have done that.
So what I'm going to talk about is the transition from the ethical to the religious.
And that's what I have been talking about this whole time because when you don't see
something for what it is, there's only two reasons that you don't see something for what
it is.
You don't see it because you can see it.
And therefore the explanation you have to come up with is why given my capacity to accurately
behold this reality, do I not behold it?
Which you recognize if you think about it, you can only do that through reflection on
the past, through retrospection and memory.
You can't know in a moment that you're not seeing something that you're not seeing it,
of course.
So either you don't see something because you can see it, but you're not seeing it.
And there the internal dialectic is what explains the capacity not being used.
So you must explain that to yourself.
The other explanation is you don't see something because you can't.
If you can't see something, the explanation you have to come up with is why can't I see
this thing for what it is?
Or again, it'll have to be historical.
It'll have to do with your memory.
Why didn't I see this for what it was?
Answer, I couldn't.
Question, why couldn't I?
And there we recognize that this difficulty has to do with our inability to accurately
understand our past.
And this is something the aesthetic person cannot do at all.
A person in the aesthetic phase of life keeps changing their outer situation because they
think it'll change their internal experience.
But they don't recognize the reason they're changing their outer situation is because their
internal experience is the source of their need for change.
When I'm not saying the change is bad, but the change is designed to help you realize
there's something inside of you that is an impulse.
And unless you grapple with that impulse, you can't really understand it.
Pardon me.
So this difficulty of grappling with your past is what is going to be the key marker
between both the aesthetic and the ethical phase in the birth of the religious phase.
Now, how does this relate to existence?
In the existing phase, you could think of this as all of the phases collapse into a
bimodal distinction, either you're existing or you're not existing.
The aesthetic person thinks that to exist, they have to be extraordinary.
And to be extraordinary, they have to overcome their experience of their environment rather
than understand why they experience their environment the way they do.
This always leads to despair.
The aesthetic always leads to despair.
These two, a type of ennui, a type of a form that can become suicidal, and you see this
very powerfully depicted in either or volume one.
Now the ethical by contrast is connected with duty, and duty is connected with the idea
of accepting the reality of freedom, and freedom, as I've explained, has to do with accepting
the claim of existing upon you.
So here's Judge Wilhelm talking about the monastery, which incidentally is obviously
very trendy again, which I've been telling some of my friends and students this was going
to be happening.
There's been a kind of trendiness of religiosity and fashion for well over 15 years, but it's
become much more noticeable since the Met Gala exhibit.
And there's always a turn towards religious symbology and a kind of faux religious practice,
which you see in the kind of the trad turn amongst very wealthy, bored people who don't
want to be associated with the so-called, well, progressive left as they would describe
it, because they're too good for that shit.
But they also don't want to hang out with the normies.
And so they construct this sort of vaguely dystopian, utopian world made out of kind
of old internet stuff and the libertarianism connected with it, with a kind of just very
common form of revanchist right wing Catholic aesthetics, which is always delicious, Evelyn
Wong, all that, because it has to do with our American fantasies about aristocracy and
Oxbridge and the beauty and glories of the Roman Catholic Church.
And there's a lot of legitimacy to all of this, but it's a fundamentally aesthetic phenomenon.
And it's a big part of our current cultural term, which is one of the reasons I thought
this is a great time to teach Kierkegaard, because Kierkegaard really explains a lot
of our culture.
So here's Kierkegaard and the persona of Judge Wilhelm.
So from the ethical stage, he's describing the monastic life.
And he says, in the Middle Ages, the matter was approached in another way.
One suddenly discontinued the course of one's life and entered the monastery.
The mistake surely was not that one entered the monastery, but the wrong idea is associated
with this step.
I, for my part, can very well reconcile myself to a person's deciding to do this.
In fact, I can see it as really beautiful.
But on the other hand, I must insist that he realized what it means.
In the Middle Ages, it was thought that in choosing the monastery, one chose the extraordinary
and became an extraordinary person oneself.
From the attitude of the monastery, one looked down proudly, almost pittingly, on the ordinary
people, like the normies today.
No wonder that people flocked into the monastery when they could become extraordinary persons
at such a bargain.
This is basically like joining the Roman Catholic Church today as a fad.
But the gods do not sell the extraordinary at a ridiculously low price.
If those who withdrew from life had been honest and frank with themselves and others, if they
had loved being a human being above all else, if they had felt with some enthusiasm all
the beauty there is in being human, if their hearts had not been unacquainted with genuine
deep human feelings, they perhaps would have also withdrawn into the solitude of the monastery,
but they would not have foolishly deluded themselves into thinking that they had become
extraordinary persons, except in the sense that they were more imperfect than others.
So Judge Wilhelm here gives a very deep analysis of this phenomenon that we see happening today.
And he says, in our day, the market value of the monastic life has fallen.
We seldom see a person break altogether with existence, with the universally human.
However, anyone with a more intimate knowledge of men will occasionally find in a single
individual a heterodoxy that is vividly reminiscent of the monastic theory.
For the sake of order, I shall here and now promptly state my idea of what an extraordinary
person is.
The genuinely extraordinary person is the genuinely ordinary person.
The genuinely extraordinary person is the genuinely ordinary person.
Now by the time you've gotten to this part of the book, if you haven't then it's fine,
but if you really, it's very important, if you're going to read either or don't read
volume one, volume one doesn't make sense and a lot of people don't finish it as a result.
It's not supposed to make sense.
It's beautiful, but it's not a coherent set of collections.
It's a collected set of writings that make sense in the perspective of volume two.
So you know, I would say read some of it, get a feel for it, and then as soon as your board
start reading either or volume two, and I'll explain more of this in my series when I talk
about how to actually engage the authorship, and I'll give a very brief, but I hope illuminating
a characterization of a few of the crucial, pseudonymous characters to help people who
are then reading through this on their own, events they want to take a seminar with me
or do further work on Kierkegaard, particularly to use it for yourself, for your business,
for your life.
So the desire to be extraordinary is a feature of the aesthetic person.
The ethical perspective on that is that what's really extraordinary is people who live actual
ordinary lives, and we talk about this, and there's actually a lot of really good media
content about it, but they're kind of in different parts of the internet.
So if you're in the aesthetic internet, you might not see this content and you might think
it's cheesy, but if you're in the ethical part of the internet, you might see a lot
of this very pro-human content that really is about glorifying ordinary people who maybe
don't look extraordinary or don't have apparently extraordinary distinctions.
So this is part of the inner reality.
Now you could say, how does this connect all of this to the religious?
Well, this is the connection, and this explains why either or ends the way it does.
Judge Wilhelm lays out a very beautiful case.
Some of it's very problematic in his own time and in our time, for example, and things
he'll say about gender, and one would have to interpret those things carefully to then
make sense of them, both in their historical context in Denmark, in the 19th century, and
then in our context today.
But there's still very important claims, because whatever you think about so-called gender
dichotomies, you have to think of them at least as conceptual realities, not biological,
but they play a role in the history of the construction of philosophy, and therefore
culture, marketing, everything.
So this element of the ethical that's very important is to recognize if you only come
into existence through your free acceptance of a duty to love another person who freely
accepts you, which is the ethical ideal, then you will submit yourself to conditions in
life that will look painful or boring or silly to a person who can't fathom, because you
can't fathom it until you've done it, who can't fathom actually making a lifelong commitment.
So the reality is the world has to be a world primarily of things, and people have to be
primarily exciting insofar as they can excite us.
We like exciting things.
So when you're full on aesthetic, you're basically full on capitalist, and capitalism is not
materialistic.
This is a major mistake, just like Americans are not materialistic.
Germans are materialistic, which I consider very positive, right?
If you go to Germany, if you go to Switzerland, lots of places in Europe, particularly the
northern kind of Germanic world, they like nice things, quality, physical things.
It's very nice to live in a culture that's actually materialistic.
I say this a lot to my students, so pardon me if those of you have heard me say this
a lot, but capitalism, which America is much more capitalistic, for example, than Germany,
capitalism is immaterialistic.
Capitalism focuses on the value of spiritual, invisible qualities.
Capital is an invisible quality, most obviously, but status, for example, which is so important
in America, is invisible.
It has all these visible signs and tokens, but you get those because of their sacramental
power.
They signal you're belonging to the Church of Capital, and what people care about in capitalism
is the consumption of invisible, ineffable realities, things like the presence of other
people who are important, the being-seen-ness quality that comes with being at a club, having
table service, drinking a bottle of pretty shit vodka for $1,000 because your family
has a trust fund.
That's a very different mode of inhabiting, and it has nothing to do with materiality.
You're not having great caviar and drinking a 1976 bottle of phenomenal wine with Michelin
3-star dinner, that is not capitalism.
That's like, you could say materialism, let me use my wealth really well.
When you use your wealth, for example, primarily to perform the fact of having the wealth,
you're not performing a physical thing.
If you guys have been at clubs like that or seen this kind of bottle service, and not
just that sort of, let's say not as nice establishments, but an establishment where
people really are spending $20,000, one of my friends used to be a manager at a really
nice club scene in New York, their club brought in over a full million dollars in revenue.
Just some people buying drinks, essentially, no food, just people buying drinks in a pretty
small space, and people might spend $30,000 at a table in a place like that, and there's
places you can spend a lot more.
So this is not about materiality, it's about existentiality, it's about existentiality.
So when you're surrounded by things, you're so anxious about existing that you have to
prove you're existing all of the time in the world of things.
When you accept the glorious burden from the ethical standpoint of becoming ethical, of
accepting the duty to recognize what you owe, what you owe, this is how the ethical
things of freedom begins when you recognize what you owe to the demands that are placed
on you by existing.
Then you enter into a world of freedom, now here's the problem.
In this world of freedom, what do you do when you've done something wrong?
And you could say, well, what do you mean?
Well, think about it, we all do bad things.
And when we do, if we're decent at all, we might eventually feel bad about it.
Now there's a very big issue here, which is the ethical person is dutiful because it's
important to be good.
And an ethical person is marked by the fact that they care about being good.
Whereas an aesthetic person might mock literally the word goodness, they might mock goodness,
they might mock beauty as words.
There's a whole range of people in our culture who sometimes take over academia and institutions
for a few generations, they always destroy them like vandals do.
And then the institutions fall apart or they get retaken over by people who actually care
about quality.
But these vandalisms of institutions comes from people who generally will attack beauty.
And you know what?
People who attack beauty tend to produce ugliness, which isn't surprising.
I'm not saying it's good or bad, it's just if in the end you don't want to live in ugly
buildings with ugly art, ugly clothes, ugly character, ugly violence, then maybe it's
not the wisest idea, this is the way the ethical stage thinks, to valorize ugliness.
But there's a reason people valorize ugliness because they hate what they perceive as the
people who valorize beauty, because maybe beauty just means I'm smart and rich enough
to live a certain way, to work out and to look really nice.
And that's true.
There's a kind of awful form of class oppression that basically flaunts the dignities that
come with privilege of having wealth, having leisure, having the ability to go to a gym,
having the ability to work out, have a trainer, having the ability to eat high quality food.
And then you look down on all of those fat Americans.
And I saw this when I came to Yale.
It took me about three weeks to realize something really weird about New Haven in the Yale bubble
part of it.
And I thought, no one is overweight.
I came from middle America.
It's totally normal that half the people you see or more are not like, they don't look
like models.
Whereas when you come into the upper classes, you notice even a 75 year old man, you know,
he'll look trimmer than, you know, the average 40 year old who makes $60,000 a year because
their lifestyles permit beauty in a way that another lifestyle makes that beauty would
be very expensive or require an enormous amount of discipline and maybe even things
that the person doesn't have to take care of themselves in that way.
So we have to be sensitive to the fact that there's valid reasons that there's always
a type of hatred of what's called the good or the beautiful, but we have to recognize
there's always a class dimension to that.
And if you don't have the class existential class analysis as a tool, philosophically
and in your social analysis, then it's hard to do justice to these phenomenon.
But from the ethical standpoint, it's just a valorization of ugliness.
And it's a mistake of not recognizing just because there are bad people who flaunt good
things doesn't mean that things aren't good.
Most of the ethical true materialist would say, but the ethical person therefore has
a real crisis about dealing with evil.
They can't deal with evil.
They cannot deal with it.
Evil is bad and they recognize that and by bad they recognize it's undesirable and it's
shameful and it induces guilt.
You don't want to do evil things if you're an ethical person.
So what about the fact that you do ethical things?
So here now I'll just end on this fact, which is the last part of either or is a transition.
So it goes through all three stages, but incipiently volume one, the aesthetic volume two is predominantly
the ethical.
But as you read the last part of Judge Wilhelm's last letter, last discourse, if you will,
it converges towards a sermon.
And the title of the sermon says the crucial fact I'm not going to analyze the sermon now,
the title of the sermon is that in relationship to God, we are always in the wrong.
So if you've read this, this is one of the very puzzling realities.
It's published at the end of the book as a kind of ultimatum it says in the titles,
the upbuilding that lies in the thought that in relation to God, we are always in the wrong.
Now this is where the ethical founders and this is where I might lose some of you as
viewers.
I hope not.
I hope I get more of you and you start to share this with your friends if you haven't.
But this is a really big part.
This is where Kierkegaard loses most readers and most readers don't even really get here.
Because this is the part that German idealism fails on German idealism fails utterly and
totally to deal with the problem of evil.
My own view of the history of German idealism is that it is fruitfully narrated and this
is how I teach it and how I'm going to narrate it and all of my work is fruitfully depicted
not saying other depictions are wrong but this is the way I think it should be depicted,
the way I see it as a the most significant failed attempt to confront the reality of
evil and the history of philosophy.
And as a result, an alternative rupturing tradition opens up, of course, in the work
of Kant, but particularly the work of Schelling, whose great Freihide Schrift is essential
for all of this and Kierkegaard and the subsequent history of German idealism Schopenhauer, everything
Nietzsche all the way to Heidegger and beyond.
So when evil is not internalized in the ethical house, the ethical house becomes perversely
the great source of evil in a very complicated sense.
So the dilemma that either or ends on is from the ethical standpoints phase in which the
good is valorized in four good reasons.
If you read Judge Willhelm, he makes a lot of sense.
He's a very compelling rational character.
You don't have to agree with him about everything, but he's smart.
He's wise.
He's delicious.
He's funny.
He has a lot of insight.
But you know, he's basically good.
How do you make sense of that basic goodness with all of the evil in society?
How do you make sense of that basic goodness with misogyny?
How do you make sense of that all all these complicated questions that you could throw
at the person who valorizes goodness is what good is the good a person might ask?
What good is the good?
And that's not an easy question actually to answer, and it's a fair question to ask
in a certain sense.
If a person says they're good and they value goodness, but then their goodness seems compatible
with all of the evil in the world, there's some weird question where we know, okay, yeah,
I should still be good, but what if it's pointless?
And why would we think that?
Well, we think that because evil gnaws at us.
It gnaws at us.
And there is a profound connection between existing and evil.
They're not identical.
It's a kind of error in certain forms of so-called Gnosticism, but evil and existing are deeply
connected and becoming human means becoming aware of evil.
That's part of what becoming human means.
So in the reality then of Kierkegaard's world, in the authorship, the ethical phase breaks
down when it comes to this single word and meaning repentance.
And Kierkegaard was an excellent scholar of Greek.
He is thinking of the Greek word for repentance, metanoia, which is a very powerful, powerful
word and concept in the history of human reflection.
And the loss of this concept, Kierkegaard rightly sees as a destructive reality of the
modern world is the complete destruction of the concept of repentance and what it names.
So Kierkegaard is trying to link the stage of the religious with the difficulty of assimilating
repentance and evil in relationship to an absolute standard.
And that's the dilemma that doesn't exist for the aesthetic person.
That exists only when a person cares about becoming good and is really working on becoming
good.
Only the person who cares about becoming good and is working on becoming good begins to
confront the reality of the problem of evil.
And therefore it is the problem of evil that gives rise to in the authorship the generation
of the religious phase.
So the religious phase therefore has to do with existing overcoming through freedom,
its enslavement to a reality of things that it doesn't understand, and then the greater
dilemma that arises from the perspective of a free human being who acknowledges the claims
of existing to then recognize in the face of the claims of the existing, what do I do
with the reality of such great evil, particularly moral evil, and what do I do with the reality
of my own past evil?
And you could say, I don't care about my past evil.
That's fine.
Just means you're in what Kierkegaard says, the aesthetic phase, you know, you know, you
don't have to change if you don't want to.
And just saying this is the way Kierkegaard is presenting it.
So ultimately what's at stake in the religious phase is the transition to a true existence
that can deal with evil.
Only the religious phase deals with evil, the ethical fails.
So with that said, I'm going to end this episode, and I will continue it quite directly in
the subsequent episode, which will be the last of this series, this first part, and
I would really like to thank you for joining me so far.
I hope this was interesting and maybe even inspiring, and I would encourage you to check
out becoming human series one origins.
Because the origin of all of my work is that series.
I started my work with that, my public philosophy work.
You can listen to the first three episodes for free on my podcast, Becoming Human.
And then if you like that, or if you like what I've done, you can buy the whole thing.
And I'd encourage you to do that.
You can use the Becoming Human Code if you want a 10% discount on that.
So thanks so much for joining me.
I'm Samuel Lankar.
I'm the founder of the Becoming Human Project, and this was episode seven of Kierkegaard,
The Poet of Existence.
