If it weren't so common, it would be easier for us to notice what a weird substance water
is.
That's right, water, it really is a weird material.
But because we interact with it almost every day, it's hard for us to notice just how
strange it is.
The English language has more words for forms of water than any other substance.
Ice, water, steam are the three phases of water.
But we also have words for watery weather, snow, fog, hail, rain, frost, sleet, drizzle.
We have specific words for bodies of water, puddle, pond, river, sea, ocean.
We even have words for applications of water, fountain, waves, floods, shower, downpour.
All of these words support the idea that water is important to us.
But I'll stand by my claim that water is, well, weird.
It has some unexpected properties in comparison to other materials, and thank goodness it
does, otherwise life wouldn't exist.
When astronomers search the skies for planetary systems around other stars, one of the things
they're looking for is any sign of water as a possible signal of life.
That's how important water is.
So, let's explore water.
Hopefully I can convince you that water really is a strange material, but also that we should
all be glad for it.
Most of us know that H2O means water, but what does it really mean?
Well, for starters, it means that a water molecule is composed of two atoms of hydrogen, H, and
one atom of oxygen, O. The two hydrogen atoms are connected, or bonded, to the oxygen atoms
through covalent bonds, or electron sharing.
One way to represent this is by putting eight dots around the oxygen atom to represent the
eight valence electrons the oxygen atom now has.
By convention, we typically put two dots on each side, top, bottom, left, right, to represent
four pairs of electrons.
Remember that the hydrogen atom can only accommodate two electrons in its 1S sub-shell, so we just
put each hydrogen next to an electron pair, showing the covalent bond.
Does it matter where we put the hydrogen atoms, top, bottom, left, or right?
No, it doesn't.
Because a drawing like this is a bit misleading in any case.
You see, the four electron pairs around the oxygen atom point to the corners of a three-dimensional
tetrahedron to minimize the repulsion between the electrons and the bonds.
In this case, it doesn't matter what electron pairs bond to the hydrogen atoms.
No matter what, you'll always get a water molecule that looks a bit like a boomerang
with the oxygen atom at the corner and the two hydrogen atoms at the ends.
We have a word to describe this shape, bent.
The water molecule is bent at an angle, and the angle between the two covalent bonds is
about 104.5 degrees.
There are consequences to having this bent shape.
For starters, we need to realize that while a covalent bond is made by electron sharing,
the electrons aren't shared equally between the two atoms in the bond.
Think of it this way.
The hydrogen atom has a single proton in its nucleus, so the overall charge on the hydrogen
nucleus is plus one.
But the oxygen atom has eight protons in its nucleus for a nuclear charge of plus eight.
These eight protons attract the electron much more strongly than the single proton and hydrogen,
so the shared electrons of the covalent bond spend more time around the oxygen atom.
This means that the sharing isn't equal.
Because the electron has a negative charge and spends more time around the oxygen atom,
the oxygen atom gets a slight negative charge to it.
By contrast, because the electrons stay away from the hydrogen atoms, the hydrogen atoms
get a slight positive charge.
A covalent bond in which the electrons are unevenly distributed like this is called a
polar covalent bond.
Think of it as a sort of tug of war with one atom pulling the electrons harder than the
other atom.
Now, if these two polar covalent bonds, these two tugs of war, were pointed in exactly opposite
directions, they're pulled with cancel out.
But they don't in the water molecule.
In H2O, the two bonds are off to one side making a bent structure.
Because they don't cancel out, there's an imbalance in the electron sharing in the molecule
as a whole.
And we say the molecule is polar, not just a covalent bond.
Water is a polar molecule.
But these covalent bonds are even more noteworthy.
Hydrogen's valence electrons are in shell number one, and oxygen's valence electrons
are in shell number two.
These are the smallest shells, so the electrical charge is confined to a fairly small volume
around the atom.
We say the atom has a high charge density.
Because of this, the polarity of this covalent bond is unusually high, so high that it affects
the properties of the molecule, as we'll see soon enough.
Now, we know from basic physics that opposite charge is attract, so the positive end from
one molecule can interact with the negative end of another molecule.
But because the polarity of this bond is unusually high, the interactions between molecules are
unusually strong.
We actually have a name for this type of interaction.
It's called a hydrogen bond.
Hydrogen bonds occur in compounds that have hydrogen atoms covalently bonded directly
to nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine atoms.
All three of these atoms attract the electron so much that a very polar covalent bond is
formed.
Remember that when positive and negative charges get close together, the energy of the system
goes down, so a hydrogen bond causes additional stability between water molecules.
In the case of water, the hydrogen bond energy is about 5% of a regular covalent bond energy.
This may not seem like much.
But notice that each water molecule can attract two other water molecules, and be attracted
to two other water molecules.
This allows a single water molecule to network with other molecules in a way that other molecules
don't, or can't.
What we'll find is that these hydrogen bonds and the energetic stability they confer have
a huge impact on the properties of water, making water, well, weird.
Let's start by talking about the boiling point of water.
The boiling point is the temperature when a liquid boils and becomes a gas, usually at
normal atmospheric pressure.
In the liquid phase, molecules are stuck together, rolling around each other.
In the gas phase, molecules break apart from each other and move around in space separately.
Based on these descriptions, we can argue that the boiling point is a measure of how
much energy we need to separate molecules from each other.
The two main things that affect the amount of energy needed to separate molecules are
the masses of the molecules and the strengths of interaction between the molecules.
Generally speaking, the heavier the molecule, the more energy, that is, the higher the temperature
we need to boil it.
If we take a look at some very similar molecules and compare their boiling points, we'll see
that as the molecule gets more massive, its boiling point goes up.
Think of the simple hydrocarbons, methane, ethane, propane, and butane, with one, two,
three, and four carbon atoms respectively.
These molecules are not very polar, so their boiling point should be affected mostly by
their masses.
Methane, the smallest hydrocarbon molecule, has a boiling point of minus 259 degrees Fahrenheit,
colder than it's ever been in any recent winter on Earth.
The next hydrocarbon, ethane, is almost twice the mass of methane and has a boiling point
of minus 128 degrees Fahrenheit, 130 degrees higher.
Propane, even larger, boils at minus 44 degrees, and butane boils at about 30 degrees around
the melting point of water.
What we're seeing is that as the mass of the molecule increases, so does the energy,
the temperature that's needed to boil and separate the molecules from each other.
But these are non-polar molecules.
Now let's look at the molecules H2S, H2SE, and H2TE.
They're all bent like H2O, except their central atom is different and they get heavier as
we go down the list.
Let's look at the trend in boiling points versus their masses.
H2S, called hydrogen sulfide, and the least massive of the three, has a boiling point
of minus 76 degrees Fahrenheit.
H2SE, or hydrogen selenide, is heavier than H2S and has a boiling point of minus 42 degrees
Fahrenheit.
H2TE, or hydrogen telluride, is even heavier and has an even higher boiling point of positive
28 degrees Fahrenheit.
Notice the trend.
As we go to heavier molecules, the boiling point of the molecule gets higher.
Based on this trend, we would expect H2O, the lightest molecule, to have the lowest
boiling point.
In reality though, it has the highest boiling point of 212 degrees Fahrenheit.
Why?
It's because of the very strong hydrogen bonding interactions that exist in the water
molecule, but not in the other molecules.
The other three molecules are polar, to be sure, but their polarities aren't unusual
in any sense, unlike the polarity of water, which is unusually strong.
The strong hydrogen bonds in H2O overwhelm the very low mass of the water molecule and
make its boiling point unusually high.
I could show you that this isn't a fluke.
Remember that I said that hydrogen bonds form when hydrogen is covalently bonded directly
to nitrogen and fluorine, too?
Well, we see similar trends in similar molecules when hydrogen is bonded to nitrogen and ammonia,
and when hydrogen is bonded to fluorine in hydrogen fluoride.
Similar compounds, using elements in the same column of the periodic table, show the obvious
trend in boiling points versus mass, until you get to NH3 and HF, when the boiling points
are much higher than expected because of hydrogen bonding.
We don't see that trend in substances made from the carbon column of the periodic table,
because none of these elements experience hydrogen bonding.
For the elements in that column, their compounds follow the trend expected according to increase
in masses, just like the hydrocarbons do.
There's a properly related boiling point that's also unusual for water.
For any material, it takes a certain amount of energy to change the phase from solid to
liquid or from liquid to gas.
For the liquid to gas phase change, this amount of energy is called the heat of vaporization.
Because we have to completely break four hydrogen bonds to separate water molecules and make
a gas, it takes a fairly large amount of energy to do that, and water has an unusually high
heat of vaporization.
If you've ever wiped your forehead with isopropyl alcohol to keep cool, you should know that
it takes three times as much energy to vaporize water as it does the alcohol.
That doesn't mean that water is three times as efficient, it means it's three times as
hard to evaporate water, which is why we use isopropyl alcohol to help cool down.
Let's talk about another unusual property of H2O.
Everyone knows that ice floats on water.
We see it, we experience it regularly.
But do you have any idea how unusual that is?
Most liquids, when they get colder and become solids, sink.
For example, a beaker full of candle wax will cool and turn into solid wax, and the solid
wax will sink to the bottom.
Why is it that water floats when it becomes ice?
The easy answer is hydrogen bonding.
Here's a more detailed answer.
When liquids cool into solids, the individual particles line up into something called a
crystal, a regular arrangement of the particles.
Usually the arrangement of particles in the solid is the structure that has the lowest
energy.
Also, in most cases, the crystal is denser than the liquid, so it sinks when the solid
phase is formed.
In the case of the bent water molecules, the lowest energy occurs when the molecules are
pointed so that each water molecule can make four hydrogen bonds, two from the positively
charged hydrogen side, and two from the negatively charged oxygen side.
So under normal conditions, this is the crystal that forms.
Something else forms too, a whole lot of empty space.
See, in order for the H2O molecules to align their hydrogen bonds properly and to the lowest
energy arrangement, they have to spread out a bit, causing some emptiness to form between
the molecules.
When this empty space forms, the volume of the sample increases by about 9%.
When the volume increases, the density goes down, so when the liquid water becomes all
solid, the resulting density goes down by about 9%.
Basic physics says that the less dense phases float on more dense phases, so ice floats
on water, unlike almost all other substances.
About 10% of ice floats above the liquid level, the rest is below the surface of the liquid.
When we say the tip of the iceberg, we make reference to the fact that only the tip of
solid water, in this case an iceberg, shows up above the liquid.
The rest, about 90% of the solid ice, remains hidden beneath the water's surface.
Floating ice was crucial to the development of life on Earth.
Most scientists accept the idea that life began in Earth's oceans.
In cold areas, if ice would form, because it floats, it would remain at the surface
of the oceans, allowing life to continue living beneath it.
On the other hand, if ice sank, then the first time it got very cold, ice would start accumulating
at the bottom of the ocean, and eventually the ocean would freeze, freezing any life
that might be in it.
No, we owe our very existence to the fact that ice floats.
There are other small molecules very close to the size of the water molecule that also
show hydrogen bonding.
I'm thinking about ammonia, NH3, and hydrogen fluoride, HF.
Do they sink or float when they become solids?
Ammonia actually increases its density by about 15% when it freezes, so it sinks.
Hydrogen fluoride increases its density by almost 20% when it freezes, so it too sinks
in its liquid.
Of the three simple hydrogen bonded molecules, only water goes down in density when it freezes.
But is water alone in this behavior?
No, as it turns out, there are other substances known where the solid floats on the liquid,
the elements silicon, germanium, and gallium.
But look around you, do you see copious quantities of elemental silicon or gallium around you?
No.
Water is the only common compound that behaves in such a strange way, and we're so used
to it, we don't realize that it's behaving strangely.
One of the nicknames for water is the universal solvent.
Actually, there's no such thing as a universal solvent, a solvent that dissolves anything.
But water is one of the best solvents around.
Think of it, most of what we drink is a water solution.
Many of our foods are mostly water, from fruits to vegetables to even meat, which is about
60% water.
The cells in our bodies are mostly proteins, nucleic acids, and sugars dissolved in water.
What makes water such a good solvent?
Well, mostly it's polarity.
See, when things dissolve in water, water molecules surround the individual particles
and literally separate them from each other.
Each dissolved atom or molecule is surrounded by a half dozen or more water molecules.
Also, a lot of things are also polar, or have polar parts.
This means that these substances, called solvutes, also have partial positive charges and partial
negative charges around them.
These partial charges attract the ends of water molecules, and when enough water molecules
are attracted, it's more energetically stable for the particle to separate from the solute.
It also helps that H2O is a very small molecule, so we can get into the cracks and crevices
that some molecules have.
For example, sugar dissolves in water because sugar molecules have four or five polar areas
in the molecules, allowing water molecules to surround them and carry them away, one
by one.
Compounds made of charged particles, called ionic compounds, are also soluble in water
because the positive and negative ions attract the polar ends of water molecules.
Not all ionic compounds are easily dissolved, though.
If the charges on the ions are high enough, it takes too much energy to separate them,
so they just don't dissolve.
So despite water's reputation for being a great solvent, it doesn't dissolve everything.
For example, oil doesn't dissolve very well, if at all, in water.
That's why you see oil slicks floating on top of puddles.
That's because the oil isn't polar, rather it's non-polar.
Because oil molecules are non-polar, there's no energetic stability in surrounding oil molecules
with water molecules, so the oil molecules don't dissolve.
Oil does dissolve in liquids that are themselves non-polar, like turpentine or gasoline.
The idea that polar liquids dissolve polar solutes and non-polar substances dissolve
each other gives us a rule of thumb, like dissolves like.
That is, molecules with similar polarity, or lack thereof, mix together to make solutions.
In the case of water, it's such a good solvent because a lot of material around us is polar.
I mentioned energy a few times already.
There is another unusual property of water that relates to energy.
But before I discuss it, I need to talk about how energy affects materials.
In its most general form, energy is known as heat.
When you heat object, it warms up, that is, its temperature increases.
Conversely, when you remove heat from an object, it gets colder, its temperature goes down.
The more heat added or removed, the higher or lower the temperature.
The mass of an object is also a factor.
A piece of metal that's twice as massive needs twice as much heat to change its temperature
by the same amount.
So the heat added or removed is related to the mass of the object involved and its temperature change.
The physical property that relates the heat, the mass, and the temperature change of a process
is called the specific heat of a material.
Specific heat is a physical property of a material, just like density or color or volume.
You can look at a textbook and find tables of specific heats of various materials, like
the elements and simple compounds.
The lower the specific heat, the less heat you need to change the temperature of a material.
The higher the specific heat, the more heat you need to change a material's temperature.
Metals, for example, have low specific heats, which is why your frying pan heats up so fast
when you turn on the stove's burner.
Water has an unusually high specific heat.
In fact, it has the second highest specific heat of any known material, second only to liquid ammonia.
But there's not a lot of liquid ammonia around.
The high specific heat of water means that it takes a lot of heat energy to warm water up
or cool it down for that matter.
In fact, when you think about your stainless steel frying pan, it takes nine times as much
heat to warm up the same mass of water by the same amount of temperature.
Think of that pot of boiling water.
Ninety percent or more of the heat went into warming up the water, not warming up the pot.
Why is water specific heat so large?
It's because of the hydrogen bonds that water molecules are making with each other.
See, when solid or liquid molecules warm up, they shake back and forth faster and faster
until they get so much energy that they change phase into either a liquid or a gas.
All of this shaking back and forth means that energy needs to overcome the forces that are
binding molecules to each other.
If the binding forces are strong, it takes more heat to overcome them and change the temperature.
Water molecules make four hydrogen bonds, each of which is about five percent the strength
of a regular chemical bond.
It takes a relatively large amount of energy to shake these water molecules back and forth.
Just like it takes much more energy than expected to separate water molecules and turn them
into steam, as I mentioned when I talked about heat of vaporization.
Well, why might this be important to us?
Well, 70% of the earth is covered with water.
Only 30% of the earth is covered in rock, which by the way has a specific heat of only about
one-fifth of water.
It takes a lot more energy to change the temperature of the oceans than it does the land, and this
has major implications for the world's climate.
The planet's oceans can both absorb and give off much more energy than the land does.
And scientists studying the long-term impacts of climate change have to include the huge
amount of energy that the oceans store.
Face it, water is weird.
But it's so commonplace that it's difficult to see that unless we really think about it.
But then again, if it weren't for water's unusual properties, it's likely we wouldn't
be here to be thinking about it in the first place.
Most of its unusual properties come from its polarity and its hydrogen bonding, both of
which impact the energy of interaction that water molecules have with each other and with
other substances.
One of water's unusual properties rears its ugly head in a strange place.
Consider the bell pepper.
A nice fresh bell pepper is good and crisp because the plant cells are stuffed full of
water, a property called turgidity.
For long-term storage, we may want to put our bell pepper in the freezer, but when we
take it out and thaw it, it's a very limp reflection of its former turgid self.
What happened is that the freezing water expanded in the plant cells and burst most of the cell
walls, so that when you thaw it out, you lose all that water and the vegetable goes flop.
This actually happens with a lot of different vegetables, and it's one of the reasons that
frozen vegetables don't have the same texture as fresh.
Manufacturers try to flash freeze vegetables as quickly as they can because this tends
to minimize, but not eliminate, the damage to cell walls.
Now, have you ever heard of cryonics?
It's the preservation of human bodies by storing them at very low temperatures.
Temperatures low enough that water in the tissues freezes.
If you freeze a body fast enough or bathe the body in liquids that prevent the water
from making ice, you can minimize the damage to cells upon freezing, just like when you're
freezing vegetables.
Ah, but there's a key word here, minimize.
Damage cannot be completely eliminated with current technology.
To date, the effects of large-scale bodily freezing are not reversible, so so far there's
no guarantee that anyone who gets frozen will be successfully revived.
Few people want to take that chance, so for now, the wholesale freezing of human bodies
is still solidly in the realm of science fiction.
For all we know, any attempt to try it will turn you into nothing more than a very large
piece of previously frozen bell pepper.
Thank you.
