Right now, there is an international space station in orbit about the Earth.
It orbits the Earth 15 times a day, and it varies from between 205 and 270 miles up.
The use of the retirement of the United States Space Shuttle fleet, the only current way
up or down, is with Russian rockets.
Suppose though, there were an elevator to the space station.
Actually, in principle, it's possible to do, but you'd need an elevator cable that's
over 200 miles long.
Unfortunately, a cable would break under its own weight, if it were made of any material
we have available today.
What we'd need is a new material, maybe carbon fibers, perhaps titanium steel, perhaps
artificial spider web.
How about a combination of all three?
Many modern materials aren't pure substances.
Instead, they're combinations of substances that are brought together to take advantage
of the best properties of each.
These kinds of materials are sometimes called composite materials.
Our society already uses composite materials in a variety of products, products that have
properties and performance that far outstrip their earlier models.
There is the possibility that new composite materials would have new desirable properties,
maybe even strong enough to make that 200-mile-long cable.
According to the scientific journal Nature, a material is a substance in a condensed phase
that is a solid or a liquid, but not a gas, that's used for some technological purpose.
So a rock in your backyard isn't necessarily considered a material.
But if you were to use that rock to build a wood-burning pizza oven, it would be a material.
And if you wanted to build a solid pizza oven, you'd probably be very interested in the physical
and chemical properties of that material.
A composite material is a material made out of two or more individual materials that have
different chemical or physical properties.
When combined, the composite material has properties that are different, usually better
than its components.
Composite materials can be stronger, lighter, or may have chemical or physical properties
that are better in combination than in the single substance.
One of the earliest composite materials was the straw and mud combination used to make
bricks over 9,000 years ago.
For that matter, wood can be considered a composite, used not just historically, but
even today as a major construction material.
Composite materials are composed of two main components, the matrix and the reinforcement.
The matrix can be thought of as the solvent if the composite itself were thought of as
a solution.
It's the material that could conceivably make a part or a piece all by itself.
Typically, the matrix is some kind of plastic, polymer, or resin that can be molded to the
shape desired.
The reinforcement is the component that's mixed in with the matrix.
Its job is to add toughness and stiffness to the matrix, increasing its physical performance.
But how does the reinforcement do this?
Well, if we look at the matrix at a microscopic level, when it's subjected to forces higher
than it can withstand, it breaks.
It starts breaking with the formation of tiny cracks that propagate through the material,
until eventually the crack goes completely through the piece, and now you have two pieces.
But when the reinforcement is present, it halts the growth of these tiny cracks.
For example, the reinforcement can be long, thin fibers of some other material, like glass
or carbon.
Even though the thin fiber might itself be brittle, if the initial tiny crack meets the
fiber side on, it can't break the fiber along its long axis, and the crack stops propagating.
Ultimately, then, you have a stronger material.
Another example of reinforcement is powdered rubber added to the matrix.
When a crack begins in the matrix and hits a rubber particle, the rubber stretches a
little bit rather than letting the crack continue.
In this way, a material that isn't necessarily hugely strong itself, rubber, can strengthen
a material by keeping those tiny cracks from becoming bigger cracks and a stronger composite
material is made.
As I mentioned, one example of a natural composite material is wood.
The cells that make up wood are long and thin, actually resembling tiny straws.
It also has tiny vessels embedded in it that serve to transport water and nutrients throughout
the living tree.
This combination of long, thin cells and hollow vessels makes for a natural composite material.
But then, there's also how a tree grows.
Every year, a new layer of cells grows on the outside of the tree, just under the bark.
It's this annual growth of new cells that leads to the production of so-called rings
in a tree.
Between the long, thin cells, the vessels, and the concentric rings of new growth, wood
is relatively light but strong, an excellent naturally occurring composite.
Wood is still used today as a major construction material because of its mechanical properties.
Another example of a composite material made from wood is plywood or particle board.
Here, thin sheets or even tiny pieces of wood are glued together so that the wood grain
alternates directions, making a board that's much stronger than the original wood.
Bone is another example of naturally occurring composite material.
The inorganic content of bone is a mineral called hydroxyapatite, a certain type of calcium
phosphate.
It's combined with a protein called collagen, which provides a small amount of elasticity.
The hydroxyapatite is the matrix, while the collagen plays the role of the reinforcement.
The structure of bone is actually rather complex.
The outer layer is hard and fairly compact, giving bone a misleadingly solid appearance.
The interior is composed of a more spongy material called cancelous bone.
Because it's more porous, blood vessels and marrow permeate it, making it less strong
but more flexible than the outer compact bone.
Interestingly enough, the hydroxyapatite matrix of bone is constantly being reformed,
which explains the constant need for calcium and phosphorus in our diets, and also explains
why broken bones can heal themselves over time.
Bone tissue is absorbed by bone cells called osteoclasts, and redeposited by other cells
called osteoblasts.
As women age and the production of estrogen decreases, the balance of absorption and redeposition
of bone can alter, leading to more bone loss than bone formation.
The disease osteoporosis can be the ultimate result, leading to an increased risk of broken
bones, especially to the back, ribs and hip.
A classic example of an artificial composite is concrete, which was used in ancient Greece
as far back as the 14th century BCE.
It starts with cement, a substance made from pulverized rock and ash that's been added
to lime or calcium oxide and mixed with water into a slurry.
Chemical reactions with water or carbon dioxide from the air transform the slurry into a solid.
When cement is mixed with sand or small stones referred to as aggregate, it makes concrete,
which has more strength than cement alone.
Concrete can be pulled apart relatively easily, for a material resembling rock that is, so
in some construction, it's common to embed steel bars inside, making reinforced concrete,
itself another kind of composite material.
Concrete is the most common construction material in the world, and society uses twice as much
of it as it uses steel, wood, aluminum and plastic combined.
Let's continue our discussion of composite materials by considering an element that's
already gotten a lot of attention, carbon.
Carbon is an interesting element.
In one crystal form, it makes graphite, a material so soft you could write with it.
While in another crystal form, diamond, it makes one of the hardest substances known.
But crystal forms aren't the only way you can get carbon.
If you take a polymer thread composed of polyacrylonitrile, rayon, or even pitch from
crude oil, and subject it to intense heat, like 4000 degrees Fahrenheit, you can drive
off all of the other atoms and leave the carbon atoms behind.
You've just made carbon fibers.
Carbon fibers have a range of physical properties, depending on their source material and how
they're made.
But in general, they're only about 5 to 10 micrometers wide, that's 200 to 400 millionths
of an inch, only a tenth the width of a human hair.
The structure of carbon fiber is complex, although its exact structure depends on the
starting material and the method of processing.
Much of the carbon is in graphite-like form, but not very crystalline.
Rather, the sheets of carbon atoms are arranged somewhat haphazardly instead of orderly, an
arrangement called turbo-stratic.
The sheets are oriented along the long axis of the fiber, and it's within the sheet that
the carbon-carbon bonding is the strongest.
So the fiber's strength comes from the fact that you have these thin sheets of randomly
arranged graphite along the length of the fiber.
Despite their size, carbon fibers have some interesting properties.
For example, they have two to eight times the strength of steel, meaning that it takes
two to eight times more force to break two pieces having the same cross-section.
Carbon fibers require twice the force to stretch, meaning that they're less elastic, more stiff.
They're also significantly lighter than most metals, so you get better performance with
less weight.
The bottleneck is size.
They're very narrow and rather short, only about one to three hundredths of an inch long.
So an individual fiber may have superior physical properties, but it's difficult to use because
a single fiber is so small.
They can be woven into threads, however, and even these threads have better properties
than many structural metals.
The threads can be woven into fabric, and the fabric used in composite materials.
For example, consider the skateboard.
The board itself is composed of several thin layers of wood called veneer, which is interlayered
with carbon fiber and glued together with epoxy.
The layers are heat-treated in a mold that shapes the board into its proper curved shape,
and then the board is cut, finished, and has its wheels attached.
What you have is a lighter, stronger skateboard that can withstand the rigors of riding better
than a single plank of wood.
This is the advantage of composite materials.
Carbon fiber reinforced composites are also used in aircraft and boat or submarine parts.
Carbon turbine blades, automobile bodies, bicycles, and in sporting goods like tennis
rackets, football helmets, and golf clubs, all of which benefit from increased strength
and less weight.
Worldwide, carbon fiber production is a twenty billion dollar industry that's growing between
five and ten percent a year as new applications are found.
One new area for carbon fibers is using them to strengthen metal and metal alloys, especially
aluminum, in attempts to make them lighter, stronger, and less subject to mechanical fatigue.
Carbon fibers aren't the only fibers used to make composite materials, although they
may be among the most high-tech.
The first synthetic plastic was actually inspired by the need for fiber composite.
In the first decade of the twentieth century, American scientist Leo Bakelind was trying
to find a synthetic substitute for shellac, which is a resin excreted by the lac beetle
in Southeast Asia.
He was also looking for something to serve as a binder for asbestos, a mineral known
for its fiber structure, and eventually found a plastic made of phenol and formaldehyde,
both rather simple organic compounds.
He named his new material Bakelite, which was the first synthetic plastic.
By 1944, when Bakelind died, over 175 tons of Bakelite was being produced for over 10,000
products.
Although it's been largely replaced by newer plastics and polymers, today Bakelite is still
used to make billiard balls and small pieces for board games.
Asbestos use has been severely curtailed because of the health issues related to breathing
its fibers.
The most common fiber used in composite materials is, believe it or not, glass.
Glass fibers were first made in the early 1930s, and the commercial applications of
so-called fiberglass were quickly realized.
By 1936, plastic resins were developed to encase the fiberglass to make moldable parts,
and the applications followed fast.
Glass fibers have advantages similar to carbon fibers.
They're very strong in the direction of the fiber, although easy to crack along the long
axis.
Because of this, when making composite materials, the maker needs to make sure that the fibers
are oriented in the direction where added strength is necessary.
If strength is necessary in more than one direction, woven fiberglass fabric can be
used.
Glass composite materials are typically two-dimensional, flat or curved pieces, like automobile bodies,
hot tubs, surfboards or diving boards.
Glass fibers are relatively inexpensive and easy to make.
Bolton glass is passed through a nozzle that has hundreds of holes in it for the glass
to come out in thin fibers.
The nozzles are made of a platinum and rhodium alloy, which is itself significantly expensive.
The fibers are either coated with a thin layer of coating to protect them and wound
on a bobbin, or coated with a binder and sprayed onto a surface to make a mat of fiberglass.
Because of the dangers of asbestos, glass fibers have replaced asbestos in many applications,
although tiny pieces of glass fibers can also cause lung irritation if breathed in.
The medical jury is still out on the question of whether or not exposure to glass fibers
causes more long-term damage, including cancer.
About 40% of the glass used to make fibers is recycled glass, making fiberglass the second
largest user of recycled glass behind simply remaking new glass containers.
Polymer fibers can also be used as reinforcements.
One interesting polymer is composed of two monomers, one for phenylenediamine and pterothoyl
chloride.
The ends of these two molecules react to bond together in an alternating fashion, making
a long chain, or polymer.
One of the interesting properties of these polymer chains is that they can interact fairly
strongly with adjacent chains, making a polymer that's very strong.
If you dissolve this polymer in the right solvent and spin it into fibers, you can
use these fibers themselves very strong as a reinforcement in a composite material.
Know what you've got?
A material called Kevlar, so strong that it's used to make bulletproof body armor for police
in the military.
It's even used to reinforce the walls of combat vehicles, including tanks and even
naval vessels, and can be woven to make material and rope.
I mentioned earlier that powdered rubber is sometimes used as a reinforcement, and it
is for certain polymers.
But it turns out that rubber is the matrix for what might be the most common composite
material in the world.
This rubber, as it's known, is used largely for automobile tires, but it's also used
to make rubber tubing or hoses, like the garden hoses that many homeowners use in their yards.
Let's talk about the hoses first.
A hose is a flexible tube used to transport a fluid, be it a gas or a liquid.
We'll differentiate between hoses and pipes by assuming that pipes are rigid while hoses
are flexible.
And because of that flexibility, they benefit from some reinforcement.
The reinforcement is usually some polymer or metal fiber, and if you look at the reinforced
hose, you'll note that the fiber is usually at some weird angle.
This angle is called the magic angle, and is about 54.7 degrees.
It turns out that at this angle, the ability of the fiber to withstand the cylindrical
forces of the rubber tubing are optimal, so the reinforcement is most efficient.
But it's likely that the most widespread application of reinforced rubber is in tires
for vehicles like cars, trucks and bicycles.
Although trains still use metal wheels and solid rubber or polymer tires are used in
small movable items like carts and vacuum cleaners and baby strollers, most vehicles
on our roads use hollow rubber tires filled with compressed air, called a pneumatic tire.
Making high quality tires is an exercise in composite materials.
About 1.7 billion tires are made around the world every year.
Most of them are made from synthetic rubber, a rubber made from the monomers styrene and
butadiene.
That's the matrix.
The reinforcement is generally called a ply, with a tire having one or more plies oriented
in different directions for additional strength.
The ply is usually made of small cords of polyester or steel wires.
Our friend Kevlar is also used in tire production.
The directions of the cords vary based on the tire design, but are generally at an angle
to the tire's direction of rotation.
The type of tire called radial tire has a section of reinforcement at a 90 degree angle
to the direction of rotation, but there are always other layers of cord and intermediate
angles to provide additional strength.
The ply and rubber composite make up the wall of the tire.
On the outer edge of the tire, the part that makes contact with the ground, there is an
additional buildup of rubber called the tread, which can be just rubber or another composite
of rubber and a filler material.
The tread usually has some sort of pattern to it that allows contact to be efficient
and wear resistant, but also allows the tire to channel water away should the tire be operating
on wet pavement.
Specialty tires for operation in snow and mud have especially wide channels for better
traction.
The pure synthetic rubber used to make tires is dark yellow or brown in color, yet tires
are almost universally black.
Why?
Turns out it's another composite material issue.
The synthetic rubber is mixed with carbon black, a fine powdered form of carbon that's
a byproduct of combustion.
Not only is carbon black used in printers to make copies, but a tire's rubber is actually
up to 50% carbon black, making the tire look, well, black.
The particles of carbon black are on the order of 20-100 nanometers in size, about a millionth
of an inch wide.
Not only does the carbon black make the rubber black, but it dramatically increases the strength
and wear resistance of the original rubber, making it a classic composite material.
So tires are doubly composite.
Carbon black mixed in with the rubber and plies mixed into the construction to make a very
durable tire.
After all, a tire that travels 60,000 miles will rotate a little over 50 million times.
At the extreme end of composite materials are nanocomposites, which are composites where
one of the components has a physical dimension less than 100 nanometers, again, about a millionth
of an inch.
So, some of the fiber reinforced composites, or the carbon black tires, might be considered
nanocomposites.
However, in many cases, the percentage of the reinforcement component is low, around
just a few percent, which eliminates tires where the percentage of carbon black approaches
50 percent of the entire material.
Certain natural materials can be classified as nanocomposites, like some mollusks shells.
But most nanocomposites are synthetic materials that have specialty applications.
One type of nanocomposite is a ceramic matrix nanocomposite, which has a ceramic as its
primary component.
Ceramics has some very useful properties.
They're hard, they can be formed in different shapes, and they stand up to wear rather easily.
However, they're also brittle, not very flexible, and they don't conduct electricity or heat
very well.
If you can imagine a piece of china dinnerware, then you probably know the properties of ceramics.
Imagine, however, if you incorporated a small percentage of fine metal powder or fibers
into the ceramic.
In this particular case, the reinforcement has to be tiny because otherwise the ceramic
structure would be interrupted, and the strength of the material would decrease quickly.
If the metal additive is small enough, you could still have the strength of a ceramic,
but now have the advantage of flexibility or electrical and thermal conductivity.
Ceramic composites like this are finding use in engines and turbines, where extreme conditions
of temperature and stress require the use of materials that can best withstand those
conditions.
Another type of nanocomposite is the metal matrix nanocomposite, which switches the roles
of matrix and reinforcement.
Whether a metal or alloy is the matrix, an embedded in it is some sort of non-metal or
ceramic nanomaterial.
One of the most studied reinforcements is the carbon nanotube.
Instead of being a thin fiber, a carbon nanotube is a cylinder where the wall is made from
carbon atoms, almost a type of carbon molecule.
These carbon nanotubes can be formed from vaporized carbon under certain experimental
conditions, and they have physical properties that surpass even carbon fibers.
However, currently they aren't very economical, and while the use of carbon nanotubes as reinforcements
in metals is an exciting prospect, it's still being developed.
Perhaps one of the most unusual nanocomposites is the aerogel.
An aerogel is a solid matrix that has tiny bubbles dispersed in it.
It's actually over 98% bubbles.
The name is misleading.
They're not a gel, they're actually solid.
But the tiny nanoscale bubbles in them drastically change the properties of the solid.
For example, aerogels are excellent thermal insulators.
After all, there's very little solid material in an aerogel that transmit the heat.
Aerogels are extraordinarily light.
The most common aerogel, made from silicon dioxide, has a density of just double that
of air, and the lightest aerogel ever made has a density of only one-eighth of air.
You'd actually have to weigh it down, or it would float away like a balloon.
Despite their lightness, aerogels are unusually strong.
A sample of aerogel can support over 1,000 times its own weight, which would be the equivalent
of a normal person being able to lift 10 African elephants.
I mentioned that silicon dioxide is the most common material for an aerogel.
They're also made of aluminum oxide, carbon, various metals, and even certain polymers.
They're made by creating a gel, which is a jelly-type material, and then carefully removing
the liquid phase to leave tiny bubbles embedded in a solid matrix.
Aerogel production is a $500 million industry in the United States alone, and these unusual
nanocomposites are finding use as insulators, as I already mentioned.
They could also be used as catalyst supports, with their huge surface area exposing catalysts
to lots of reactants.
They could also be used as water and gas purifiers, with the small bubbles of the gel selectively
passing one type of molecule, but not another.
We're only beginning to explore the possibilities of these unusual materials.
Composite materials allow us to be more selective about the properties we need in a product.
We're no longer completely bound by the inherent properties a substance has.
We now have the ability to customize those properties to some extent, making parts that
are stronger, lighter, more flexible, more durable.
Usually they're also more expensive because making a composite material takes more effort
or requires more high-tech, costly ingredients or processes.
But in the long run, these additional expenses are worth it to have engines that operate
more efficiently or football helmets that are more protective.
What's interesting about composite materials is that there's very little new theory about
them.
It's all about engineering a material in new ways so that we can better take advantage
of the properties they already have.
Now, let's get back to our space elevator.
If we were able to make a carbon nanotube that has a cross-section of one square inch,
then according to actual measurements and some simple calculations, that nanotube, and
it wouldn't be nano anymore, could theoretically support a cable that's 2,100 miles long before
it breaks under its own weight.
Hey, we have our space elevator cable.
Unfortunately, as of now, we can't make a nanotube that wide or even that long.
Now, it's more likely that if we ever do have a space elevator, the cable will be some
sort of composite material.
When you look at all the modern composite materials and what we're getting them to do,
it's easy to imagine that maybe we're almost there.
Thank you.
