In this day and age, scientists know a lot about matter and energy, an awful lot.
To make things easier for us, it's useful to be able to categorize, to organize our
knowledge.
But there's a lot of knowledge.
Well, chemistry has a tool to help us organize some fundamental facts about the basic building
blocks of matter, and it fits on a single page of paper.
It's called the periodic table.
I would argue that it's the most important one-page tool in all of science, and chemistry
gets to claim it.
No other science has a tool like this that summarizes so much fundamental information
about the topic.
Geology doesn't have one, physics doesn't have one either, nor does geology, astronomy,
or any other science you could name.
The periodic table is unique in all of science.
How did it get this way?
And more importantly, why did it get this way?
Actually, it's all about the chemical properties of the elements.
So we'll start with the elements.
What really is an element?
Strangely enough, the modern understanding of an element is fairly recent.
In the days of the ancient Greeks, empedocles listed air, fire, water, and earth as the
four principal components of nature.
The actual word element was coined by Plato about a hundred years later.
Plato's contemporary Aristotle added ether to the list, which he proposed was what made
the heavens.
Because of Aristotle's and Plato's influences, the four elements model of nature held steady
for hundreds of years, and even the ether idea was kept alive until the early 1900s.
The conquests of Alexander the Great, a student of Aristotle's, spread these ideas through
much of what we now call the Middle East and Western India.
After about a thousand years, a new practice emerged, alchemy.
Some historians argue that alchemy actually started as early as 3500 BCE, when humanity
first learned to smelt metals from their oars.
There's also the appearance of practices resembling alchemy in China 2,000 years ago,
as well as in India 2,500 years ago.
But the goals of these different flavors of alchemy were very similar.
First, to lengthen life up to and including immortality.
Second, to turn ordinary, or base, metals like iron into rare or noble metals like gold.
Alchemy, at least the type derived from Aristotle's elements, was based on a simple idea, because
all material was a combination of the four elements.
If you just change the combination, you can change the material.
For example, perhaps gold had more fire than iron.
If so, then by adding a bit of fire to some ordinary iron, you could change it, or transmute
it, into the more precious gold.
Alchemy was all the rage for hundreds of years.
Then Isaac Newton was a confirmed alchemist.
Alchemy evolved into modern chemistry, starting in the mid-1600s, and by the late 1700s a more
modern definition of element was proposed.
This was done by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, who published a book titled Elements
of Chemistry in 1789.
In the book, Lavoisier defined an element as the last point which analysis is capable
of reaching.
In modern terms, an element is a substance that cannot be broken down into simpler substances
by chemical means.
In his book, Lavoisier listed 33 elements, some of which are no longer considered elements,
like light, heat, lime, which is a compound of the elements calcium and oxygen, and silica,
which is a compound of silicon and oxygen.
Scientists have been discovering elements ever since, after a fashion that is.
It turns out that about 10 elements have been used in their elemental form since antiquity.
In alphabetical order they are carbon, copper, gold, iron, lead, mercury, silver, sulfur,
tin, and zinc, arsenic, antimony, bismuth, cobalt, phosphorus, and platinum were also
discovered before Lavoisier's 1789 definition.
The rest were discovered in the 1800s and 1900s, with work continuing even today on making
new elements in giant atom smashers.
The last stable element naturally occurring to be discovered was rhenium, discovered in
1925, and one of the rarest naturally occurring elements.
Two radioactive elements, neptunium and plutonium, were found in ultra-trace amounts in naturally
occurring rhenium ores.
These tiny amounts are formed by the absorption of stray neutrons in uranium-238 atoms, a particular
isotope of uranium.
In 1913, English physicist Henry Mosley discovered what sets elements apart.
The number of protons in the nucleus is different for each different element.
The number of protons in an element is called its atomic number, and is a fundamental concept
in understanding matter that we'll talk more about in a minute.
This seminal discovery was the final piece to the puzzle of how to define an element.
Sadly, Mosley was killed in August 1915 in the Battle of Gallipoli, part of World War
I.
As elements were discovered through the passing of time, scientists began to notice that certain
elements had similar chemical or physical properties.
For example, sodium and potassium are two light metals that react rather violently with
water, and combine with the element chlorine in a one-to-one ratio.
When the element lithium was first isolated in 1823 and its properties investigated, scientists
found that it reacted similarly to potassium and sodium.
Other similarities were noted among the elements.
The elements chlorine, bromine, and iodine showed similar chemical properties, as did
the elements magnesium, calcium, and strontium.
These similarities piqued the curiosity of some scientists.
In 1829, German chemist Johann Dobereiner collected 15 elements into five groups of three based
on their chemical similarities, which he called triads.
Other chemists noted these similarities, but were unable to make any real sense out of them.
However, one other property did make sense in Dobereiner's triads, the atomic weight.
The atomic weight is another fundamental property of an element.
Originally, the relative weight of hydrogen, the simplest element, was set to one, and
the weights of the other elements were determined with respect to that standard.
Indeed, a concept called Prout's Hypothesis, first announced by English scientist William
Prout in 1815, proposed that all elements were multiples of hydrogen, suggesting that
all relative atomic weights should be integers.
The stubborn appearance of non-integer atomic weights soon disproved that, but it did spur
a lot of investigation into atomic weights.
In any of it, Dobereiner's triads showed something interesting.
The atomic weight of the middle element was very close to the average of the other two
elements in the triad, so something was going on here.
By 1860, about 60 chemical elements were known, enough for scientists to start organizing
them.
The first person to recognize that there was a repetition in the properties of the elements
was the French geologist Alain Gendres de Chancourtois.
Unfortunately, de Chancourtois used a lot of geology terminology, and his contributions
were missed by the chemists at the time.
In 1864, English chemist John Newlands grouped the known elements into 11 groups and, noting
that the weights differed by multiples of 8, proposed a law of octaves based on an analogy
to musical scales.
This wasn't appreciated very much by his contemporary colleagues, though, and it wasn't
until over 60 years later that a variation of his law of octaves gained some experimental
support.
In 1864, German chemist Julius Lothar Meyer published a chart of elements, but it included
less than half of the known elements, and so has been found wanting by science historians.
No, the big breakthrough came in 1869, when Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev published
a chart of the elements that was the first version of the modern periodic table.
Mendeleev organized his elements by atomic weights, as everyone else did, and in doing
so argued that some atomic weights had to be wrong if chemical properties were the organizing
factor.
Turns out he was wrong on this, but more on that later.
But Mendeleev did something that no one else did.
He left gaps in his chart if an element didn't fit the correct progression of chemical properties.
His excuse?
Perhaps these elements hadn't been discovered yet, and based on the properties of other
elements around them, Mendeleev predicted some of the chemical and physical properties
of these missing elements.
A bold move, but Mendeleev was right.
60 years later, the element gallium was discovered, and it had almost exactly the same properties
that Mendeleev predicted.
Not long after that, a new element, scandium, and another germanium were discovered, and
their properties agreed very well with Mendeleev's predictions.
For these reasons, Mendeleev is more generally considered the inventor of the periodic table
rather than Meyer.
The modern version of the periodic table has seven rows.
However, to make it appear legibly on a single page, a 14 column segment of the bottom two
rows is cut out and placed underneath the remaining section, leaving an 18 column section
behind.
We'll see a reason for this in a few minutes.
Each row of the periodic table is called a period.
The first row has only two elements, hydrogen and helium.
The second row has eight elements, as does the third row.
The fourth row has 18 elements, and so forth.
Each column of the periodic table is called a group, sometimes a family.
The elements in each group have similar chemical properties.
That's the whole reason behind the periodic table in the first place.
Some of the groups have names.
For example, the first group is called the alkali metals.
Groups are also labeled with a number-letter combination, so the alkali metals are also
called the group 1A elements.
The second column of the periodic table is called the alkali and earth metals, or the
group 2A elements.
Going over to the other side of the table, the next to last column of the elements is
called the halogens.
While the last column of the periodic table is called the noble gases, so called because
they don't like to interact or chemically react with other elements.
The noble gases are an interesting footnote to the development of the periodic table, because
the first noble gas wasn't discovered until 1894, over 25 years after Mendeleev published
his first periodic table.
After several of these gases were finally discovered, Mendeleev simply added them to
his periodic table by making a new column for them in 1902.
Originally, the developers of the periodic table ordered the elements in terms of atomic
weight.
Mendeleev was so insistent on this that he even argued that the proposed atomic weight
for the element tellurium was wrong.
You see, the numbers had its atomic weight as being higher than the atomic weight of
iodine, even though the chemical properties put tellurium before iodine.
We know now from Mosley's work that the order of the periodic table is not based on atomic
weight, it's based on atomic number, the number of protons in the nucleus.
Although the atomic weight does go up with atomic number, in six places in the periodic
table it's the case where the lower atomic numbered element has the higher mass than
the next element.
This is because of the characteristic number of neutrons in the nuclei of each element,
which does not follow a specific pattern as you go from one element to another.
Why does the periodic table have this strange shape?
Why does the first period have only two elements, the second period eight elements, and so forth?
The answer?
Electron configurations.
Remember that quantum mechanics gives us rules for how electrons are organized in atoms.
As these rules are followed, the elements and their properties just naturally form the shape
of the periodic table.
For example, remember that the first shell of electrons has a single sub-shell, the s-sub-shell,
which holds a maximum of two electrons.
The elements with one and two electrons are hydrogen and helium, and they form the first
row of the periodic table.
The first shell is now completely full, so for the next element we have to start putting
electrons into the second shell.
The second shell has two sub-shells, the s and p-sub-shells.
We can put a maximum of two electrons in the s-sub-shell, making the elements lithium
and beryllium, and then up to six electrons in the p-sub-shell.
This accommodates the elements boron through neon, and this gives us the six entries on
the right hand side of the periodic table.
With that, the second shell is completely filled, and we have to go to the third shell
to hold any additional electrons.
As with any other s-sub-shell, the three s-sub-shell holds two electrons, giving us the elements
sodium and magnesium.
Then we go to the three p-sub-shell and add six electrons there, giving us the elements
aluminum through argon.
But then remember something weird happens.
Instead of starting to fill the 3D sub-shell, because the third shell has three sub-shells,
instead the 4S sub-shell is filled first.
Why is this?
It happens because by putting electrons in the 4S sub-shell, we get an atom that's more
energetically stable than if we put electrons into the third sub-shell of shell number three.
Remember, energy is a key issue on why matter behaves like it does, and we're seeing its
impact here.
In doing so, we start a new row, a new period in the periodic table, with two more electrons
giving us the elements potassium and calcium.
Only after the 4S sub-shell is filled do we go to the 3D sub-shell.
This is why we find ten elements in the period after we fill the 4S sub-shell, the elements
scandium through zinc.
Then we could go back to the 4P sub-shell and fill it up with six electrons, giving
us the elements gallium through krypton.
But again, before we start filling up the 4D or the 4S sub-shell with electrons, we actually
fill the 5S with two electrons, starting again with another period.
Then we fill the 4D sub-shell, then the 5P sub-shell, then the 6S sub-shell, then a new
period, and then the 4S sub-shell, which can hold up to 14 electrons, so we get a series
of 14 elements from lanthanum to lutecium.
Now ideally these 14 electrons would show up in the periodic table right after the 6S
electrons appear in the elements cesium and barium, but this could make the periodic table
a bit unwieldy, so it's very common to cut out this 14 column section of the periodic
table and place it underneath the remaining elements.
This lets us display the entire periodic table comfortably in a single page.
We just have to remember to jump around a bit as we go to that section so that we're
properly following the atomic numbers.
The rest of the periodic table falls into place as we continue to follow the filling
of shells and sub-shells.
So this explains the shape of the periodic table.
But how does the periodic table explain why elements in the same column have similar chemical
properties?
We need a quick definition.
We're going to define the valence electrons as the electrons in the highest numbered shell
of an atom.
Valence electrons are among the last sub-shells filled in an atom, and are usually the farthest
electrons away from the atomic nucleus.
Now, here's an interesting fact.
Almost all chemistry happens because of valence electrons.
When you think about it, it makes sense.
The valence electrons are farthest away from the nucleus, so they're the inner electrons
that can interact with other atoms.
Almost all chemistry is valence electrons.
Well, if you look at the elements in one column of a periodic table, you'll see that they
have the same number of valence electrons.
Look at the first column.
Hydrogen has a single S-electron in shell number one, lithium has one S-electron in
shell number two, sodium has a single S-electron in shell number three, potassium has one electron
in shell number four, and so forth down the column.
They all have the same valence electron shell configuration, and because of my point that
chemistry is valence electrons, then these elements must have similar chemistry.
Well, they do.
That's the entire point of the periodic table.
They're all soft, shiny metals that react violently with water, that make compounds with
chlorine and a one-to-one ratio, and so forth.
Because chemistry is valence electrons and these elements have similar valence shell
electron configurations, they have similar chemistry.
Same with the next column.
The elements in the second column have two S-electrons in their valence shell.
Because they have the same valence shell electron configurations, they have similar chemistry.
Same for the halogens on the right side of the periodic table.
They all have not just the two S-electrons, but five P-electrons in their valence P sub-shell.
Because they have the same valence shell electron configuration, they have similar chemistry.
The same thing can be said about all the tables, all the columns of the periodic table.
We've just explained something that Deschancourtois, Meyer, and Mendeleev knew, but couldn't explain,
how the periodic table works.
Unfortunately, it had to wait until the development of quantum mechanics.
This happens sometimes.
We need to wait for both theory and experiment to develop enough before we actually understand
what's going on.
Like Darwin had to compare all those finches on the Galapagos Islands before he enunciated
his theory of evolution.
But that's another story.
With this understanding, though, we can make up some new labels to describe parts of the
periodic table.
In the first two columns of the table, the valence electrons are always going to be S-subshells.
We call the first two columns the S-block of the periodic table.
On the right side, the six columns that are the valence electrons going into P-subshells,
we therefore call this the P-block of the periodic table.
Similarly, we have the D-block, and the F-block is that section that we usually break away
and place underneath the rest of the blocks.
These labels emphasize our understanding of the sub-shell nature for the table shape.
I should point out that the periodic table isn't perfect.
There are anomalies in the electron configurations of some of the columns, especially when we
get to larger and larger atoms in the D-block and the F-block.
But these analogies don't erase the overwhelming examples of similarities that do exist in
the rest of the periodic table.
Ultimately, the periodic table is backed up by quantum mechanics, which is currently our
best model for understanding the behavior of electrons and atoms.
There are other properties of the elements that the periodic table codifies, making it
an even more useful tool.
For example, atoms have size.
How big are they?
Well, it would take about 100 million atoms to make a line an inch long.
We use x-rays to determine the approximate sizes of individual atoms, and it turns out
there's a trend that relates to the position in a period.
As you move left to right across a period, the atom of the element gets smaller.
Then as we get to the next period, by starting over on the left, the size of the atom jumps,
and the size then decreases as we move across that next period.
The trend isn't absolute, but obvious if you were to look at a graph or a picture of atomic
sizes.
Well, why does this happen?
Well, when you go across a row in the periodic table, you're staying in the same valence
shell, the s-subshell on one side and the p-subshell on the other side.
But as you go across the period, the number of protons and therefore the nuclear charge
is increasing.
This increase in positive nuclear charge attracts the negative electrons more, so the atomic
size shrinks.
On the other hand, when you start a new period, you're going to the next highest shell, which
is farther away from the nucleus.
So the size jumps up again before shrinking as you go across to the right.
The periodic table embodies this so-called periodic trend of the sizes of the atoms.
The periodic table also tracks some energy trends in atomic behavior.
Remember I said that virtually all chemistry is valence electrons?
One key type of chemistry is the exchange of valence electrons among atoms.
Atoms can either lose or gain valence electrons.
There is an energy change that always accompanies the gain or loss of a valence electron.
Let's focus on the loss of an electron.
The energy change when an atom loses an electron is called the ionization energy.
Loss left over is a positively charged atom called a cation.
Going across a period, as the nuclear charge increases, it gets harder and harder to remove
an electron, that is, the ionization energy increases.
Then when you jump to the next shell by going to the next row, because the valence electrons
are now farther away, it gets easier to remove them and the ionization energy jumps down
before slowly increasing again.
As with atomic sizes, this trend isn't absolute.
But it's pretty obvious if you look at a graph of ionization energies versus the position
in the periodic table.
Other trends have been mapped out by scientists all relating to the relative position of elements
in the periodic table.
It's trends like this that make the periodic table the most useful one-page tool in all
of science.
Let me leave you with two stories that relate to the periodic table.
Many of our prepared foods have sodium compounds in them, partly because sodium compounds are
inexpensive and partly because almost all sodium compounds dissolve in water, making
them easy to add to many foods.
Many studies suggest that excess sodium consumption is a factor in high blood pressure, so some
physicians recommend a low-sodium diet.
People can buy salt substitutes if they want, and guess what these salt substitutes are
made of?
Potassium compounds, and you could probably guess why.
Potassium is right underneath sodium in the periodic table, so potassium compounds would
have similar chemical properties as sodium does, including dissolving in water so that
they're easy to add to prepared foods.
Unfortunately, some people taste bitterness when they eat salt substitutes, and potassium
compounds are much more expensive than sodium compounds.
But we could take advantage of potassium's properties to use it as a replacement for
sodium, thanks to the periodic table.
One story has to do with radioactive fallout, which is matter spread in our atmosphere due
to nuclear explosions or accidents.
There's a lot of concern about strontium-90 in fallout, which is the radioactive form
of the element strontium.
Look at the periodic table and figure out why.
It turns out that strontium is right underneath calcium in the periodic table, meaning that
it has similar chemical properties.
People exposed to strontium-90 find that it replaces calcium in their bones, and the
subsequent radioactivity contributes to increases in bone cancer and leukemia, thus a cautionary
tale based on the periodic table.
One last note.
In this lecture, I used the term atomic weight when talking about the sizes of the atoms.
The term atomic weight is no longer considered acceptable by the scientific community, because
weight is a measure of how much the Earth's gravity attracts another piece of matter.
The preferred term is atomic mass, because mass is a measure of the amount of matter
and doesn't depend on gravity.
For example, your weight is different on the Earth and on the Moon, because the Moon's
gravity is much less, but your mass stays the same.
You may wonder then why I even used the term atomic weight.
I used it because Doberriner, Deschan Cortois, Lothar Meyer, Mendeleev, and the other scientists
of their time used it.
It made sense to me to tell their story of the periodic table using their terms.
The periodic table is central to chemistry and the nature of matter.
The fact that it incorporates so much helps us recognize so much about the elements gives
it a key role in science.
If we were to ever meet aliens from another planet, we just might start communicating
with them by swapping periodic tables.
Thank you.
