Pour a small amount of table salt in a glass of warm water.
Wait a few minutes.
The salt disappears.
It's magic.
Where did it go?
Actually, it didn't disappear and it's not magic.
The salt just dissolved.
It's still there, but you can't see it.
The warm water and the salt made something called a solution.
Most of the materials around us are solutions.
Some of them are obvious, but some are hidden right under our noses.
For example, the human body is largely made of solutions, including our blood and the
stuff inside our cells.
Most of the metal around you is likely a solution.
Seventy percent of the earth's surface is covered with a solution, and our entire atmosphere
is a solution.
A lot of industrial processes occur in solution, including a lot that involve food and drink,
much of which are also solutions.
As a class of material, solutions have properties that are different from other types of matter,
and some of these properties are very useful or desirable.
So let's talk about solutions.
Let's find out why they form, and let's see a few examples of the major impacts they
have on our daily lives.
Let's start with the basics.
Fundamentally, matter is either pure or impure.
If it's pure, then it's either an element, one of the 90 that are naturally occurring,
or it's a compound, one of about 70 million that are currently known.
But if it's impure, then technically it's called a mixture.
An obvious mixture is described as heterogeneous.
An example would be a mixture of salt and pepper, where it's easy to see what chunk
is salt and what chunk is pepper.
There are some mixtures, though, that are so intimately mixed that you can't easily
tell that it's more than one material, like our salt water.
These are called homogeneous mixtures, or solutions.
Solutions can be all phases of matter.
While we usually think of solutions as liquids, there are also solid phase and gas phase solutions.
I've already mentioned that air is a solution.
It's a gas phase solution, while metal alloys like steel are examples of solid solutions.
The majority component of a solution is called the solvent.
It's also the component that has the same phase as the overall solution.
The minority component of a solution is called the solute.
For our salt water solution, water is the solvent, and salt is the solute.
There's usually only one solvent in a solution, but there can be many solutes.
For instance, air is 80% nitrogen, so nitrogen is considered the solvent, while the solutes
include oxygen, argon, water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other gases.
As I hinted at earlier, solvents and solutes can be any phase, and just about any combination
of phases is possible, except maybe for liquids and solids dissolved in a gas.
A cloud, for example, is not a true solution, but a suspension of tiny water droplets suspended
in air, and if those droplets get large enough, they fall out of suspension and become rain.
We don't see rain in true solutions.
Any combination of gases is a solution by the simple definition of a gas.
I've already mentioned air as an example of a gas solvent with several gas solutes.
Gases can also be dissolved in solids or liquids.
Soda, beer, and champagne are examples of solutions of carbon dioxide gas dissolved in water,
and some metals, like the element palladium, can actually absorb hydrogen gas to make a
solution.
Alcohol and water is an example of a liquid-liquid solution.
The identities of the solvent and solute depend on how strong the drink is.
And examples of a liquid dissolving in a solid are mercury alloys called amalgams, where
liquid mercury is dissolved into another solid metal, like gold or silver.
Certain amalgams have been used in the past for dental fillings.
I should mention that there is some controversy over the safety of amalgam fillings and their
potential for mercury poisoning, but to date, any evidence has been equivocal at best.
A person is actually more at risk from having amalgam fillings removed than simply leaving
them in.
A larger and better documented environmental risk is the improper disposal of amalgam leftovers
by the dentists themselves.
In order to understand how solutions form and why they behave the way they do, we need
to talk about intermolecular forces.
While science knows that matter is made of atoms and molecules, we also know that atoms
and molecules interact with each other, and these interactions strongly influence the properties
of matter.
The most fundamental force in all atoms and molecules is called the London dispersion force.
This force is caused by electrons moving around in atoms and molecules.
As an electron moves, it takes its negative charge along with it.
This means that at any one point in time, one part of an atom or molecule has a negative
charge on one side, and therefore a leftover positive charge on the other.
Then in the next instant, the negative charge disappears and shows up on another part of
the molecule in a never-ending dance.
Because of the constant presence and then absence of negative and positive charges around a
molecule, the opposite charges on neighboring molecules are always attracting each other.
For its bliss second, then the attraction is gone, then it's there again, and then
it's gone.
The ultimate result is a very weak interaction between molecules that encourages them to stick
together, if the temperature is low enough.
If the temperature isn't low enough, there's enough energy that the substance may be liquid
despite the presence of this dispersion force.
If the dispersion force is weak and the surrounding temperature provides enough energy, the substance
might even be a gas.
In fact, this is the basic idea that determines which phase, solid, liquid, or gas a substance
has.
It's a balance between the energy provided by temperature and the strength of the intermolecular
forces.
But when I said that London dispersion forces were weak, I meant per electron.
As the number of electrons in a molecule increases, usually so does the mass, and definitely so
does the London dispersion force.
Let's consider hydrocarbon molecules as an example.
Molecules compose only of carbon and hydrogen.
The smallest hydrocarbon molecule is methane, whose formula is CH4, and which has 10 electrons.
The London dispersion forces between methane molecules are so weak that it only takes a
temperature of minus 270 degrees Fahrenheit to boil methane.
And remember that boiling is when we separate molecules from each other to make a gas, so
the boiling temperature is a good indicator of the strength of intermolecular interactions.
The next hydrocarbon, ethane, has a formula of C2H6 and has 18 electrons.
Its boiling point is 127 degrees below zero Fahrenheit, about 130 degrees higher than
methane.
The next largest hydrocarbon is propane, the same propane that you find in tanks for some
barbecue grills.
Its formula is C3H8, it has 26 electrons, and its boiling point is 44 degrees below zero.
Notice that as we go to larger and larger hydrocarbons, the boiling point gets higher.
This is because the London dispersion forces get stronger as the number of electrons increases.
When we get to pentane, C5H12, the dispersion forces are so strong that pentane is a liquid
at room temperature, octane, the major component of gasoline, is a liquid, and by the time
we get to a molecule with 17 carbon atoms, the intermolecular forces are so strong that
it's a solid at room temperature, it boils at 575 degrees Fahrenheit.
All of these trends are caused, at least in part, by an increasing amount of intermolecular
interactions.
The next major kind of intermolecular interaction depends on the shape of the molecule.
If a molecule is shaped so that the atoms are bonded unsymmetrically about its center,
then there's going to be an imbalance in the electron distribution of the molecule.
Because electrons carry a negative charge, this means that there will be an imbalance
in charge around the molecule.
Keep in mind that the molecule will still be electrically neutral overall, but like
in the London dispersion forces, there will be sections of the molecule that will have
a partial negative charge, and sections that will have a partial positive charge.
Only in this case, instead of being fleeting and short-lived, these partial electric charges
are permanent.
Molecules with such permanent partial charges are called polar.
We say they behave like a dipole.
Molecules that don't have these permanent, partially charged regions are called non-polar.
The hydrocarbons I discussed earlier, for example, are considered non-polar substances.
All else being the same, especially mass, polar molecules interact much more strongly
with each other than non-polar molecules.
For example, dimethyl ether and ethyl alcohol have the exact same chemical formulas and
molecular masses.
Usually the ether is non-polar and the alcohol is polar.
If we're still using boiling points to judge intermolecular interactions, then how do they
compare?
The boiling point of non-polar dimethyl ether is minus 11 degrees Fahrenheit.
The boiling point of polar ethyl alcohol is 173 degrees Fahrenheit, almost 200 degrees
higher, and all because of polar versus non-polar molecules.
As I've mentioned in a previous lecture, there's a special type of polar interaction
that appears in certain molecules.
When a hydrogen atom is covalently bonded to a nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine atom, the
polarity is especially pronounced, and the interactions between molecules are unusually
strong.
Because of this, the polar interactions between molecules having this type of bond is called
hydrogen bonding.
Molecules that show hydrogen bonding also show significant deviations from expected trends.
For example, hydrogen combines with oxygen and sulfur to make two very similar compounds,
H2O and H2S.
H2O has half the mass as H2S, so you would expect it to boil with less energy, that is,
at a lower temperature.
But in comparing the two, H2S boils at minus 76 degrees Fahrenheit, whereas H2O, our friend
Water, boils at 212 degrees Fahrenheit, almost 300 degrees higher.
Why do the lighter molecules need so much more energy such a higher temperature to boil?
Because of the strong hydrogen bonding interactions between H2O that H2S doesn't have.
The last interaction we need to talk about is the interaction between ions, which are
atoms or molecules that have a permanent charge due to the loss or gain of one or more electrons.
The attraction between positively charged ions, or cations, and negatively charged ions,
or anions, is very strong.
In fact, it's the strongest force we see in chemical bonding.
It's interesting to note, though, that all of the intermolecular interactions I've introduced
here are based on electrical charges.
If the charges appear and disappear quickly, the force is relatively weak.
If the forces are permanent, or even fully ionic, then the force is relatively strong.
So how do these intermolecular interactions impact solutions?
Well, it's mostly about energy.
Most systems of matter want to go to lower energy, like a round rock on a steep hill
wants to roll down to lower gravitational energy.
At the very least, systems avoid going up in energy because systems can't make energy
from nothing.
These ideas control why certain solutions form, and perhaps more important, why certain solutions
don't form.
Pick a liquid hydrocarbon, hexane, for instance.
Hexane is a nonpolar hydrocarbon.
Let's try to dissolve salt in it.
Salt, or sodium chloride, is composed of ions of sodium and chloride.
Remember that ions are the most extreme type of charge separation with full-blown positive
and negative charges on them.
When hexane comes in the vicinity of, say, a negatively charged chloride ion, the ion
repels the electrons in the hexane molecule, forcing the electrons away, and creating a
positive side on the hexane molecule.
In this scenario, the hexane molecule would be called an induced dipole.
The problem is, the repulsion causes the energy of the system to increase, rather than make
something that's energetically stable.
This is a solution that does not want to form.
Instead, let's consider paraffin wax, which is composed of long hydrocarbon chains with
20 to 40 carbons in the molecules.
As hydrocarbons, the molecules of this wax have only London dispersion forces of interaction,
just like hexane.
When these molecules interact, the similar forces between hexane molecules and wax molecules
mean that there is no force polarity, no induced dipole, no increase in energy.
With no energy barrier stopping it, the wax dissolves in the hexane.
Well, if there's little or no change in energy, then what's causing a solution to form?
There is one physical incentive to this solution forming, increased entropy.
Recall that entropy is a measure of the number of energy states available to the molecules.
A rather improper description of entropy is a measure of disorder.
When the wax molecules and the hexane molecules disperse within each other, that is, when
the wax dissolves in the hexane, each molecule has more energy states available to it as
it can now interact with molecules of a different substance.
Just this increase in entropy, rather than a decrease in energy, that's the driving
force in the formation of this solution.
Now, let's consider water as our solvent.
If we were to try to dissolve wax and water, we would have the same situation as we had
with the hexane and the sodium chloride.
Only now the properties of the solute and solvent are reversed.
The water molecules would try to induce dipoles in the wax molecules, leading to a charge
separation and an increase in energy.
Nope, this solution won't happen either.
By the way, this is one reason why we wax our cars.
The car wax we used does not interact with water, keeping the water away from the metal
parts of our car and fighting rust.
But with sodium chloride and water, it's different.
The positive ends of the polar water molecule are attracted to the negative chloride ions,
while the negative ends of the water molecules are attracted to the positive sodium ions.
Very quickly, so many dipoles of water surround the ions that they can overcome the inner
ionic attraction between cation and anion, and the salt dissolves in water.
You may notice a generality here.
Nonpolar solvents dissolve nonpolar solutes, and polar solvents dissolve polar solutes.
This generality is so useful that it's spawned a rule of thumb, one that I mentioned before,
like dissolves like, meaning that solvents having certain inner molecular interactions
dissolve solutes that have similar types of inner molecular interactions.
Now, it's only a rule of thumb.
There are some solutions where a nonpolar solvent does dissolve a small amount of polar solute,
or when a polar solvent dissolves a bit of nonpolar solute.
But the concept of like dissolves like is very useful in predicting which solutions likely
form and which ones don't.
But in knowing the idea that like dissolves like, we can actually engineer some molecules
to do what we want.
For example, when I change the oil in my car, I get my hands dirty with a lot of used oil.
I go over to the sink to wash my hands, but the water does nothing, because oil is nonpolar
and water is polar.
Ah, but then I get out some soap.
With a soap, sometimes massive quantities of it, I'm able to clean my hands.
Why?
A soap molecule is a very well designed thing.
It consists of a long hydrocarbon chain with one ionic end.
The long hydrocarbon chain is nonpolar and dissolves in the nonpolar oil.
The ionic end is very polar and dissolves in water.
With either end dissolved in the different liquids, the soap molecules make it easier
to remove the nonpolar oil with water.
Without the soap molecule making that bridge, the water would be rather ineffective at cleaning
the oil off my hands.
Detergents work the same way.
The technical difference between a soap and a detergent is that soaps were originally
made from naturally occurring hydrocarbon chains, like those we find in animal or vegetable
fats, such as beef tallow or olive oil.
Detergents use hydrocarbon chains from other sources, like petrochemicals.
Most solutions we deal with only have a small amount of solute dissolved in them.
We call these solutions dilute.
Because they're mostly solvent, these solutions have properties very similar to those of the
pure solvent, but there are a few differences.
First, solutions evaporate more slowly than pure solvents, assuming that the solute itself
doesn't evaporate.
This happens because the solute molecules literally block solvent molecules from evaporating.
However, if the solute does evaporate, then interesting things can happen.
If a solution is ideal, then the overall solution evaporates at a rate proportional to the composition
of the solution.
But because of intermolecular interactions, most solutions are not ideal, and the solvent
and solute evaporate at different proportions than expected.
What happens sometimes is that there's a certain composition of vapor that preferentially evaporates.
This composition is called an aziotrope, more specifically a low-boiling aziotrope.
For example, mixtures of alcohol and water preferentially evaporate at a composition
of 95% alcohol and 5% water.
That's why it's almost impossible to distill pure alcohol with no remaining water in it.
Solutions typically have a lower freezing point than the pure solvents.
That's because the solute particles interfere with the formation of solvent crystals, so
it takes lower temperatures to make those crystals, that is, to freeze the solvent.
Those of us who live in areas where there's snow in the winter take advantage of this
when we throw salt on ice.
The salt and ice mix to make salt water, a solution that has a lower freezing point
than pure water.
Thus, the ice melts, making it easier for us to walk and drive.
Some communities use sand instead of salt, but they're using sand for traction, not
to change the freezing point of ice.
Sand does not dissolve in water to make a solution.
There's another property of solutions that seems weird, but is actually very important
biologically.
Imagine two solutions, one concentrated and one dilute, on either side of a very thin
membrane.
Initially, the two solutions have the same height in their container.
Over time, however, the height of the concentrated solution will rise and the height of the dilute
solution will fall, and will only stop when the two solutions have the same concentration.
The difference in heights of the solutions is called the osmotic pressure, and the process
that's occurring is called osmosis.
What's happening?
The key is that very thin membrane.
It has to be so thin that it allows for the movement of solvent molecules from one solution
to the other.
Think of a solution as having a certain amount of chemical energy.
The more concentrated the solvent, the more chemical energy it has.
Our two solutions have different chemical energies because they have different concentrations.
But that thin membrane allows solvent molecules to pass, allows the two solutions to equalize
their chemical energy.
It's like two rocks on either side of a deep valley.
One rock is large and the other rock is small, but they'll both run downhill to the bottom
of the valley to equalize their gravitational energy.
It's a similar situation with solutions of different concentrations.
The concentration difference drives the movement of solvent from dilute to concentrated until
both solutions are the same concentration.
Osmotic pressure is measured in atmospheres, just like gas pressures are measured in atmospheres.
One atmosphere is the pressure of our own atmosphere at sea level.
Well, osmotic pressures can be substantial even for dilute solutions.
The osmotic pressure of our blood is about seven and a half atmospheres, over seven times
the pressure of air.
A teaspoon of sugar and a cup of coffee makes a solution that has an osmotic pressure of
just over one atmosphere, so it doesn't take much to significantly impact the solutions
properties.
How does osmotic pressure impact biological systems?
Well, I mentioned the need for that very thin membrane.
One membrane that experiences osmotic pressure effects is a cell wall.
Our bodies are constructed from cells that have membranes separating the inside material,
largely cytoplasm, from the outside.
Concentration differences inside and outside the cell walls set up osmotic pressures that
can affect the behavior of the cells, and by extension, the health of a human body.
For example, suppose you're a patient needing an intravenous, or IV, treatment.
Most of the IV solution is a salt solution called saline that contains either nutrients
or medications.
That saline solution needs to be the right concentration, the correct osmotic pressure,
or bad things will happen.
If the IV solution is too dilute, a condition called hypotonic, then solvent will flow into
the red blood cells through the cell walls to equalize the concentrations inside and
outside the cells.
The cells will swell and eventually burst, killing the red blood cells.
Not good.
On the other hand, if the saline solution is too concentrated, or hypotonic, then when
it enters the bloodstream, the red blood cells will lose water through the cell walls in
an effort to dilute the IV solutions.
The cells will lose so much water that they'll die.
Also, not good.
A proper intravenous solution needs to have the same osmotic pressure as blood, called
isotonic, in order to not disrupt red blood cells and kill you, the patient.
Osmotic pressure is also the mechanism behind kidney dialysis.
If for any reason the kidneys aren't functioning properly, water, waste materials, and minerals
build up in the bloodstream, threatening life.
Some impermeable membranes are used to transfer excess water and waste out of the bloodstream
until other measures, like a kidney transplant, are possible.
Osmotic pressures are also important in diabetes, as the sugar concentration of the urine increases
and impacts the distribution of water in the body.
Osmotic pressure is also one mechanism that trees use to get water from the roots to the
leaves high above our heads.
The water isn't defying gravity, it's simply responding to the more concentrated solutions
at the leaves, trying to dilute it and giving the tree water necessary for life.
Every once in a while, a newspaper headline screams, Man stranded on ocean drinks urine
to survive.
The headline is surely meant to gross us out, but there's actually a solid chemical reason
why someone stranded in a lifeboat on the ocean needs to do this.
The ocean is about 3% dissolved salts, mostly sodium chloride, but also a few other ionic
compounds.
There's nothing really toxic about seawater, but it has a very high osmotic pressure.
If in fact we drink a lot of seawater, its high osmotic pressure would draw water out
of our cells as our body tries to dilute what we drank.
Eventually the drinker would pass out and die, ironically dying of thirst at the cellular
level even though they drank seawater.
Urine has less than one third the osmotic pressure as seawater, so while it may be distasteful
to drink it, it's better than dying in the middle of the ocean.
But if you're stranded in a lifeboat on a freshwater lake, like Lake Michigan, drink
all the water you need, until you're rescued of course.
Whether it's dental fillings, the air we breathe, our blood, the soda we drink, solutions
have a huge impact on our daily lives.
Their properties keep us alive, literally, and they're all around us whether we realize
it or not.
Thank you.
