Welcome to Entanglement Radio on the Conversations from the Brink Network. I am your host, Angela
Lovec, and this show is all about the potential and possibilities of what it means to be human.
Our guest today is an evolutionary philosopher and systems designer, Daniel Schmockdenberger,
and we are going to be talking all about, obviously, our human potential, but we're going
to be talking about blending science, spirituality, philosophy, how we create meaning in our lives,
and talk about this idea of emergence in synergy and a self-organizing universe, which
I think are really important concepts to understand and really appreciate how we can
implement those in our lives so that we can make the changes necessary. Coming up next week,
we have Lisa Knopp, she's the author of six award-winning books of creative nonfiction,
and we're going to talk about the cultural and spiritual factors that lead to women's bodies
issues, eating disorders, and ageism. I'm excited about that. If you'd like to know more about
myself or the show, my website is angeloovec.com, and you can find me on Facebook and on Twitter
at Hestia Health. You can also find out more about this show, Entanglement Radio, and my project,
Conversations from the Brink, which is all about talking about insight and inspiration for humanities
next step, and that's conversationsfromthebrink.com. With that, I want to introduce my guest,
Daniel, who has a transdisciplinary science background with a whole systems complexity
and integral framework. He loves solving seemingly intractable problems by reassessing the
foundational data of axioms of the field and then restructuring it from the ground up. Daniel
was the academic dean for College of Mind, Body Medicine and has consulted for many cutting-edge
integrative doctors and medical clinics to help find novel solutions for complex cases.
He created and ran a cutting-edge think tank developing complex system solutions for
environmental and social issues and has directed a transdisciplinary group of scholars
on a philosophy of mind project addressing core questions of mind, brain, interface,
and developing axiomatic reformulation for the epidemiology of neuroscience. Wow,
that's a mouthful. But with that, I feel very honored and blessed to welcome Daniel to the
program. Hi, Daniel. How you doing? I'm good. I'm happy to be here. Thanks for having me.
Well, I'm excited, you know, as I'm connecting with you and I'm reading about all of these
different projects that you do. One of the things that I find really interesting with people who
kind of have been involved in over so many different disciplines and fields of study is
what is it that drives you? It's an intersection of a number of things. So I'm probably like most
people very moved by suffering, suffering of other sentient beings, humans and non-humans,
and how to reduce that, eliminate the foundational causes of it. This is a core
call for me in life that is across all different topics. I'm also called by the
positive side of their experience. So how do we create world systems that make possible and induce
not only less suffering, but higher quality of life across all meaningful aspects of what
quality of life is for all life now and ongoing and all the different facets that come together to
make that possible. And also just by a deep love of universe, which leads to a fascination in
wanting to learn all that I can, which of course ends up applying itself to the previous topics,
but is a lower in and of itself. Well, I think I want to start with this idea. So I was watching
this short talk that you gave, and you were talking about the evolutionary universe story,
kind of the ones that we've been able to piece together now, which is much more whole
and complex and very different from kind of the way that we look at things in science,
where we like to get mechanistic and break things down into parts that we can then analyze.
And so I want you to give us a view of the way that you see this universal story and tell us
about what it means to be self-organizing. There's a lot in there. Yes. So to really have a
proper context for the scientific worldview and scientific process as we know it and what we call
reductionist thinking, it's important to kind of understand how it emerged. So when we look at
Copernicus, Galileo, Descartes, Newton, this was really what helped to deliver us from the dark ages,
where people had different religious ideas about the nature of absolute reality that were the basis
of crusades and the burning of witches and so many things that had no empirical basis
and empiricism, being able to say, hey, wait, no matter what we think it is,
we might not be able to agree on God's name, but we can agree on the speed of sound. We can agree
on the speed of light. We can agree on whether and solve problems we hadn't been able to solve
like Galileo, finding the rate of things falling. And it seemed like not only the ability to explain
a tremendous amount, which it was, and to empower us with the application and technology, which it
was, but also a way to get everybody on the same page. Because if there is objective empirical
reality independent of our beliefs about it, and we can all kind of find that out, there's a profound
unification of that. So it's important to understand how crucial that is and also why it, you know,
emerged with the philosophic kind of fervor that it had of a movement away from subjective based
belief systems towards objective based belief systems. Now, of course, then the problem ended
up becoming in the huge success of that, that when we define what is real by what's measurable,
what's objective, what is available to empiricism, then we ended up defining that which is subjective
as not real, just by definition, right, that becomes part of the axiom. And so then consciousness
and our whole interiority is not real, right, it's first person stuff and science is the domain
of third person stuff. And as scientists continue to be able to explain so many things that we
had previously had in spiritual, philosophic, religious categories, been able to explain them
better in many ways. This has led to a whole technological advancement of humanity, which is,
you know, beautiful. And the downside of it, of course, is it has no interiority. So either
consciousness is not real at all, or it's the somehow emergent property of brains and neural
networks that usually leads to interpretations of having no agency, meaning, etc. And so,
as we take some of the next steps in our understanding of universe, beyond some of the
early religious concepts and beyond the earlier scientific concepts to basically just progressively
better and better and more nuanced and more interconnected understandings of the nature
of the reality we're in, we start to look at with it, even within third person, even within what
science looks at, that in very complex systems like biologic systems, there are so many variables
interacting so dynamically, that to try and understand those systems by just looking at
individual parts, which seem to make a lot of sense for us, right, like, when you think about
in the time of early science that we could calculate a ballistic curve that we had done
in pendulum dowsing before, now we could use Newtonian mechanics and calculus to plot that
curve perfectly, but there were only two variables we had to affect, right, which is the the angle of
the cannonball and how much gunpowder we put in, we could take what seemed like a difficult
scenario and reduce it to a small number of variables and have a tremendous amount of insight
and impact. But in certain kind of complex systems, where the variables actually do different things
in relationship with other variables than they do on their own, and where they interact so quickly
and complexly, reductionism has limits of how explanatory and how useful it can be, and so
we've had an emerging field of system science, how do we understand whole self-interacting systems,
and one of the key insights here is that when we take the parts apart, like say we take a cell,
we take it apart and we look at each individual type of molecular structure, we look at the
organelles, we look at the organic molecules that make it up, none of those organelles, none of those
molecules on their own breathe, and yet the cell has a whole breathe, and so we say what part
breathe and none of them do, right, it is the complex orderly relationship of all those parts
in that way that leads to respiration and life as a whole as an emergent property, and so this
property of synergy which is the behavior of a whole system that's not found in the parts taken
separately is something where reductionism isn't able to give us the whole picture,
understanding the parts is important, it's just not the whole thing, understanding how the parts
come together, and what the relationships are that aren't found in the parts separately and what
the whole is is also a big part of the picture. So this is where kind of the fields of system
science and complexity science have emerged and given us better insights even into the nature
of third person physical reality, and then we also have this movement to look at what if
consciousness first person experience isn't well explained exclusively as an emergent property of
physical systems, right, brain, etc., and even if it was, if I'm looking at the
EEG of a Buddhist monk who's in some deep meditative state, I can explain their EEG patterns,
but I have no idea what their experience is like, or how to get there, and so there is a need for
a process of understanding the texture and the nature of subjectivity of consciousness of first
person that's beyond third person completely. So science is going through, or our, our, our
philosophic system that science is a part of is going through an evolution to include more complex
understanding of the nature of third person and the deeper understanding of the nature of first
person and how those come together. Well, that was very well explained. So as I'm listening to
say this, and many people in, in my community, and so I have a largely spiritually based community,
and we like to cherry pick science to validate our spiritual beliefs, which I kind of find annoying,
but anyway, we will, what I, I understand what you were saying, but why do we need to quantify
and categorize and, and understand subjective experience? Why can it not just be something
that runs maybe parallel or why do they, I don't think I even, why do we need to have an explanation
for that experience? Why can't the experience be part of the package of the whole? Does that make
sense? I will speak to what I think makes sense. Okay. So a couple things. Say you take a system
like Buddhism where there are certain kinds of processes that are for rather than exploring
this nature of physical reality, right, the speed of sound or the pH of a, of a fluid,
they're exploring aspects of one's own conscious experience. So do this kind of breathing, pay
attention to these kinds of things, move your attention in these ways, and then notice what
you experience. And this is both because if many people do that, and they find some similar things
independent of being pre-suggested to look for certain things, then not just, we're not just
exploring subjectivity, we're getting through this intersubjective exploration of what might be true
about consciousness, about experience as a whole that informs all of us. And we just become better
at navigating our own internal landscape, right? So this is relevant if we want to be able to move
out of anxiety and depression and et cetera into states of subjective experience that are
more fun to be in and more creative and make our availability to others better. And so it's, it's not
simply to like prove something, it's to actually learn the contours of the dimension of universe,
the subjective dimension, so that we can navigate it better and understand it better, right? And
understand, because it's fascinating, but also understand so that we can navigate and help others
too. I would also say that why it's relevant to really understand the relationship between
consciousness and physics between mind and brain body is, one, we live in a system in a world right
now where science has had so much explanatory power and, you know, has been able to make the
radically complex technology that's allowing you and I to talk wirelessly across the world right
now. And then for this to be heard by all your listeners and have us exploring Mars and deep
reaches the brain all like this, because of its explanatory power, it has become the dominant
philosophical system. And if it's a philosophic system that ultimately in most interpretation
says what's real is physical stuff, right? This is called physicalism, physical particles are real
and consciousness either doesn't exist at all with view called radical liminism, or it exists,
but it actually couldn't have agency, right? It arises as this emergent property from the brain
and therefore it can witness only but has no causal influence, which is an inexorably nihilist,
right? Meaningless view, that's a real bummer. And it's not just a real bummer, it's a real
problematic thing for science being perceived as uncommenceratable with ethics, right? Because
ethics involves the experience of sentient creatures and science, you know, that's not its domain.
And so we have this technological force, right? Science as a system of seeing the world that gives
rise to technology that gives rise to the way we're building and affecting the world that affects
subjective experience, but without any compass or guidance system, because it doesn't
commensurate with ethics. So it's very important to actually have a deep scientific exploration
of the nature of consciousness, so that we can actually affect and direct the development of
technology, right? And the development of our built world. And I don't think that I'm disagreeing
with you. I think that that's an important piece, but I also find that the experience aspect, the
not, because I feel, and this is actually something that I have been working through, and in my world
we talk about the masculine and feminine energies. And I tend to be very, like I spend a lot of time
in my mind, I spend a lot of time in deep contemplation thinking about the things. And
one of the things that I have been exploring is this idea of embodiment. And instead of thinking
about what it is that I'm doing, being in the experience, which to me is slightly different.
It's not a, it's not about better or worse. It's not a value judgment that this is the correct way.
This is the wrong way. But there is something different about having the awareness from an
intellectual perspective and embodying the experience. And I think that that's where,
you know, I do a lot of work with cancer survivors. And we, they get a lot of people telling them a
lot of the research, and this is what needs to do. But one of the reasons they've told me they
really like to come to my class is because I create, we create meaning from data. We create
meaning from story and experience and being not just like the other day we talked about
Candace Pert and she wrote a book called The Molecules of Emotion, which are all about,
you know, neuropeptides and the, the connections between like the bio,
biochemical correlates of emotion, basically. And then we went and we had the
into meditation and we connected very metaphorically, energetically, spiritually with
our emotional bodies. And so there was this play between understanding, you know,
Dr. Pert and her amazing research. And then we had the experience of embodiment of that emotion
in itself. And so that's where I kind of, where I'm looking at your stuff. And it's just incredibly
fascinating. And I love it, but it's so intellectual. And I just, I also interview a lot of people that
talk about, you know, the heart. And I, I know we can obviously talk very biologically about the
heart, but talk about the heart more metaphorically or spiritually. Where do you feel that that fits
in to this idea of emergence in this self-organizing universe?
I gave you a lot there again, didn't I?
That's great. I think we create false dichotomies that lead to either unnecessarily polarized partial
views or kind of pendulum swinging back and forth between partial truths. And we need to learn how
to transcend the false dichotomies. So for instance, embodiment and experience versus
intellect and understanding or heart versus mind, there's no versus, right? It's how do we
evolve and expand both and the relationship for the full human experience. And so let's say,
let's say we talk about any kind of very deep trans personal, numinist spiritual experience.
So let's say we talk about a vision quest or a medicine journey. Okay. So say we take a medicine
journey and someone has an experience, right? They're having a very real deep, profound, maybe,
you know, life altering experience. Then they come out of it. And they're going to interpret that
through a cognitive model. And so say someone goes into a journey and part of what happened,
there was a dark part of the journey and they saw monsters chasing them, which is this is not
an uncommon thing. And they come out and there's a particular worldview that says, well, the medicine
was letting you see into the astral realm. And there are monsters in the astral realm that are
actually after you because whatever you did bad things in the past life, or that's just where
they are. And so now you need to put crystals around yourself and need to the person having
more fear, more disempowerment, et cetera, or someone else has the exact same experience. And
they have a different kind of worldview facilitation that says maybe the monsters were the way that
your mind brain complex symbolically represented unresolved fears and emotions. Maybe, you know,
represents issues you had with your parents or whatever in childhood. Let's try again. And
then the person faces the monster and then the monster becomes their dad. And then they
make peace with their dad. And then it becomes their dad's inner child and have this whole healing.
But the cognitive model actually ends up affecting the meaning you make ends up affecting how that
experience is stored, how it's interpreted and how it becomes a part of your behavioral and
experiential basis for the rest of your life. So if I only did the cognitive side and talk to people
about like we're talking now, the worldview of psychedelics, and no one ever had an experience
with it, for instance, or meditation or whatever, we also wouldn't get there. So it really is at the
synergy of people's experience and working with technologies and processes, like meditation,
like breathwork, like transpersonal psychology, like psychedelics, like whatever, right? Working
with technologies and processes that are deeply experiential, deeply embodied, and also being
able to go into those as best pre-framed as possible because of what we've learned from
previous people's experience and interpret them as best as possible within our cognitive model.
So in what I would call a full human experience, someone's thinking and their
intuiting would actually align. And they would continue to work on developing and advancing
both of them as necessary parts of a full human experience. Right on. I'm like,
I'm definitely in your choir on that. I love that. So let's, you talk about this idea, you use the word
emergence and you've used word synergy and is looking through your website. So that often right
now we are having emergence through emergency. And I just love that idea because I've always kind of
referred to it as the band-aid approach that we see something that pops up and then we find the
easiest solution, the path of least resistance to deal with that one little thing without
looking at the systemic issues underneath. So I was hoping that you could talk about this idea
of emergence through emergency and how individuals can help shift us out of that, I guess, mode of
dealing with things. Yeah. So this was a term first coined, as far as I'm aware, by Buckminster Fuller.
And really talked about it as a sociologic, but even just a deeper universal process where
sometimes emergency, I mean, this is the same as necessity as the mother of invention and so
many concepts like this, but where an emergency motivates a foundational level shift that wouldn't
have been motivated previously or wasn't being motivated previously. And so of course we can
have a situation where a problem arises and we just deal with it reactively post facto in a band-aid
way. And we'd see that all over the place and it might be necessary, but it's inadequate for what
we really care about. There are other times where an emergency is big enough that rather than just
put a band-aid on it and then move back to life as it was, it actually requires some core restructuring
at a personal level of our life or at a collective level of how we organize as a species or
technologically or we have so many scenarios where like as we were getting into World War
I, which was represented this a level of war and existential threat we hadn't had, we
end up developing some new technologies that became the basis of how the world became
interconnected transportation and communication technologies as we were getting into World War
II. We mined more copper in the first year the US joined World War II than we had in the whole
previous history of humanity which then ended up leading to the electrification of the world and
then the interconnected communication of the world, cold war giving rise that's becoming
you know an interplanetary species. But you can see that we continued with the warring direction.
So there's a deeper set of shifts ahead for us, but probably so many people who are listening
and part of your community have experienced that whether it was a cancer diagnosis or whether it
was a midlife crisis or a family member dying that there was some personal
kinds of emergency that shook up the whole way of being that they had had that forced
like a reevaluation of who they are, why they are, how they are that then led to a fundamentally
new path that was more aligned with their purpose. And so that happens right and when we look at all
of the major issues facing the world today environmentally, socially, on so many levels
we have emergency, right? We have collective emergency that is potentially existential
and bandage solutions aren't big enough. Bandage solutions will not fix ocean acidification or
biodiversity loss or so many of those level catastrophic and existential issues that the
only thing that will fix them are foundational shifts at a species wide level and how we orient
in universe. And one of the key things is to get that emergence through emergency is kind of like
it's kind of like the safety that if we have not consciously proactively evolved in necessary
ways into the ways that we have been behaving have led to problems, then hopefully those problems
are you know a wake up call a smack to then change. But we don't have to be bound to that
being the primary way we evolve forever as soon as we stop identifying primarily as nouns
and we start identifying as verbs, we start identifying as dynamic becomeings and processes
of evolving and blossoming then as when we identify that there's this evolutionary process
that creates more ordered complexity that has brought about biology and mammals and us
and that with that more orderly complexity comes new emergent properties and capabilities we can
actually kind of identify as not only the result of evolutionary process but in a meaningful way
that that the evolutionary process brought us about as a species with abstraction that can
then contemplate evolution. So the evolutionary process woke up to itself in us where we can now
think about the future understand how evolution as a set of processes is increasing elegant order
of complexity and we can participate with evolution we can not just kind of be a part of the whole
unconsciously governed by genetic programs but we can become agents for the whole itself and
you know what Barbara Marks Hubbard calls conscious evolution,
consciously participate with it and once we identify as evolutionaries we don't need pushed
by emergency or catastrophe or pain to evolve because we are not sitting here as like complacent
things we are dynamically being drawn by what Terry Deschardins called the lure of becoming right
by the continuous process of creating a more beautiful world not because things aren't good
enough now not because we're dissatisfied but because it's the nature of universe to be evolving
and becoming it's our nature to do that and as soon as we start really shifting into that space
of active becoming we de necessitate emergency and pain as evolutionary drivers.
Yes you and I have very different tools in our toolbags but I think that both of us that
I mean that is ultimately when I work with people I I want to help them get excited about
life so they're not doing things because somebody says they should or their doctor says or there's
because of exactly what you're saying and as I was listening to that talk that was up on
Facebook that's what I could feel that sense of passion that sense of wanting to move towards
something and realizing that we are these dynamic these ever-changing dynamic beings and what happens
when we decide to do that consciously versus you know just letting our environment or whatever
the media just shift us so as I'm listening to you and I love it I'm getting excited and I can feel
your passion are there a few things that need to shift within us culturally or in our society like
are there a few linchpins that we could pull that would give people a greater access or an
understanding of our potential I yes and they are at micro and macro levels macro levels
so when we said earlier that there are these false dichotomies one classic false dichotomy is
kind of we can see represented right now in political process
um in the difference between what has been thought of as the primary philosophic elements of the
democratic or republican platform which is also kind of mirrored in the communist and capitalist
platforms which can be oversimplified as the the primary kind of truth of the republican platform
is this agency oriented perspective hey I pulled myself up by my bootstraps even though I came
through from a difficult situation we want other people who are responsible self-directing agents
pull themselves up by their bootstraps we don't want social services that make people lazy independent
and etc and we want to maximize for for agency right and that the collective is the result
of all of the individual human behavior so if we you know and this is in what capitalism would say
similarly if we maximize individual freedom and individual incentive we'll have the best
collective possible because a collective is made up by individuals so that's that side of the story
then the other side of the story which in various ways both the democratic and I'm not saying that
any current candidates represent these well but the democratic platform and in a bigger way the
communist platform is held is hey but wait the individuals are actually being conditioned by
the environments that they are born into and raised in and that we see very clear statistical
correlations between if someone is born in poverty grows up in situations of low education what they
are likely to achieve experience their statistical likelihood for for crime for etc and even though
there are a few cases where someone pulled themselves up by their bootstraps their statistical
outliers so since the individuals are conditioned by their environment let's make better environments
collective environments that support all individuals to do better and so then the question
is well do we want better environments that condition individuals better or do we want
better individuals that help create better collectives and environments and the answer is
obviously yes both and that these are mutually symbiotic and the again the idea that there's
something dichotomous here just means we haven't understood the scenario well enough can we
see if we offer a model for increased agency of the individual like the libertarian model right
like the capitalist model but that doesn't factor for how that individual's agency ends up affecting
others or the whole well enough then we end up leading to a situation of what we you know so
much what we see in the world right pathologic destructive competition hoarding of resources
requiring more resources being extracted from the earth for less actual abundance
you know continuing enmity etc and the tragedy of the commons similarly though if we try to
optimize for the collective in a way that squishes the agency of the individual then we
end up getting dissent and either the breakdown of those systems like has happened with communist
attempts or the enforcement of those systems authoritarian Lee which neither of those are
good so the question is how do we optimize for people's own a genetic desire to evolve and
express and self-actualize and their communal desire to be part of larger holes and contribute
to and take care of them and the truth is if let's say we look at a human body the liver
isn't trying to get ahead at the expense of the kidneys and vice versa in fact they all
need each other because it's a it's a very closely interconnected system and so they all
work very symbiotically when we realize that our planet is this tiny little fragile organic spaceship
in this vast cosmic so far to us uninhabitable space and we are all on that spaceship together
and and there's really no room for infighting right there's really no room for there's no
place called away that we can put our trash there's nobody called others that we can advantage
ourselves at the expense of when we get how profoundly interconnected we are our own best
self-actualization and the best support of the whole will actually be identical if we factor all
the cause and effect loops so we need to really get that at the level of our own consciousness
in our own worldview and at the level of our macroeconomic systems and our infrastructure
so imagine if we had a macroeconomic system where it wasn't that I could confer a lot of
material advantage by cutting down trees and killing whales because as soon as I kill that whale
it's a million dollars worth of whale meat on my on my fishing boat we're leaving it alive it's
worth nothing because the balance sheet of the commons isn't counted right that economic model
leads to massive biodiversity loss ocean acidification all the problems that we see
imagine if we had an economic system where the incentive of every individual was perfectly aligned
with the well-being of every other individual and of the commons and so people could take
incentive could move forward but the collective is being advanced and move forward and everyone's
individual access to all of the collective commonwealth is also growing so that's an example of
the macro shifts that we need to make and at a micro level making sure that our own worldview
is we notice where we start to fall into thinking that we can advantage ourselves at the expense
of someone else or advantage other people by sacrificing ourselves and get get over the
false dichotomy and look at how we can become more omniconsiderate more omnipositive through
better strategy well we only have a few minutes left and so I think feel that this segues nicely
into your the newest thing you're working on which is neuro hacker and I find this very fascinating
if somebody who does a lot of work in my body stuff tell my listeners a little bit about
what neuro hacker is and and why you felt it to be necessary at this time
so when we're looking at how to bring about better global civilization and not through imposition
but a self evolving self governing emergent global civilization then we look at what are
all of the things that end up influencing human experience and human behavior and what are all
the things that that lead to poor human experience unnecessary kinds of suffering and that lead to
poor human behavior unnecessary suffering induced in others via our behavior and what leads to the
opposite of those and what can we do to maximally influence movement in the right direction and
again this is not control this is recognizing we're being we're being conditioned by our
environment all the time anyways how can we be more thoughtful about that to do a better job with it
and when we look at all the categories of things that influence human experience
and human behavior we see that there's there's ways that the physical environment and world
around us does right the infrastructure itself and the built world does and so the whole field
of environmental psychology there's a lot and how do we rebuild the physical world to both be
not only better for the planet but to affect and condition the humans within it better and by
condition i mean if you have a world where to get energy you the energy came through coal and you
really have no options other than that available to you and to not have access to energy ends up
leading to uh just you know no no capability to do the things you want to in the system then you
have to end up rationalizing participating with something that you know is causing inexorable
suffering somewhere else so infrastructure itself conditions a certain aspect of empathy out of
everyone right the way that we currently do it if we had a renewable uh infrastructure it could
condition totally different things in people so infrastructure is an area that affects human
experience and behavior our social systems economics governance law language all do so there
are things we work with there our worldview does our definition of success or definition of self
other meaning right which we've been talking about but our biology also does and when we look at
things like anxiety or depression or brain fog or meaninglessness there are contributors to those
in all of these categories but specifically at the level of individuals there's obviously
psychological uh trauma ideas beliefs that we can deal with through psychotherapy through personal
development methodologies that are important that address what we kind of think of as the
software side but there is also hardware predispositions when we when we look at any particular
kind of neuropsychiatric issue we can see a number of neurochemical neuroendocrine gut brain access
neuro structural correlates and actually identify some of those correlates as causal to some of those
structures and so some of that can be affected through mind-brain interface right things that
you've looked at where shifting mental patterns shifts physical patterns but it goes both ways
shifting physical patterns and everyone who started sleeping better and exercising more and
eating better has had an experience of shifting physiology in ways that affect their mood how
much kindness is available to them everyone who's felt really sick or had hormones at a balance has
felt the opposite and so we've created neurohacker collective to work on understanding how to balance
and optimize the human physiology the neurology and the associated physiology to support more
optimized human experience and human capability so this is everything from increasing cognitive
capability right memory focus intelligence complex thinking to increasing empathy to increasing
the kind of neurologic pathways that meditative non-symbolic experience is mediated across
and so we have one technology that if you go to the website neurohacker.com you'll see is currently
available we have many many more in process our goal is to actually have all that is meaningful in
the space of neuro technology vetted curated synthesized and then personalized so that the
very best tools for working on whatever it is that one is wanting to work on are available to them
and that there's there is specific guidance capable so that's what we're working towards
with that project that is so fascinating when I was looking over the website and would you
describe it as a nutraceutical um so the products that you have that have been specially formulated
to do like you said the cognitive enhancements those just that looks incredibly fascinating to me
and I'm very excited to try so the the product that you see on the website now is called qualia
and it is a it is a nutraceutical it is a notropic which means cognitive enhancing supplement
we are not limited to nutraceuticals we're working on technology in the transcranial
stimulation space and EEG neurofeedback and basically all technology areas that we believe
to be fundamentally up regulating of human capacity without any kind of meaningful side
effects that's our criteria but we started in nutraceuticals and started in cognitive enhancement
for a number of reasons it's an area that can produce a tremendous amount of positive shift for
lots of people and that is more familiar right taking a pill is is an easier step for many people
than getting into devices for transcranial stimulation that are more foreign so if as you
continue to to stay tuned you'll see more and more different kinds of technologies becoming
available but the first product qualia our goal was especially seeing how much demand for productivity
the world has and how much distraction and kind of damage to people's focus and attention there is
and how much the world has turned to uh you know red bull and energy drinks and off-label
uh you know Adderall as a smart drug and you know so many things like that we wanted to see if we
could meet the needs that people are trying to meet with that in terms of increased creative
productive flow capabilities without the negative side effects and even with lasting positive
benefits where we're rather than overriding someone's regulatory system we're working on
supporting the robustness of the regulatory system so that instead of creating dependence we
actually create lasting positive effects after someone would stop using this that was our goal
and we've been you know we're continuing research and development but we are very happy with what
we've been able to affect in people so far yes well i'm very interested and i will definitely be
seeing what's next because i just obviously this show i started this show to talk about human potential
and i believe that there's many arenas where human potential can be accessed and activated
within each other and i do i do think that there is this this definitely the space for this blending
of technology um in our biological you know creating an interface between that i also think
that there's also space for you know straight up meditation and spiritual facts and psychedelics
i've i've done quite a bit of that as well but um i just want to thank you so much so at this point
in the show i just want to leave you the opportunity to share with people how they can
find your website shows social media anything you'd like to leave my listeners with at this time
yeah just a last thought on one other dichotomy i'd love for people to see if they can ask us
the idea that nature and technology are somehow opposed they have been uh because we have developed
technology without really understanding how nature works without understanding self-organization
and complexity well which has led to externalities but that's not innate to technology nature
evolved us and evolved our capacity to evolve things which you know our tools or extensions of
the evolutionary process of the future is going to be both a very nature integrated and very high
tech world where our technology is an expression of the natural world with the self-organization
and design complexity of the natural world and so whether we are meditating or whether we're using
no tropics i don't see those as fundamentally different kinds of things i see those as methodologies
processes technologies of understanding how to navigate the human experience better utilizing
all that's available to us so um just a just a closing thought people can see more of what we're
doing with neuro hacker at neurohacker.com and if people want to uh you know just see kind of what
i'm up to uh following me on facebook is an easy way well daniel i want to thank you so much for
being on the show today um you gave me a lot to think about and uh yeah i would love to have you
on anytime and if you need any test subjects for your for uh your new technology let me know
well um coming up uh next week we have lisa nop and she's the author of six award-winning books
on and we'll be talking about the cultural and spiritual factors that lead to women's bodies
issues eating disorders and ageism if you want to know more about myself angelo aback you can go
to angeloaback.com and if you want to know more about our projects here at conversations from
the brink or more about entanglement radio you can go to conversationsfromthebrink.com
that's our show for you today thank you so much for tuning in and we'll be back next week
