Music
Welcome to a course that serves as an ecological analysis of our dynamic planet.
Hello, my name is Eric Strauss.
In this course, we are interested in the Earth and actually we're interested in a part that's confined to the very thin film on the surface that we call the biosphere.
Life's realm, which is only about 10 to 20 kilometers thick.
You know, some migrating birds can be found flying high over the mountains at about 8,000 meters and some fish swim at depths as large,
but it still represents a very tiny portion of the Earth that is actually hospitable to life.
As the late astronomer Carl Sagan pointed out, it's about the same thickness as that of varnish painted on the surface of a basketball.
However, within this thin film of life resides a million named species of organisms, some with such complex interaction that it seems almost like science fiction.
It is in these very interrelations that we are investigating in this course, interactions among organisms and the Earth they inhabit.
Now, there are three core emphases in this course.
One is that we're going to be looking at humans and other organisms.
Two, we're going to be looking at what we call boundary changes that have been created by humans.
And three, from an ecological perspective, the human outcomes related to these changes.
We engage a wide range of topics, from trees that sequester carbon to water fleas that clone themselves.
But we also never step very far from the perspective of, what's in it for me?
After all, living systems are so resilient because that is the central concern of every living molecule and every gene that is expressed in nature.
Our primary focus in this course is ecology as a science.
This project builds from courses that I already teach or have taught, including ecology of a dynamic planet and animal behavior,
foundations of urban ecology and introductory biology for bio majors, plus freshman mentoring and seminars in ecology.
And I'm very fortunate to teach with a cadre of exceptional scholars, including a physicist and an environmental lawyer and my former high school ecology teacher,
who, upon getting his PhD, has joined us on the faculty and runs our field station.
In my teaching and mentoring of students, I make use of my own everyday field work and experimentation, and mostly of those committed scientists that inhabit our discipline.
You know, my PhD was on studying the behavioral ecology of piping plovers, their controversial species.
You may have heard about the land closures around their protection and seen bumper stickers like plovers taste like chicken.
And unfortunately, or fortunately, depending your perspective, some of the data that I gathered contributed to the insight that protects the species now.
This course is going to reference many current studies drawn from peer-reviewed journals.
You know, since the late 1990s, when my first textbook was being published, people would hear I teach ecology and biology at a Jesuit university,
and one of the first questions they have is, how do I handle questions about global warming or about evolution?
And my response is that my approach is shaped by the limited but powerful methods of science.
Now, in science, we certainly believe in gravity, but we call it a theory.
That theory is not best tested by jumping off of a fifth-story roof, but we call it a theory because something may better as a descriptive tool may come along
with better evidence and arguments, and we better be in a position to accept that as scientists.
Now, global warming and evolution are the most powerful tools that we have in our toolbox of science to explain the phenomena that we see.
Both are backed by such a mountain of repeatable and peer-reviewed research.
However, as scientists, we must be prepared in our professional and psychological domains to abandon these models if better ones come along.
So, this is very much a science course, but I also point out that there is a bit of a false dichotomy between science and the humanities,
because ecology is very much linked to natural history and the ideas of narrative and legacy.
What happened before is critical to the nature of ecological revelation,
and that differentiates it a bit from some of the other sciences which are more reductionist.
Theoretically, a physics experiment conducted anywhere in the universe, if the variables are the same, should come out the same.
However, ecological investigations are embedded in knowledge that we gather about the forces that drove this situation and where it might move over time.
And so, in that sense, ecology is a bit holistic.
Now, there is an impression that ecology is the activity that happens when you only go to distant locations.
You get on a plane, and from that plane you take other forms of transportation,
and ultimately you're dropped off in some remote area, and that's where ecology begins.
That's where you start to gather data.
Now, in fact, this model of gathering ecological information in pristine and remote ecosystems has led to some rather extraordinary understandings of nature.
I mean, for example, the great systems work of Eugene Odom in the 1930s has led to an incredible understanding that ecosystems are complex and interconnected by both physical and biological drivers.
And yet, ecology turns out to be far more than the study of pristine nature that many people expect when we say the word ecology.
Newer approaches, which by the way are funded by the agencies that drive our work, the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of Agricultural Forest Service,
Environmental Protection Agencies and others, have really driven us to ask more integrated questions and studies that investigate the ecological impact on humans,
as well as the impact by humans on ecological systems.
So maybe we should begin with a definition.
The study of ecology is the examination of the interactions between the biotic living things and the abiotic non-living things.
You know, there's a joke about ecologists, often true, that we tend to eat alone because whenever we come to somebody's house for dinner, our environmentalist roots emerge,
and folks around us are afraid that we're going to be asking whether the table comes from sustainable wood and worrying about whether they're serving us free-range chickens.
But you know, in fact, ecology and a sustainable worldview, at least in my perspective, isn't about giving up meat or giving up one's car.
It's instead a little bit like a marriage, a long marriage, where one develops a sense of what sorts of changes are possible, what are not possible, or what would be possible at too high a cost.
In fact, I think like a good marriage, much of what we see around us is an amazing testament to human ingenuity and positive belief, and really is a terrific success story.
You think about this. For instance, we can eat in virtually any restaurant, even the cheapest fast food joint that's not particularly healthy food, and we virtually never get sick.
And we take that for granted. But in the past, and not so distant past, people very often got sick from the food they ate, even when they were eating so-called natural foods.
So one of the great, great testaments of success of our human species, at least in developed nations, has been the homogenization of food quality.
Even in more traditional ecological terms, we have terrific success stories. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency's reduction in lead emissions in the United States have dropped almost 98% from what they used to be even in 1970.
Tempered forests have seen an incredible rebound from the decimation observed in the previous century.
In short, ecology can be, and I hope this course will be, a manual scholarship and a source of inspiration.
For instance, one of the things that motivates me as an ecologist is the large pool of underserved human communities, and how we tend to underuse nature as a tool for human improvement.
This is a tremendous opportunity that we're just beginning to unlock as a function of the recognition of nature of humans and nature by humans.
So nature has profound effects on our physical being and our psyche. We'll look at research by folks like Robert Ulrich, who found that even something like the duration of a hospital patient stay after surgery
is shorter and the amount of pain medication they need is reduced if these postoperative patients can see trees and greenery outside their window.
Imagine something as simple as that connection to nature, having physical and psychological impacts on healing from illness.
Now, it makes sense, actually, we're adapted over a very long period of time to see what trees have to offer, and it makes sense.
This isn't some sort of voodoo that solutions we've adapted for very long periods of time turn out to be beneficial to us within our own individual lifetimes.
Now, what ecology is not, and to the best of my ability, ecology will not be an exercise in preaching.
It is a science that is an offering of how nature works.
Here is what we know and how we know it and what kind of decisions we are facing and what will likely be facing given what we do know so far.
So ecology is a way to understand the past, to make sense of the past.
It's a way to understand the present and with some caution, a way of investigating the potential outcomes of the future.
Ecology is not about making people feel overwhelmed or depressed.
I believe it's deeply about a sense of wonder.
For example, there is a wonder of evolved traits, for instance, of gender.
Why does gender exist?
Why do things like cooperation and friendship and love exist?
I like love as much as anybody, but why does affection exist?
What are the ecological conditions and do we see this across other organisms?
Ecology can show us where life is fragile,
but ecology is also about life's incredible resiliency.
The eruption of Mount St. Helens destroyed all surrounding life for miles,
and yet within just two years, life was again flourishing, even in some of the most ravaged areas.
Now many of you will remember Prince William Sound in Alaska, the site of one of our country's most serious oil spills.
That area has shown great signs of recovery, and we'll report on this in the series later in the series.
I just have to add that it's really quite extraordinary because one of the most really cool unexpected parts of that was that
you have this tremendous amount of oil spilled.
Some of it was mechanically picked up, some of it was kind of corralled and boomed,
some of it was sort of these giant vacuum cleaners that were taken up,
but half of it was actually taken up by microorganisms that were able to use the oil as metabolic fuel.
Absolutely extraordinary.
Now I also want to confront up front one fear that people sometimes seem to have about ecology.
What about my self-interest or my family?
To which I say, there is no reason at all to give up your selfish best interest.
Remember, life depends on the fact that every living organism will invest in its own survival and perpetuation of its genes.
That's selfish behavior in a biological sense with a little s, not a big s.
The little s, we have to behave and make decisions in our own best interest.
And ecology can allow us to see how that self-interest can be expanded into larger scales of recognition than we currently have.
What we gain from ecology is not a path to some impossible form of altruism.
Rather, as informed people, we need to ask, and ecology can help us answer,
what is in our enlightened self-interest? What is our deep selfish best interest?
Remember, as a species, if we go extinct, we have extinguished an incredible flame which cannot be easily relit,
and most of the species that have ever existed on the planet, 99% of them, are now extinct.
We, as a species, have the capacity to understand the complex, mechanistic, and sometimes random forces that shape those outcomes.
And so we actually can alter the trajectory and the risk of our own potential extinction.
Now, one of the things I think that is so powerful about ecology, and something I share with my students all the time,
is that not everything in ecology and not everything related to positive ecological change has to be really complicated.
Ecology can even help us identify what I call the low-hanging fruit,
or at least what are the most important factors for these wide-ranging issues of environmental and ecological decline that we face.
For instance, greenhouse gas emissions in our nation from cattle are almost as significant as those that come from automobiles.
You know, what cows do is, you know, they are fermenters, and so they take in large amounts of essentially undigestible grass.
And for the sort of situation in which we have domestic cattle, they turn essentially indigestible grass into tissues that we can consume.
But they do that by having multiple stomachs, and actually they don't digest their food.
They have communities of mutualistic bacteria that live in their gut that actually digest the grass for the cow,
but at the price they produce a lot of natural gas, a lot of methane, and so cows actually produce a significant amount of greenhouse gases.
Now, as opposed to what you might think, gases actually come out the front end of the cow that are the greenhouse gases, they're belching it up.
And so these interconnections that you might not expect, one of the significant ways in which we can modify greenhouse gas emissions worldwide in the United States
is to address, with open eyes, the amount of domestic cattle that we maintain for food production, because that is a significant source.
And these are the kind of relationships that you might not expect when you first think about the kind of problems that we're facing.
But then what about the practical implications or the ramifications of an enhanced ecological worldview?
Shouldn't we approach predictions from any science with skepticism?
Yes.
Skepticism is part of sound science and actually part of our healthy self-interest.
And in fact, any realm of scholarship requires a healthy level of skepticism.
We live in a world right now where we are deluged with data, most of it digital, that washes over us like a rainstorm.
And because of the ease and demogrification, if you will, of access to the internet, there's a lot of junky information out there that comes at you in very pretty pictures.
And so it becomes even more of a challenge for our generation and the generations of young people to come after us to be even more efficient with their filters
as they understand or attempt to understand what data are believable and reliable and which data are so tainted by either lack of competence or adjusted so much by a particularly extreme worldview that they really can't be trusted.
Those skills are some of the most important things that we can impart.
For example, ever since the release of some early greenhouse gas data in the 1970s, which suggested that the earth was actually headed for a period of cooling, premature and sort of radical and wild public discussion has had consequences ever since.
And scientists studying the earth have arguably become even more cautious than necessary as more data emerge.
Anyway, I mean, the quantity of data done since the 1970s about climate change is so enormous as to be absolutely unavoidable.
And we will investigate that and the incredible work of the International Panel on Climate Change, their most recent report, which will be a wake up and call for us in this course.
I don't think any ecologists can look at that report and not say that this new understanding that it creates for us has profound implications, not only for our work as scholars, but for the reality of the stewardship role we play as citizens and the communities in which we live.
Now, it happens to be a very useful coincidence that the cost and availability of oil is increasingly headed for shortages and higher prices at the same time that the issue of climate warming has reached public awareness.
It's a bit of a coincidence, but it sure is useful. The conservation and lifestyle changes that people are making in response to petroleum prices actually have positive ecological value to the earth's sustainability.
Now, the word sustainability gets overused quite a bit. It sounds vague or even empty, but solutions we will need for a sustainable human ecosystem are not without costs.
Now, I'm fortunate to be a co-founder of the Urban Ecology Institute, which is active at the intersection of science and policy, and our mission is to improve urban ecosystems through research education and advocacy.
And I see this kind of thing all the time. I mean, if, for example, as part of a coalition, we recommend to the city of Boston that based on our analysis of tree cover and the structure of neighborhoods that Boston needs to plant 100,000 trees.
Well, these trees are not inexpensive. It takes an effort to do this.
And even though the trees will hopefully provide cleaner air and modulate climate and have tremendous and hopeful measurable social advantages to creating green space, that may mean hiring fewer municipal workers like some teachers or fewer police.
So if ecologists are making these kind of suggestions, we better be sure that the data we're standing on are robust.
But if the physical and social benefits of trees help to make Boston more livable and sustainable, then the investment is sensible. It's in our selfish best interest, especially if the ecological transformation employs people in green jobs and the metrics of public health improve.
By the way, green jobs, maybe a term you haven't heard before, but boy, you're going to one of the, one of the areas of tremendous expansion and opportunities.
That's a collection of technical and service jobs across a wide spectrum that are linked to sustainability environmental improvement.
Now ecology is a science is like that, looking for multiple mutually supportive long term benefits.
In fact, as ecologists, one informal way we can tell ourselves that humans have got something right actually is when people love where they live.
You know, these, the attitudes people have reflect actually a very, very wide range of variables and social demographers and social ecologists have learned that one of the best ways actually to understand the nature of neighborhoods.
We can take a lot of technical measures which are helpful, ask the people who live there what they think about the neighborhood they live in.
And the way in which we all live ultimately is that very thin but complicated realm of the planet studied by ecology.
What an ecological diagnosis seeks to offer is therefore quite different from the very singular focus on a single cause and a single outcome located a single point in time typically demanded in a more traditional science such as physics or chemistry.
After all, what is going on in a particular place at a particular point in time sometimes cannot be understood without reference to a lot that was going on earlier, even 100 years earlier or before that both in time and space.
Ecology isn't just applied biology. It is also a different and complimentary way of doing life science. It is holistic instead of monocosal.
Both in this course and in ecology more generally, we will sometimes find ourselves returning to the same places or to the same examples but with new questions and with new additional tools of investigation.
Now ecology has multiple subfields, each of which play important roles in addressing the interrelated challenges that taken together suggest that the living earth faces a crisis.
So this population ecology where we look at the dynamics within a single species, then there's community ecology where we're interested in the interactions of groups of species and the kinds of complexity that emerges from those interactions.
Now some of those interactions are behavioral and that realm of ecology is called behavioral ecology and it tends to look at the interactions among animals and social ecology that among people.
And the reason that we think of behavior as being such a critical metric for understanding the nature of ecology is that remember behavior is the most complicated of all phenotypes.
It involves the interplay between genes and the environment, all the other scales of biology that go on in living organisms from the cellular to the tissue to the organ level.
They all give rise to this complex phenotype we call behavior.
Broadly defined, there's also systems ecology which include human impacts in nature and focus on the really broad interactions that happen at larger spatial scales.
And emerging more recently is a new branch of ecology called urban ecology.
And here we are looking at the interface of nature and human dominated landscapes and what are the scales and patterns emerging from this new kind of investigation.
We will use each of these main fields of investigation to help understand the implications of the changes that we observe happening to the earth's biosphere.
Ecology does not operate alone.
In this course we recognize and use the contributions of allied fields such as public health and earth science, economics, engineering, history and the humanities to knit together a coherent understanding of the intricate dynamics of the earth.
Now there are two sorts of changes that suggest the earth's ecosystem as a whole seems to be in decline.
And perhaps you'll need to make up your own mind about this even in crisis.
And these changes are in terms of climate and in terms of habitat.
Of the two, climate changes are probably more familiar.
Things like sea level rise, past 10 years scientists have recorded an average of about 1.8 millimeters rise per year since 1961.
And since 1983 that rates has doubled its rate of acceleration.
These are all data according to the IPCC report.
And the sea may displace as many as 200 million people in the next 50 years as sea level continues to rise.
There is a clear and definite increase in greenhouse gases have been documented by a whole variety of both instrumented and long term history data.
Some of the most famous being the Mauna Loa Hawaii data by Keeling and his group.
We seem to be seeing harsher and more severe weather patterns related to hurricanes and droughts that may be and probably are related to the increased heat energy that's available on the earth as a function of global warming.
Glaciers and ice caps are melting at an alarming rate.
The Northwest Passage in the Arctic Circle remain passable for the first time in recorded history throughout the year in 2007.
Habitat changes are perhaps less familiar than the climate challenge.
However, habitat destruction is the largest threat to our world's biodiversity, which is why habitat is a central focus throughout this course.
Habitat destruction encompasses a wide range of issues such as deforestation, habitat fragmentation, and even urban sprawl that together are a huge threat to our ecosystems.
Now here's some of the details of the course and what we hope to accomplish.
Each lecture is going to cut across physical and temporal scales.
Like we talk about mercury toxicity, we'll be talking about it from its molecular impacts all the way up to how it moves through the food chain and why it's so widely spatially distributed and what are the human social factors that give rise both to its bioavailability within ecosystems and also the cost to humans of that outcome.
Now the lectures themselves are often coupled in doublets or pairs with basic ecological principles discussed in the first lecture of each pair and the human role or implications addressed head on in the second.
Lecture two, for example, continues the introductory attention to lecture one to the kinds of changes the biosphere and humans are witnessing but with more direct attention to humans acting as the causative agents.
In lecture three, we're going to talk about some of the early history of ecology.
Examples include Eugene Odom's great contributions of systems thinking that laid the groundwork for the holistic discipline of ecology to flourish.
Lecture four, a more recent history including the introduction of the full range of forces and drivers studied in contemporary ecology.
Now the vast majority of the lectures are divided into two broad sections.
Lectures five through eighteen, we will investigate specific forces and drivers that cause ecosystems to change over time including the flows of energy, materials including waste materials, water, food and toxic substances.
So for example, the large ocean currents that serve as great conveyors of energy around the globe and can influence entire ecosystems such as the ratio of sardines and anchovies in the rich fisheries off the coast of Chile.
The other broad section of the course focuses on ecological interactions and processes.
Lectures nineteen to thirty-two, these include microevolution, changes within a given species, population growth, migration, disease, coevolution in which complex systems such as zoonotic disease where an infectious bacterium sometimes requires a minimum of three or other animals just to complete its life cycle.
So for example, over the past 300 years human land use practices have reduced the forest cover across the United States significantly and have also altered the type of forest that is currently observed.
Both of these outcomes have considerable ecological impact.
And we will conclude the course with four lectures on human responses to environmental challenges.
Lectures thirty-three through thirty-six including current and prospective contributions from science, from new designs and technologies, hopeful directions for cities and new ways of thinking and living that maintain and restore healthy ecosystems.
For example, wildlife parks and reserve systems have been established worldwide.
Parks even in developing nations become possible thanks to a complicated economic solution involving debt relief and return for ecological investment.
Throughout this course we will do our best to engage you in the world of ecology and enhance the stewardship role that each of us can play in our daily choices we make in our own lives.
In our next lecture we'll look more directly at the human factor in the overall state of the earth and we'll consider in particular outcomes that have led to an influential view that humans are driven by self-interest to enact what has been called the tragedy of the commons.
So until then, welcome.
