Welcome back. In our first lecture, we had the opportunity to investigate the state of the earth, and in this lecture, we're going to look at the ecological conditions from an anthropogenic or human influence.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about overfishing. We're going to look at the theory that helps us to understand why it is that humans appear to act in such selfish ways.
We'll look at rainforest destruction as an example of how this theory plays out. We'll think about how much of the impact is linked to population expansion and longevity.
And finally, we're going to talk about some of the legacy costs associated with ecological decline, why it's so high and why it seems to be put off.
One of the most fascinating aspects to me at least about the way in which we impact the planet as a species is that we're such a recent species.
Modern technology is only a couple of hundred years old. In that period of time, we've been able to make extraordinary changes in the nature of the earth and the number of people that live there.
We have extraordinary capacity to reproduce and to modify our environment. Our powers of technology and information flow has transformed the post-industrial world.
We're interconnected as a community of humans in so many different ways. People have benefited in the short term, such as longer life spans and lower infant mortality and reduced violence, but the legacy costs to this technology are high.
We have pollution, habitat destruction, human displacement, and this is an ecological burden, and it really has yet to be shouldered, much less paid off.
So in this particular lecture, we're going to focus on the human components of the ecosystem change and resiliency.
So I want to begin by talking a little bit about this turtle shell that we have here. This is a female diamondbacked heropon, or at least the shell of a female diamondbacked heropon.
They're a relatively small, marsh-dwelling turtle that lived to be anywhere from 70 to 100 years old. This is a shell from a female.
We've been studying them at our field station on Cape Cod now for about 30 years, and we capture them and nets mark them. We re-release them.
We use radio transmitters to follow their natural history patterns. This is all stuff we'll talk about later.
But I think for now, the important and illustrative point is that this species has been on the earth for a very, very long time. Turtles precede the dinosaurs.
They survive the end of the age of dinosaurs, and yet they find themselves now confronted in a world with cars and roads and engine-driven boats, and their populations are starting to decline.
This is a federally threatened species, and our work and the work of others are helping to understand how their natural history interacts with humans and what it is we can do to help preserve them as a population.
One example to consider when we think about this whole issue of human impact is to consider the aspect of overfishing.
It's an excellent example of how humans place too much demand on the ecosystem. Look, we need food in order to survive.
In fact, nutritionists tell us that fish is a great source of protein, so why shouldn't we be getting as much fish as we possibly can?
Well, the increase in demand for fish have caused fishermen to develop techniques to meet those demands, but many of the fish populations can't withstand that kind of stress.
In fact, if we thought about the way that we fished and did so in a terrestrial setting where we drag nets across the bottom and we tend to take the top order predators fish out of the sea, we would be shocked at the way we actually go about the process of fishing.
And we're going to look at that a little bit later when we talk about trophic dynamics.
But here we're going to talk about the story of the Atlantic cod. Near and dear to the residents of Massachusetts, Atlantic cod in many ways shaped the not only the ecology but the economy of New England for almost 300 years.
The fisheries in which cod were caught, and Stellwagen Bank off the coast of Massachusetts, at one time were the richest fishing grounds in the world.
But by the late 1990s, the stocks had fallen almost by 95%.
You know, earlier in the 19th century, there were nearly 40,000 metric tons of codfish that were harvested from Georgia's bank each year.
And the fish that were captured in that period of time that were caught weighed an average of 100 pounds.
And it was not unusual actually to bring in fish that weighed 200 pounds each.
And you would see them on the docks and their images that are captured from the Maritimes that show these big fish being brought ashore and they were larger than children.
In fact, they were as big as adult humans. They were gigantic fish.
Pushed almost to the point of extinction, regulations have helped save the Atlantic cod, but the numbers of fish being caught are coming back.
But their average weights are now down around 20 pounds because the population has been so impacted by the activity of human fishing.
Another example and one that was supposed to essentially solve the problem of overfishing in the North Atlantic is the Chilean sea bass, and yet a similar problem emerges.
The species was supposed to save the industry, but population declines due mainly to the way in which they're caught, which are using these techniques called long lines coupled with illegal fishing have really decimated the population.
You know, these long line techniques that they use can catch seven tons of fish on a single line.
Now, early on in the explosion of fishing activity off the coast of Chile, reports in the early 90s, 1990s, showed as many as 34,000 tons of fish caught.
And by 1995, the capture was down to approximately 9,000 tons.
So the system had really begun to fail.
Now, a team of researchers led by fellow named Jackson published recently in science, I think a really important piece of work with respect to understanding our impact on the fishing industry.
And if I can direct your attention to the figure part a investigates the impact of cod fishing.
Part B looks at the resiliency of coral communities and part C looks at the impact of oyster fisheries.
Now, those are three very important measures of ecosystem health in the near shore for us, obviously in different parts of the world.
So in part A, we see that over a period of time that dates back thousands of years, you can see that we have legacy data on the cod population.
And you can see that the mean length of cod that was being caught has dropped dramatically over time as a result of overfishing.
We've talked about that.
Part B looks at coral communities and it looks at coral communities over time.
And it looks at the percent of those coral communities that are maintaining a dominance within the ecosystem.
And you can see that those levels are falling as well.
Now, we have two sets of data that are interactive.
The first, the solid line depicts the amount of oysters that are captured off the near shore areas of the American East Coast.
And you can see that beginning about 150 years ago, there was an enormous increase in the harvesting of oysters.
Oysters are considered an incredibly valuable resource for both food and for the marine trade.
And you can see that there was a peak in the capture that happened about 100 years ago and it has essentially been declining ever since.
But here's the part I think that's most interesting.
If you take a look at the dotted line, which admittedly is a little bit complicated because it shows a ratio of planktonic to benthic organisms.
Those are the ones floating in the water versus those that are on the marine floor.
That ratio tells us something about the health of the ecosystem.
And what it's telling us is that as that ratio becomes more positive, the system is becoming uterified, which means it's losing its oxygen level.
And it's actually on the way to becoming a dead zone, something we're going to talk about later in our lectures.
And notice that as the impact of humans within this fishery is increasing, measured by the number of oysters that are being landed,
you can see that the degree of eutrophication is beginning to climb.
And even in the early periods when humans were dredging these near shore environments and mucking them up quite a bit,
the oysters were able to keep the ratio at somewhere around 3 to 1.
But as the oyster populations declined, then the eutrophication exploded.
And what we have now is a badly degraded ecosystem that is not easily repaired.
Well, those are data.
And I think data are important.
Data drive us as ecologists to understand our ecosystem.
But ultimately, the importance to us as scientists is that data help us forge a theory.
And so one of the theories we're going to look at today is called the tragedy of the commons.
And it's as much about us as a social species as it is about tools for science.
Now, to understand this environmental conundrum, we have to understand that there is an inherent struggle between self-interest and public benefit.
And one of the first early systems thinkers in this domain was a fellow by the name of Garrett Hardin,
who wrote a piece called The Tragedy of the Commons.
He was a professor of human ecology at the University of California at Santa Barbara.
He was one of the first what we call systems thinkers.
And system thinking is going to play a very important role as we talk more and more about ecology in this series.
He was controversial, which is interesting because he was an annoyance to both the political left and the political right as a function of some of his views.
But his contribution was nonetheless quite important.
And let's talk first about what we call Hardin's first law.
And the first law states that you cannot do only one thing.
And if there's a golden rule in ecology, I think that would be it.
Because if we take for our understanding that ecological systems are deeply interconnected,
and in some way this runs against the notion of science as we tend to think of it,
being very reductionist, isolating our variables, and trying to measure only one thing,
in ecology we can't do it.
Because as we have learned and will learn, ecology is about legacies.
We need to understand what happened before in order to understand things as they are now,
and to think coherently about how things will be in the future.
So he publishes this article in 1968, very early in our struggles around the issue of sustainability,
before the first Earth Day, as an example.
And he states that in an overpopulated or unstable ecological system, there can be no technical solution.
Remember as a species, we love technical solutions.
If we use too much water out of an ecosystem, we'll just build a desalinization plant
and turn ocean water into drinking water.
If we're producing too much nitrogen from waste that we're producing, we'll build a water treatment plant.
As a species, we're very good at building technological solutions.
Technological solutions, however, have high legacy costs, as we'll talk about.
But here's the notion of the tragedy.
And it's not the tragedy in the sense of something being terribly sad.
It's a tragedy as defined by the philosopher Whitehead, who said that the essence of a dramatic tragedy is not unhappiness.
Instead, it resides in the solemnity of the remorseless working of things.
In other words, the tragedy is the mechanistic and machine capacity.
So let's use an example to talk about this.
And then first we'll use a theoretical example.
And then we'll actually look at some data.
So as the article was written by Hardin, he used an example of a pasture, a common pasture land, terrestrial pasture,
that was open to as many cattle as possible.
Now, each individual herdsman owns a certain amount of cattle and allows those cattle to graze.
And this works for centuries as the resource, in this case the pasture, has not reached its maximum capacity.
However, eventually the pasture becomes maxed out and is now actually starting to degrade.
As a collective wisdom, it should make sense now that we should reduce the number of cattle that are grazing in the system.
However, this is where Whitehead's comment about the remorseless mechanistic aspect of this.
Each herdsman, even under this recognition, is compelled to add another cow.
Why?
Well, because the profit for each cow all goes to the individual herdsman.
But the cost of the degraded pasture is shared by everybody.
So the negative cost is borne out over many.
The profit is taken in by one individual.
So this is the same as it is for the fishermen that we've just talked about.
Each is locked into a cycle of boat payments and crew salaries and insurance and fuel.
But there is an escalating value for the fish that are being captured, even as the fish are declining in number.
As they become more rare, they become each individual fish becomes more valuable.
So it's likely that each act of fishing will be individually profitable even to the end.
So off the coast of my native Cape Cod, people are fishing for tuna using sonar and airplanes in order to capture them.
They're so rare, but their value is so high.
So the question is, given the tragedy of the commons, given the reality that exists between selfish interests and the community interest as a whole,
how do you solve this problem?
And Hardin is a realist in the sense, as he would have described himself, in that we cannot ask individuals to give up some of their profit.
What we need to do is create legislative intervention, which he calls a form of mutually agreed upon coercion.
What we mean by coercion is that the group decides that this kind of intervention is appropriate.
Now, let's talk about an example of coercion that would be very easy to understand.
And that example is bank robbing.
Most of us agree that bank robbing is a very inappropriate thing to do, and therefore there's a very high penalty for robbing a bank.
And if you get caught, you're in very big danger at the moment you're caught because you're going to be surrounded by armed people,
and you're likely to go to prison for having done that.
But that's not very controversial because most of us would feel that robbing a bank is inappropriate.
Let's look at something else. Let's look at taxation.
Taxation is an example of a mutually agreed upon coercion.
We don't necessarily agree to enjoy it, but we understand that the individual benefits associated with a group commitment to taxation is worth the investment.
Here, let's revisit this notion of how these ecosystems degrade under these ideas.
You know, Jackson pointed out that there are different possible scenarios, right, with his investigations of coral and cod and also in oysters.
But if we think about this legacy of human expansion, which has led to increased fishing and then pollution and mechanical habitat destruction from the types of fishing that we use,
like the long lines and the dragging lines, the introduction of species that happen, the impact of things like climate change,
what we have are altered ecosystems that look very different than they did then compared to now.
So we are stuck with the reality of this kind of change.
And the question is, can we use insight from Garrett Hardin's work to alter the kinds of choices that we make?
So let's continue our conversation about the fishing industry.
There's a model for the fishing industry where we can compare cod versus lobster.
Now Dietz and his team did some very interesting work, and they looked at the cod fishing industry and compared it to the industry that's occurring in the very same geographic region,
but admittedly nearer to shore, and that's the lobster industry.
So the measurements were happening in the Gulf of Maine, and they're measuring cod and lobster.
Now if you take a look at the chart, you can see that from 1980 up to the current time, the solid blue line shows the amount of landings of cod,
and you can see that number going down over time.
There's a little bit of peak in the late 1980s and early 90s, but then there's a decline.
In comparison, the dotted line, through the same trajectory of time, you can see the impact on the lobster industry.
And you can see that except for occasional declines, the lobster industry has continued to grow.
And that represents a different historical legacy of regulation.
The lobster industry has had a successful mutual coercion, if you will, and the cod industry has not.
And so here are two ecological realities that are playing out as a result of different human interventions.
Let's move to another example.
And that example is habitat destruction in a terrestrial environment.
It's one of the biggest threats to the world's biodiversity.
And a classic example would be rainforest destruction in Borneo and Costa Rica,
both of which have some of the largest amounts of both habitat destruction and critical habitat that needs protecting.
So for example, Costa Rica, which contains about 5% of the world's known species, the country's about the size of West Virginia,
that's an incredible amount of biodiversity, and many of these species are endemic,
which means they're only found in that part of the world.
In 1940, in the middle of the previous century, approximately 85% of Costa Rica was considered to be forested, covered by natural vegetation.
By the 60s and 70s, that had declined to about 35%.
By 1983, it was down to 17%.
Clearly, Costa Rica was in a situation of habitat disaster.
The land was being cleared to create space for cattle ranching and banana plantations.
Through appropriate interventions by both the Costa Rican government and with incentives from developed nations,
today about half of Costa Rica's land is considered forested and the country is continuing to focus on sustainable practices.
We're actually going to look at how some of those practices work later when we talk about something called debt for nature swaps,
which are ways in which developed and developing nations can exchange each other's burdens.
So in this case, the tragedy of the commons was circumvented by regulations that were successful.
Now, on the other hand, we have Borneo.
This is the third largest island in one of the most biologically rich areas in the world.
From 1984 to 2001, about 56% of the rainforest was destroyed,
mostly for hardwood logging and for palm oil.
The World Wildlife Fund keeps a living planet index, which helps them to monitor the conditions of ecosystems around the world,
and we'll be talking about these living planet indices throughout this series of lectures.
And if you take a look at the Tropical Forest Index, which measures a whole variety of factors associated with their ecological resilience,
you can see from 1970 to the present the living planet index for Tropical Forest has gone down dramatically.
It's one of the ecosystems that we have the most challenge in maintaining.
And I think it's interesting because palm oil was a solution to a problem that only emerged recently
because of an insatiable market for fast food and prepared foods that can be produced with palm oil,
and even more recently as a tool for making biofuels.
Palm oil production claims a large amount of land and is detrimental to the surrounding ecosystem because it's a monoculture.
And as a monoculture, it creates a very, very inhospitable environment.
To top that off, fire is used to clear the land.
It creates air pollution and significant problems for the surrounding areas.
And in fact, if you look at the impact of burning the lands, destroying the soil, producing the palm oil, transporting it,
actually the carbon savings, if you will, by using that as a biofuel is a net loss with respect to ecological resiliency.
But that's a conversation for later.
Much of our human impact is linked to population growth and modern technology.
That's a critical take home point that we'll be returning to over and over.
In developing nations, this notion of modern technology, it's enabling humans to live longer and have higher survivorship at birth, which is good.
If we think back to medieval Europe, living to the age of 30, which would be a high average depending on gender and social status,
was considered to be successful, even early in the 20th century, living to be 40 was considered the average.
The current world average is now 67, which ranges from a high of 82 in Japan to a low of 41 in Sierra Leone,
which is a war-torn and poverty-stricken human ecosystem.
There's even significant variation in the United States.
We do enjoy a relatively high standard of living and long lifespan.
The longest average lifespan is in Hawaii, where the average is 80.
In the District of Columbia, it's the lowest in the United States, which is 72.
An increasing population size, however, and people living longer, means more resources expended each day and a larger carbon footprint,
something we're going to investigate and measure later on.
An increasing ecological footprint that creates additional stress on the environment.
Returning to this living planet index for a moment, we can take a look at this chart of world biocopacity, as was measured from 1960 to the present.
We can see that if we look at biocopacity as a measure of how many Earths it takes to support the activities that we have.
And again, this is a very clever analysis of multiple variables that help us determine what the carrying capacity Earth is.
You can see that somewhere in the vicinity of around 1990, we exceeded the capacity of our Earth to support the demands that we've placed on it for the long term.
And this is one of the examples that I brought up when I talked about this burden that we are shouldering as far as ecological impact that we haven't actually been able to repay that debt yet.
Now, human populations have benefited quite a bit, at least on the short term with respect to technology.
However, the legacy costs are high. We've drained and filled wetlands, and we've seen that as a quick fix for either transportation issues with respect to crowding of coastal cities.
Boston has lost 95% of its historic salt marsh, only about 350 acres remain, and as a result, the coastline is battered by relatively minor storms.
Development and dredging have claimed nearly 2,000 square miles of marshes along the Louisiana coast for homes and petroleum transport.
However, we now know that salt marshes and barrier beaches are critical buffers to storm surge.
Dolphin Island, which is a barrier beach off the coast of Alabama, was slammed first by Hurricanes Lily in 2002, Ivan in 2004, and both Dennis and Katrina in 2005.
Now, the barrier island did exactly as it was supposed to, and it absorbed the storm surge and reduced the impact of the mainland, but houses and property in the island were decimated.
As a result, the barrier islands and beaches were still there, the homes were destroyed, and the houses should not have been permitted.
Again, this is a classic tragedy that commons example.
Individual homes may have a beautiful view and high property value and be of high value to the individuals, and their losses are covered by insurance companies and the environmental costs are covered by the government.
So you have a system that is inherently out of balance.
The legacy costs for ecological decline are very high.
Now, Wilson and a team have done some work where they have investigated both the measure of ecological decline and compared that to the expansion of activity.
In other words, human-based activity on the planet, and they see that the two forces are essentially in opposition as we have increased our gross product of activity and technology.
That's a line that keeps going up.
The impact on the planet, the planet's resiliency has essentially decreased.
Now, sometimes these impacts are unintended, but they're just as important.
I'll close with a story about European rabbits that were introduced into Australia in the middle of the 19th century.
Australia as a continent has mammals, but they're a more primitive form of mammals.
They're marsupials, and when the Europeans, especially the British, colonized Australia, they wanted to bring rabbits over because they had a fondness for rabbit meat and for rabbit hunting.
Now, only a few rabbits were brought at first couple of dozen.
They were brought in 1859, some of them escaped, and the extraordinary thing is by 1928 there were 500 million rabbits loose on the continent of Australia.
They caused massive land erosion and vegetative destruction that lasts to this day.
Now, to control the population, they introduced a myxoma virus that had been found in the European rabbits.
It had a devastating effect on the Australian rabbits. It killed 90% of them, but within 20 years after that, the population was back to 300 million.
And now these are sort of super rabbits that are able to withstand these kind of viral interactions.
It's had the effect of pushing the sort of Australian rabbits, the greater and lesser bilbies, to the point of extinction.
And we've seen similar patterns like this around the world.
In our own country, plants like purple loo strife and Fragmites have devastated fresh and saltwater marsh systems.
They were originally brought here as ornamental plants.
Zebra mussels, which got to the North America in the bilges of boats and are now devastating the Great Lakes.
And I don't think any of us can live in a house anywhere in North America without a house sparrow as a neighbor.
House sparrows are actually finches from Europe that immigrated to the United States along with Western settlers who came over at the same time.
So this is an example of how ecosystems change as a result of human social forces.
You know, in the next lecture, we're going to continue this look at Hardin's legacy.
But we're going to consider the human impact this time from the standpoint of the research and ecology that have brought us the modern science.
So until then, thank you.
Thank you.
