Welcome back.
From here through lecture 20, we're going to investigate specific forces and drivers
that cause ecosystems to change over time.
And we're going to start with energy.
And what we're going to do is that in the first of these sort of coupled lectures,
we'll talk about the system as it operates, and then we'll look at, in the second lecture,
the human impacts on those systems.
Now, all energy and ecosystems is ultimately derived from sunlight.
Energy flow and ecosystems is unidirectional.
The ecological users of energy are organized into what we call trophic pyramids.
The rules of energy transfer dictate the abundance of species and the population density of all organisms in an ecosystem.
The energy gets distributed in something we call complex food webs.
Now, to begin with, I want to introduce a stuffed squirrel here.
It's actually a study skin.
It's prepared for study, so it's stretched out.
This is scurus caroliensis, the gray squirrel.
It's very common throughout the eastern and midwestern areas of the country.
It's what we call a scatter hoarder, which means that throughout the summer,
it collects thousands of food items and caches them each year,
so it has food to eat during the winter and during the early spring.
Now, in order to do this, this animal has extraordinary spatial memory.
It literally remembers thousands of places that it stores food.
It's a critical species in the food web because it both consumes many forms of seeds and nuts,
but it's also eaten by many predators.
And in fact, it doesn't actually remember all the places it stores food,
and as such, it actually produces food resources for a variety of organisms
that sort of break into the squirrel's cache and gain access to those resources.
Now, energy flow in ecosystems is unidirectional,
and it's governed by models of thermodynamics.
What that means is that all the energy that we use ultimately traces back to the sun.
Now, energy arrives from the sun, and some of it is converted to chemical energy,
and that energy can be used by other living organisms.
All of the energy in ecosystems is ultimately degraded to heat and lost to the atmosphere.
Now, it's important to note, as organisms, we can conserve energy, but we can't reuse it.
So the notion of reuse and recycling is an important idea when it comes to the materials in ecosystems,
but energy flow is essentially unidirectional.
These relationships differ significantly between materials and energy.
Materials, of course, do cycle.
We will investigate in a future lecture the whole notion of material cycling.
Now, we need to begin by investigating this energy in more detail.
So I direct your attention to a figure around the movement of energy through ecosystems that I think will be helpful.
And in reviewing, remember, the sun is the ultimate source of all energy in living systems,
but only about one tenth of one percent of that is actually converted by photosynthetic organisms,
and we call that the gross primary productivity.
In other words, the amount of energy that's actually captured by photosynthetic organisms.
But of that, only about one percent of the energy captured is actually found in the tissues of plants and photosynthetic algae,
which is the stuff that consumers and other organisms in the system can actually eat.
So the rest of that energy is actually used for growth and repair and other activities within these photosynthetic organisms.
And so about one percent of that energy is actually transferred, and we call that the net primary productivity.
So as you see, and we'll look through this in more detail, energy from the sun captured by organisms that we call producers,
which are traditionally, we think of them as being plants.
And these are the organisms that harness the sun's energy for food production.
We call them the producer group and algae and plants and some photosynthetic bacteria.
Producers make their own food through the process of photosynthesis.
It's an extraordinary process where the particular energies of light excites particularly energy absorbent molecules
within the photosynthetic organisms metabolism, and those energies are actually captured in chemical bonds,
and that locks them into availability not only to the photosynthetic plants, but to other organisms as well.
Light energy is absorbed and carbon dioxide and water are converted into carbohydrates or food and oxygen as a waste gas.
Now heterotrophs are consumers that depend directly on the photosynthetic output of plants as a source for energy.
The organisms that produce their own energy, we call them autotrophs, self-feeders, heterotrophs, other feeders,
means that those are organisms that are relying on plants to provide tissues that they can consume.
The consumer level within trophic systems begins with organisms that eat the producers, such as herbivores which eat plants directly.
All animals, including humans, require the photosynthetic activity of the producer group to provide the tissues that we can live on.
Humans cannot synthesize organic molecules from sunlight and carbon dioxide.
Most we get from sunlight is a sunburn.
Now we do actually transform some of the chemicals in our body in the presence of ultraviolet radiation,
especially active forms of vitamin D, but that's a different story.
So the organisms that feed directly on plants, we call them primary consumers, and they are at a trophic level just above the producers.
The secondary consumers are those carnivores that eat the herbivores.
And carnivores that eat the secondary consumers are called tertiary consumers.
And then within the system there are also groups of organisms that we call decomposers that help to recycle the materials between each trophic level
and that recycling of the materials that breaking it down into simpler forms actually allows energy to move between trophic levels more efficiently.
These decomposers consume non-living organic material that we call detritus.
And this trophic level plays a key role in recycling materials back into the biotic realm.
Key example of these are fungi and prokaryotes.
These are the main categories of decomposers.
And if you're walking in a traditional woodland area, it's not unusual to see mushrooms growing on wood that has landed on the forest floor
or trees that have fallen over.
And what you're seeing actually is a process by which these materials are released back into the system.
These organic materials are typically broken down by special enzymes that these decomposer organisms have.
And what they do is actually eat the breakdown products.
So they're not actually eating the wood directly, they're breaking the products down and eating the products that are produced from that.
Now, we can envision this whole relationship as a trophic pyramid.
And in this kind of system, the bottom of the pyramid is composed of producers.
And these organisms by definition are going to have the most amount of biomass.
In fact, the total weight of all living organisms in the system is what we call the biomass.
And energy moves from one trophic level to another through an ecosystem.
From primary producer to primary consumer to secondary consumer to the last group of consumers or apex of the pyramid.
The least amount of energy or biomass is found at the apex.
And that's because of a fundamental aspect of the thermodynamics of ecosystems.
You see, energy is lost between each level of the pyramid.
And think about this for a moment.
Now organisms that are consuming energy are not doing this to provide food for other organisms in an ecosystem.
They're acquiring and metabolizing chemicals that provide energy so that they can complete their own life cycles.
And part of that is for growth and part of that's for repair and movement and reproduction.
And only a portion of the energy consumed actually gets integrated into the tissues and locked up as chemicals that can be broken down by other organisms.
So inevitably, the trophic efficiency, the transfer of energy from one level of the ecosystem to the next is actually quite low.
Because most of that energy is actually used to run the metabolism of organisms.
So the production transfer from one trophic level to the next is only about 10%.
And the loss of that energy within a food chain is reflected in the shape of the energy pyramid.
Which tends to be very wide at the base and narrow at the top.
As I tell my students, well, that's why in a very basic sense that when you go out into the ecosystems of New England,
there are many more blades of grass than there are going to be coyotes.
Because there are very, very different parts of this trophic pyramid.
And the amount of energy that's available to the grasses is much, much larger than the energy that's actually available to organisms that are sitting at the top of this food pyramid.
And this inefficiency of energy transfer has important implications, in fact, for human food choice and sustainability.
Now, if we take a look at this relationship between where humans choose to feed on the food in this trophic pyramid,
it's actually quite interesting. Because humans, because we're omnivorous, can have our calories come from a predominantly carnivorous diet or a predominantly vegetarian diet.
And depending on where we eat within the food chain, we end up using energy quite differently.
So, for instance, it takes about a thousand calories of cereal grain to produce a hundred calories of beef.
Now, those cereal grains could be consumed by humans directly, and they would provide ten hundred calorie meals, as opposed to one hundred calorie piece of beef.
Now, we will look at this in much more detail later on in the lecture series, because the story about the distribution of energy through ecosystems
and the balance in vegetarianism versus carnivorous diets are really quite interesting.
And in fact, it gets delightfully complicated, as you will, because as we grow different kinds of foods, the energy transfer can be actually quite different.
But in order for us to understand this in some detail, we need to think about the movement of energy as it works within the system,
and there we're really talking about a food web.
And here the trophic pyramid is the simplest way to examine energy flow in a food chain.
However, it's often much more intertwined and complex than it is linear.
And so, if we take a look at even a simplified food web, and by the way, these food webs are organized, and if you take a look at the diagram,
you'll see that these food webs are organized so that the arrows actually show the direction in which the calories are traveling.
It's a little bit backwards, counterintuitive, because you might think, oh, the arrow should be pointed in the direction of this animal eats that thing.
Well, instead, it's actually the arrows are positioned so that you see which way the energy is flowing.
So if you take a look at a traditional simplified terrestrial food web, what you see is that you have certain animals that are consuming plants directly,
and so the arrows move from the photosynthetic producers to the first level of consumers.
So you might see deer that are consuming shrubbery, and then you see that the calories from the deer flow to animals that are carnivorous predators.
And all of that's true, but what happens, as you can imagine in ecosystems, ecosystems is that animals have many, many diet choices.
And in fact, some animals can feed as carnivores and some feed as herbivores, and in fact, as we'll see in human-dominated ecosystems,
those organisms that can display the ability to feed at different trophic levels generally have the highest success in surviving around humans.
Each herbivore, for instance, often eats many different plants and is preyed on by many different predators who fall into different levels of consumption.
So in nature, actual food webs are really quite complex.
Now, early researchers in ecology, such as Eugene Odom, believe that more complexity meant more stability.
In other words, as ecosystems became more complex, there were more pieces to them, and as such, the additional pieces provided sort of a safety net,
if you will, of how these systems operate. And in fact, many of the early ecologists considered these additional complexities to be very, very important.
In fact, coming out of that were such models as the rivet model of the structure of ecological communities where we envisioned the structure of an airplane,
for instance, with many rivets that hold it together, and we could consider in an ecosystem that each species was a different rivet in the ecosystem.
And as you began to pull rivets out, the system became more unstable, and in fact, ultimately the plane could crash.
This was a metaphor that was built by Paul Ehrlich, in fact, to think about the structure populations.
But Robert May, another very powerful ecologist with respect to the ideas that he provided, a mathematical ecologist,
shocked the scientific community that studied food webs by developing some rather sophisticated simulations that suggested that complexity can actually lead to collapse and extinction,
because the additional complexity, in some respects, makes the system that much more susceptible to diversion.
Now, current research attempts to investigate the strength and the interactions within a food web.
We're trying to get to the bottom of this, because as we've mentioned before, one of the delightful aspects of ecology is that there's lots of controversy.
We're trying to look at a systemic science, and so lots of theories are being tested.
Now, for example, the sea star, Pisaster, has a strong effect on a variety of its prey species, mostly bivalves, mollusks, and barnacles.
When Robert Payne from the University of Washington did removal experiments of the sea star, the biodiversity plummeted as the top-down predation impacts were reduced.
Muscles ended up dominating the benthic landscape, and Payne considered the sea star a keystone species because of its strong effect on the ecosystem.
In this idea of keystone species is something we'll investigate in more detail. Humans, for instance, are keystone species in urban ecosystems.
Now, these impacts can be direct and indirect.
Sea stars directly impact muscles and barnacles, in this case negatively, by eating them.
But for barnacles, the impact is actually positive indirectly by changing the competition dynamics that barnacles have with muscles.
Sea stars eat muscles, which reduces the competition barnacles have for space on the ocean floor.
So in this case, the presence of the sea star reduces the competition, and so it allows for a greater degree of biodiversity.
And most importantly, it allows for a greater degree of evenness in the distribution of species.
We investigate this idea in more detail in other lectures, but the notion of diversity is not only important,
but it's important that there be relatively similar representation of different species within an ecosystem.
We call that idea evenness.
Now, another classic study that has looked at the distribution of species on feeding an ecosystem function
is that of the study of wolves and moose and tree growth on Isle Royale.
And we actually refer to the study a number of times because it's such an important contribution to our understanding of how ecosystems function.
Now, this was an investigation by Brian McLaren and his colleagues from the Michigan Technical University.
And these findings were published in Science back in 1994, but they still serve as a model ecosystem for us to compare other work to
and to consider how our theories will map onto the data that were recovered from this study.
It's really an extraordinary example of what I consider to be theory and practice.
So what they were really doing was studying the growth of the balsam fir, which is a key tree species in that ecosystem.
And what was revealed was that the intense relationship between the herbivores and trees exist,
and that the herbivores were actually responsible for regulating tree growth.
Let me step back and discuss this for just a moment.
If you're a young tree, you're a seedling and you're coming out of the ground, you've got a number of things that are going on.
First of all, you're trying to compete for access to sunlight.
So you need light gaps, you need the sunlight to penetrate to the floor of the forest,
which by the way is one of the reasons it's so critical that organisms of all kinds disperse,
because when you're growing up out of the floor, who's the individual that's actually blocking your sunlight?
It's your own parent.
And in animal systems, it's the same way.
If you're growing up next to your parent and you have a territory adjacent to your parent,
you're both competing for the same food resources.
So dispersal, something we'll discuss in other lectures in much more detail,
dispersal is actually a key factor for not only individual fitness, but population survival.
So you have these young trees that are fighting for light gaps,
but they're also trying to get resources out of the ground that they need micronutrients.
And so there is a bottom-up control for how fast they can grow,
because it's a function of resource acquisition.
But then at the same time, they're also struggling to avoid being eaten by predators,
which is a top-down control.
And it turns out at Isle Royale, the top-down control was the most important aspect.
And the species that was responsible for that top-down control were moose.
Moose love the young plants because they're succulent,
they haven't produced all of their secondary defensive compounds yet,
and they're easily digested.
So plant growth was regulated by population fluctuations in the predators and herbivores.
The plants increased their primary productivity only when they were released from consumption of their tissues by moose.
And it turns out that moose populations were limited by predation from wolves.
And let's take a look at these data. They're really quite fascinating.
And I know it's a bit of a complicated chart, but follow me on this,
because there's really a number of parts here.
First of all, at the top of the chart, you see the distribution of wolves over the period of the study.
And you can see that somewhere in the middle of the,
you see first that the number of wolves begins to drop,
and then there's a secondary climb in the population and then a fairly severe drop and then recovery and so forth.
If you notice, the population of moose, which is in the second graph from the top,
follows in a cycle with respect to the wolves.
So as the wolf population is declining, the predator pressure on the moose is relieved and the number of moose increase.
Then as the population of wolves increases, then you see that the population of moose decrease.
Here's where it gets very interesting though.
In the following two graphs, you see the balsam fur ring width in two different sample plots,
which is a measure of how fast they're growing.
Notice that as the population of moose increases,
the growth rates of the furs decline in both of the sample plots.
And as the population of moose decline, the trees recover.
So you see this extraordinary trophic cascade,
where the, ultimately, the growth of the furs are linked directly to the predator pressure of the wolves,
which are all interconnected.
So this is a clear example of what we call top-down control.
So ultimately, the wolves control the moose, which in turn control the growth of the furs.
Now recent studies in Yellowstone Park have shown the impact of top-down control on the plant communities along the rivers and streams.
The reintroduction of wolves forced the elk back onto the mountain slopes,
and this release of herbivory pressure on the willows along the rivers allowed them to rebound.
And we look at this in more detail in a future lecture.
Now another aspect with respect to the movement of energy through these systems
has been the emergence of ocean dead zones as a result of human disturbance.
A study by Robert Diaz at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
and Rutger Rosenberg from Göttenberg University,
investigated this phenomenon of oceanic dead zones.
And it turns out that there are nearly 400 such dead zones distributed around the world,
and you can see them from the map here, you can see their distribution.
Overall, this covers nearly 95,000 square miles.
And they develop because of eutrophication as a result of nutrient loading, usually from fertilizers.
And what happens is this rapid and explosive growth, that's a result essentially of human pollution,
results in hypoxic waters, in other words, waters starved of oxygen,
that end up having less than two parts per million of available oxygen.
Now normal freshwater is somewhere in the vicinity of 10 to 12 parts per million and even more in some areas.
You know, think about trout, which you find in bubbling cold brooks.
That's because cold water holds more oxygen, and the cold, riffling water is additionally oxygen-rich
because it's constantly exposing surface areas so that oxygen can diffuse.
Ocean systems are somewhat less rich in oxygen, typically between 6 and 9 parts per million.
And the largest dead zone, which is in the Caspian Sea, itself is 25,000 square miles.
And this has resulted from high levels of fertilizer runoff.
Now this process is conceptualized in more detail in the following diagram.
And you can see that the diagram shows the distribution of oxygen as a function of energy to mobile predators.
This is sort of a surrogate measure of ecosystem health.
So in the green zone, we have a normal amount of oxygen.
Energy flows as carbon from the benthic community to the mobile predators, the fish and free-swimming invertebrates.
In the orange zone, an influx of nutrients typically from runoff causes a short pulse in productivity, followed by a decline.
And that decline is the result of the oxygen consumption during this burst of development.
And sometimes these are seasonal events, and they can become more severe if there's human pollution.
And ultimately, these systems enter a red zone, which is anoxic, no oxygen.
And all available carbon is going to the anaerobic benthic microbes.
Now the good news is, and when you look at a chart like this, it's pretty frightening,
but the good news is ecosystems are resilient.
And in fact, this whole process is reversible.
Now the Black Sea, which has one of the world's largest dead zones, about 15,000 square miles,
between 1973 and 1990, this dead zone became gigantic,
functionally because of the fertilizer runoff that was occurring.
And that was a result of fertilizer subsidies that the Soviet Union was providing.
And during the breakup of the Soviet Union, those subsidies ended,
and nutrient loading dropped to only about a quarter of the previous levels during those subsidies.
So these systems began to recover, and overall the anoxic conditions can be reversed.
So it's one of the sort of exciting pieces of good news.
Now in closing, I just want to think a little bit more as we transition into our next lecture
about some of these human aspects of human dominated ecosystems.
When we think of urban areas, the movement of energy becomes more complicated
for organisms that live there, and in many instances the fitness of those organisms
is linked to their ability to live or survive, if you will, at various levels on the food chain.
Urban food webs are dynamic because humans contribute to those food webs.
So the successful organisms in urban areas are those that can change their diets
as the fluctuating and dynamic availability of human food resources reveals itself.
Now in our next lecture, we're going to look more closely at the role of human energy use on global ecosystems.
Until then, thank you very much.
