Hello and welcome back. In the last lecture we were investigating thermodynamics and its
implication for the structure of ecosystems. In this lecture we'll focus on the ecological
reality of thermodynamics and its implication for human survival. Humans are the most important
external forces in ecosystems. We have a voracious demand for energy and our patterns of energy
consumption have long lasting impacts on both local and global ecosystems. Our consumptive
patterns produce enormous short and long term challenges to ecological sustainability. We're
going to investigate energy as the facilitator and limiter of life on earth and we'll peek
into alternative ways of extracting stored energy. We'll focus on advanced wood combustion. Now
remember in our last lecture when we looked at the squirrel and considered the hoarding behavior
that the squirrel goes through and I said that some of the nuts that this squirrel buries,
he's not going to find it again. In fact it's other animals that do and in a sense that mass
crop both that's there in the ecosystem and hidden by squirrels is an energy fuel for wintering
birds and mammals. They are extracting energy from the system and so in a sense we like other
organisms will extract energy from the system that's stored. Now human demand for energy is
increasing and its acquisition has significant consequences. Consumption of energy and the
challenges of delivery are linked to human population growth and redistribution over the
past 500 years. Populations have grown and moved to the new world where technology and
consumption has skyrocketed. Current world consumption of fossil fuels is absolutely
staggering. Somewhere in the vicinity of 85 million barrels of oil are consumed worldwide
each day. Daily in the United States we consume about 19 million barrels. Each year 6 billion
tons of coal are used worldwide. The U.S. consumes about a billion plus tons and our
use of coal is increasing. If we take a look at data from the Department of Energy we can
see our relationship to energy consumption and you can see in the red line that energy
consumption is continuing to grow from an amount in the 1950s of under 40 quadrillion
BTUs of energy to the current levels which exceed over 100 and you also note that for
quite a significant portion of our time in our expanded technology our production of energy
internally from coal and oil and other sources actually matched our consumption. But beginning
in the late 1960s and early 1970s our ability to maintain our own needs has fallen and our
production levels have tapered off but our consumption has continued to grow and so therefore
our only choice is to import more of the energy that we need. Significant change with respect
to the pre and post World War II era. Now another interesting fact is to think about
the energy consumption per person and here we also look at additional Department of Energy
data that go back to 1950. In the 1950 just after the Second World War humans in the United
States were consuming about a little over 200 million BTUs of energy each year. That grew
steadily as technology increased and the consumption of typical Americans also increased in response
to expanding wealth and by the beginning of the peak we peaked in about 1978-79 at about
360 million BTUs but a series of energy crises and a push within industry to improve efficiency
we saw a bit of a drop in the following decade followed by a leveling off and our current
consumption is somewhere in the vicinity of about 330-340 million BTUs of energy per person
per year which is a staggering amount absolutely staggering amount to be able to meet. This
increased energy consumption from fossil fuel burdens the earth's ecosystem. It increases
the amount of greenhouse gas we produce. It increases the habitat loss and fragmentation
that ecosystems have to bear and some of this comes from extraordinary activities like
mountain top removal which is a mining technique that we're using in the United States to extract
coal and also oil extraction itself as the ecosystems that we need to move into to get
that oil are more fragile and have more disturbance as a result of the extraction.
Now habitat destruction from loss and redistribution of fresh water supplies is also absolutely
extraordinary because linked to this demand for energy is a voracious demand for water. We'll
investigate water in real detail later in the course but it's important to consider it here
in relationship to energy consumption because often the two are quite tightly linked. For example
the Three Gorges Dam in China. To produce this dam there was a displacement of somewhere in the
order of 1.2 million people but when fully functional the dam will produce somewhere in the vicinity
of 18,000 megawatts of electricity at peak capacity. However the reservoir behind it stretches back
40 miles and holds somewhere in the vicinity of five trillion gallons of water. Now the water
level in the gorges will rise somewhere about a hundred meters over time and cover somewhere in
the vicinity of about 200 square miles. Its impact has spawned landslides and increased risk of
earthquakes. Now this is an example of a balance the trade-offs that we talk about in ecological
systems. The dam will however offset somewhere in the vicinity of 50 million tons of raw coal
that China would otherwise use to produce the electricity. That will have an impact of preventing
a certain amount of acid rain from being produced and it should improve health standards by reducing
the amount of air pollution. It will also become the world's largest single producer of renewable
energy but the overall costs of this system are complex because at the same time we're seeing human
displacement and we're seeing a variety of other implications not the least of which are changes
in the landscape. So patterns of energy consumption by humans have long lasting impacts. Of prime
concern to us is the increase in greenhouse gases due to our consumption of fossil fuels.
Historic dependence on fossil fuels have resulted in a significant burden to the environment and if
we take a look at another figure from this department of energy report you can see that the various forms
of energy use have grown dramatically over the over the past century. We've had an increase that a
decrease and now an increase reliance on coal. We've seen an increase in some renewable sources
of energy such as hydroelectric power but a tremendous reliance on natural gas and a tremendous
reliance on oil and so these combined reliances have significant impacts. In fact really our
dependence on fossil fuel is ecologically crippling. The average surface temperatures around the globe
have increased somewhere in the vicinity of 0.6 degrees centigrade during the last 100 years.
The 1990s were the warmest decade on record and 1998 was the warmest year in the northern hemisphere
from data that we have that goes back over a thousand years. Over the last 50 years the nighttime
minimum temperatures have increased by about 0.2 degrees centigrade per decade and there has been
a 10% reduction in snow cover ice since the late 1960s and the less fresh snowfall on our ice caps
the more heat absorption occurs in these areas because the snow is actually darker due to dust
particles and particulates. There's been a reduction of about two weeks in the annual duration of
lake and river ice over the 20th century and mountain glaciers have retreated significantly
during the 20th century and this has a significant impact on what we call the albedo effect and I
should take a moment to explain that. It will come up again but I think it's an important
consideration. Albedo is essentially a measure of the reflectance of a surface with respect to
sunlight. So in fact it's the reason that there's a movement in urban areas to paint
roofs white because they will reflect more heat and the building will heat up less so
and snow and ice have that capacity as well but as snow begins to melt and reveals the darker land
underneath then even more heat is trapped and it acts as a positive reinforcement and literally
increases the rate at which the earth is heating. In fact it's the idea why you have road surfaces
in temperate areas that are very dark in color mixed into the macadam or pigments that make it a
very dark color almost the black and so as you begin once in a snowstorm once you've plowed the roads
and you have little bits of pavement showing that heats up and melts the snow around it which
heats up more and melts more snow and you get this runaway effect and so it helps roads clear
faster which is an advantage but when we're talking about global warming reducing the albedo
effect on surfaces is a significant cost and it's one of the reasons that the loss of glaciers
is so important. Now there are in addition significant pollution impacts from petroleum
from petroleum and they can be devastating to marine and terrestrial ecosystems.
The impacts of oil spills last for decades even well-funded recovery plans like those in Prince
William Sound leave lasting negative legacies. Now if you remember the tanker the Exxon Valdez
struck ground in Alaska in March of 1989 spilled about 11 million gallons of oil that eventually
covered somewhere in the vicinity of about 12,000 square miles of ocean. This caused the near total
collapse of the local sea populations of clams and herring and seals which also caused two fishing
corporations to go bankrupt. A recent study headed by Joan Braddock from the Institute of
Arctic Biology found that of the oil spills this is very interesting 14% was recovered
13% is still in the sediments and beaches about 1% remains in the water about 20% evaporated
but 50% underwent biodegradation which means microorganisms literally consumed the oil as
a food resource and released it in less toxic forms. I mean this is another example of the
extraordinary resiliency that ecosystems have even under the most extraordinary conditions.
Remember in a previous lecture we talked about we talked about recovery of anoxic dead zones
in ocean ecosystems this is another example. Now reliance on petroleum has increased global
political tensions over the past hundred years there have been significant resources expended
and loss of life due to protection of our nation's access to oil resources.
This cycle intensifies as the resource becomes more scarce. Now according to Royal Dutch Shell's
governing committee chairman Jaron van der Meer the relationships between governments will be the
critical factor in the two-part challenge of delivering fossil fuel reserves to hungry nations
that and the confrontation of climate change he considers those to be of equal challenge
and the geopolitics of oil are in the thick of the ecology of the world's future.
Now extraction technologies and pipes must enter and cross many national borders
and as a result small nations can exert tremendous influence on the world by hindering or
disrupting petroleum deliveries and this system is likely or this conflict is likely to increase
as we move into even less stable political environments and more fragile ecosystems
to extract remaining fossil reserves. Now let's think a little bit about oil and this ecological
legacy of pollutants and remember we talked about Prince William Sound it's just one example
of what we call the legacy of pollution. Now pollutants released into the
released into the atmosphere can travel around the world. This transport efficiency
of pollutants is calculated as transit time so pollutants released into Russia as air pollutants
can be delivered to the United States in only three to five days and I know that sounds extraordinary
because Russia is sort of halfway around the globe but let's take a look at how this actually
takes place and here you see an image of the globe and superimposed on that image are the
dominating air currents and remember the air currents are the result of a variety of large
scale interactions that happen in the globe the heating and cooling of the globe as a result of
the impact of solar energy the Coriolis effect generated by the spin of the globe and so forth
but you can see by looking at these dominating air currents that there is almost immediate delivery
from these centralized industrial areas to other parts of the globe and it doesn't take long
for pollutants to move from one area to the next. Now pollutants from legacy cities around the Great
Lakes that we pejoratively call the Rust Belt contribute to acid rain around various parts
of the United States including the Appalachian Mountains and we call them legacy cities as
they are historically old and they shape the industrial ecosystem of the United States.
Now if we consider this legacy from the standpoint of fates and movements of chemicals in the
environment we get an entirely different but enriched picture. There are essentially three
sources for air pollution all of which are related to energy consumption. One source of air pollution
is what we call primary pollutants and these are released directly from the source and are harmful
in that form and typically they're related to combustion technologies things like carbon monoxide
which is poisonous at the time that it's released. There are other kinds of products to release that
we call secondary pollutants and those become dangerous when they are modified by the environment
and made hazardous after they have been released and those are such chemicals as the
photochemical oxidants and atmospheric acids and photochemical oxidants include ozone and hydrogen
peroxide and as they engage the atmosphere they and additional things like atmospheric acids
sulfuric acid they become toxic as they fall back to earth.
Now additional sources of pollutants are things like fugitive emissions
and these are excuse me these are particles and chemicals that don't go through a smokestack.
For example dust from soil erosion and strip mining and rock crushing those particulates provide
an additional source of pollutants. In the U.S. it's not insignificant this results in 100
million metric tons per year. Now worldwide emissions of carbon-based pollutants went from
about 1800 million tons in 1950 to over 7000 million tons at the turn of the century.
These data cause particular concern in light of recent research that even very small particles
can have profound health effects and these particulates kill from lung disease and mitochondrial
diseases that are related to these very small particle sizes. Now AE now at the University
of California at Los Angeles recently published in science that very small particles can end up
impacting our cellular metabolic machinery. Worldwide these fine and ultra fine particles kill
somewhere around 500,000 people per year this is an extraordinary figure. Now our government
regulates particles for three sizes coarse fine and ultra fine. Ultra fine particles are less than
0.01 micrometers in diameter and are released as a product of combustion typically diesel fuel.
So this sort of micro particles is a whole new ecological dimension of challenges that we need
to investigate. Now what about alternatives? It's clear that our economy is based on our
ability to provide energy for necessary services and there is an increasing awareness
and emerging consumer demand for clean sustainable energy options around the world.
Solar, geothermal wind, tidal, hydroelectric and even biomass sources are becoming part of the
conversation and not just in laboratories but also among concerned members of the general public.
Now so far the impact has been relatively small and if we take a look at additional data from the
Department of Energy you can see that the demand and use for fossil fuels has grown
voraciously since the 1950s with a slight drop in response to the concern over
the availability of oil that happened in the 1970s but it's still continuing to grow.
If we look at renewable sources and also nuclear electric power we see that there is a growing
trend but it's still a relatively small proportion. So the question is where are these
alternative sources going to come from? Now the ideas are driven both by forward thinking about
sustainability but also this response to the fear that fossil fuel availability will decline.
Now industry has responded to the stress by becoming more efficient.
If we take a look at an additional figure from this report we can see that the energy consumption
per real dollar of gross domestic product has actually reduced over time. The companies that
are responsible or the industries that are responsible for productivity have recognized
the increased cost and are doing their best to try and save upfront production costs and that
has resulted in becoming more efficient and so it's interesting to see that if industry can do
this at the consumer front we ought to be able to do so as well and one very interesting alternative
is something called advanced wood combustion and this is a source of a renewable or biomass fuel
and there was a time in the history of the United States when wood provided more energy than
fossil fuels. However we tend to consider wood and old and dirty technology but it turns out
not so according to a team led by Daniel Richter at Duke University and he argues in the journal
Science that they propose a global reconsideration of this emergent technology that utilizes wood
in a renewable fashion to generate both heat and electricity. Building on data from Europe
especially in Scandinavia they report that these systems are generally small scale and decentralized.
Some run as high at 90% efficiency and some countries such as Austria have embraced these
power plants and built over a thousand a hundred of which are actually producing both electricity
and heat. So an emergent question is can these systems be adopted for use in the United States
in a sustainable fashion? Now Richter admits that this is an open question with hurdles that are
more social than technical. Now according to the Department of Energy we consume about 100
quads of energy each year and a quad is 100 times 10 to the 15th BTUs or a million times
a billion BTUs. Now wood currently provides somewhere in the vicinity of two quads but that
could easily according to these researchers be expanded to five quads. Now by perspective to
put this into perspective hydroelectric production is somewhere in the vicinity of three quads and
our entire strategic petroleum reserve is about four quads so the amount of energy that could be
produced by these advanced wood combustion technologies is significant. Now with Americans
generating over 350 million tons of wood per year that get used primarily for energy generation
advanced wood combustion can provide an additional sustainable harvest of wood products.
The trick here is the balance within each ecosystem in which the extraction activities are
undertaken. The controversial piece is the release of carbon when the trees are burned
which does inevitably add to greenhouse gas emissions. However and here's the interesting
ecological part the team argues that these carbon sources are already in the ecosystem
and that they are not coming from deeply sequestered sources such as oil or coal
and that the combusted carbon will be resequested by the growing forest that will supply the next
round of these advanced wood combustion technologies. The economic equation is more favorable in fact
in the United States than it is in Europe and they favor essentially three key steps in making
this work. One is to make advanced wood combustion the preferred choice for new construction in
areas that are favorable in other words if if people are applying for permits for new homes
and buildings and we're already using the kind of clustered technology and building activities
smart growth demands something we'll look at at the end of this course then using these advanced
wood combustion technologies would make sense and if they're required at the time of construction
then you don't have the cost of conversion which is a significant calculation that happens when
you're asking people to change energy forms and in fact the cost of AWC as it's caused that it's
called is buried into the into the general cost of developing the system to begin with.
Now the second part of the strategy is to be more efficient with waste wood. We generated
enormous amounts of waste wood in this country each year and if there was a system in which it
could be utilized more efficiently then there would be the impetus to save that wood and use it for
these AWC technologies and the final sort of strategic piece here is to develop more district
level energy systems where heat is from a central source which tends to be something that
universities and hospitals and other types of organizations had done historically but as we
went to these big mega energy systems in the 1950s, 60s and 70s we moved away from that direction.
However certain cities like like Akron and Ohio and St. Paul in Minnesota and some universities
such as Colgate University and the University of Idaho have adopted these AWC strategies.
Now when we think about the challenge of energy consumption I can't help but be reminded
in my own native Massachusetts to think about the decline of the whaling industry.
You know at one time whale oil was prized for the enormous amount of heat energy available
within the oil. It was also an extraordinary pre petroleum product with respect to its lubrication
capacity and so forth and the acquisition of whales and the resources that they provided
made Massachusetts and some of the communities that were whaling was intensive like New Bedford
and Nantucket some of the wealthiest communities in America because of this availability of the
resource but it didn't take us that long really only about a hundred years or so to actually
drive that resource nearly into extinction and we tend to think of living organisms as being
renewable but we actually managed to fish whales almost to extinction and as such the resource
became prohibitively expensive and the emergence of new technologies which was the discovery of
oil in Oklahoma and Texas and Pennsylvania suddenly in a very short amount of time made whale
oil essentially obsolete and we saw the demise of that industry in Massachusetts which was not
really prepared in many of those cities to move to the next phase of industrial development.
And one final piece I would bring forward in our conversation is that we've actually learned quite
a bit about the role of microorganisms in maintaining healthy ecosystems and the development
of oil eating bacteria which allow us to use bacterial infusions into areas where oil spills
have taken place to help clean up the system. We learned a bit about that with respect to
Prince William Sound but here's the interesting piece. It also turns out that you can use the
same kinds of oil eating bacteria inject them into relatively low quality ecosystems that
are storing oil like in shale and oil tar sands excuse me and these oil tar sands which are
very hard to extract the oil from it turns out that if you inject these oil eating bacteria
they can transform the oil into forms that can be extracted with less ecological damage.
Now when we next gather we're going to look at the material side of the equation when we consider
the recycling of nutrients in our ecosystem so until then farewell.
