Hello and welcome back. I hope I didn't frighten anyone off in our conversation about trash
and e-waste in the last lecture. I think it's actually quite hopeful some of the technologies
that are emerging. And in the last lecture, we focused quite a bit on this interface between
trash and its impact on the aquifer, on the flowing water that runs underground. Water
like all other molecules and ecosystems is recycled and used over and over. Water is such
an essential molecule to life, its role in the ecology of living systems is completely
unparalleled. Even something as far out as astrobiology, the search for life and other
planetary systems really can be reduced to a search for water. If astrobiologists through
their technology can find any evidence of water, water vapor in other planets or moons,
that's really a pretty strong indicator that life is possible. Water is a limiting factor
in ecosystems and it is the common conduit that connects various trophic levels in the
biosphere. Water has a dramatic effect on climate. Its physical chemistry makes water
a very potent storage system for heat. Something we'll be exploring later. We'll investigate
the water cycle and the role that it plays in pollution abatement, disease and long term
sustainability. I want to begin by talking about a particular species of animal that
is adapted to deal with water stress and that example is the sand plover which is found
in Africa. They nest on the substrate, they're not tree nesting birds, they nest on the ground
and traditionally they're nesting during the driest season of the year which has advantages
for them with respect to avoiding predation and that type of thing but the young chicks
are hatching out into an environment of pretty high water stress and so although the females
do the bulk of the incubation of the eggs, the males have adapted a special set of feathers,
special set of breast feathers that allow them to collect water and what they do is they'll
fly sometimes 3 to 5 miles away to the remaining water reserves that exist in the ecosystems
that they're nesting, they soak their breast and belly feathers in the water and they fly
back and when they return the young chicks literally bury their heads into the breast
and belly of the male's feathers and from that they can take the water out. It's really
quite an extraordinary thing to see and it's quite an adaptation because feathers for the
most part have evolved to repel water, their physical structure literally repels water,
it's essentially an organic raincoat for birds to wear but in this instance these feathers
actually absorb the water because without this connection, despite the fact that the
birds have habitat and relatively predator free, they wouldn't be able to complete their
life cycle if they couldn't get critical water resources to the young. Now water like all
material cycles throughout the ecosystem and water is often the key limiting factor to
life within any ecosystem. As you know about 70% of the earth is actually covered with
water, the oceans and seas which contain the saltier saline water comprise about 97% of
all the available water on earth. The other 3% is fresh water but over 2% of that about
2.1% is trapped in ice caps and glaciers although that figure is going down as glaciers are
melting. About 0.1% is found in freshwater lakes and a really small about 0.0002% is
actually found in rivers and streams. And an additional amount although small is very
critical about 0.001% is actually in the atmosphere at any one time. Typically water stays about
9 days in this atmospheric form and is the process that creates all the fresh water resources
on the planet. So stop and think about this for a minute. We have 97% of our water that
is salty and essentially not accessible to terrestrial organisms from a metabolic standpoint.
Most of the rest of the fresh water is trapped in ice and glaciers. And so we have this finite
but renewable fresh water resource and the conduit between the large standing supply
of water which is in the ocean and fresh water reserves is that process by which water goes
through the atmosphere. Only small amounts in the atmosphere at any one time but that
amount is critical. And I'm sort of harping on this because we're going to talk about
the role and movement of water vapor in large ocean air currents both in this lecture and
in future lectures. So the potential for human use to outstrip fresh water supply we're going
to look at that in detail in the next lecture because it actually may represent the single
most important environmental crisis we have. We think about the earthen crisis. Fresh water
availability is probably right at the top of the list. Now the available fresh water
that we can access cycles through the atmosphere and is really vital to all living things.
Plants and animals in terrestrial environments have adapted to life based upon the amount
of water that they can access. So we talked about the sand plovers but certain plants
like cacti living in the desert have large vacuoles in their cells for water storage
and they carry out photosynthesis at night to reduce the amount of water that they lose.
All plants have a dynamic water balance. During the day special pores on the underside of their
leaves open to exchange gases. Oxygen flows out, carbon dioxide flows in. However the
gradient for water is steeper than the gradients for the other gases. Inside the leaf is essentially
100% humidity and when those pores are open collectively called stomata, there's extreme
water loss as the stomata remain open. At night under more humid conditions plants close
their stomata and are regaining some of the lost water through uptake. Now the amount of
available water also influences the producers and the amount of available food. If there
is a drought and less plant growth then all of the consumers and trophic levels above
will experience a shortage in food and available energy. Remember when we talked about trophic
dynamics we said that there are controls from the top down and there are controls from
the bottom up. Remember the top down controls are things like predators but the bottom up
control is how much producer metabolism gets turned into biomass so that primary consumers
can eat them then secondary consumers and so forth. So under periods of drought a smaller
portion of producer biomass is generated which ends up limiting the whole system. Now one
way for us to consider how water interacts with ecosystems is to concentrate on our understanding
of the water cycle. It's really a way that we can understand how water moves through
an ecosystem. Also called the hydrologic cycle the critical steps are evaporation condensation
and precipitation and that couples with other transport both at the surface of the earth
and below. Just as we considered how other materials in the ecosystem water can be considered
to reside in different compartments only some of which are available to humans and other
organisms for use in metabolism. So as the earth warms water is heated and evaporates
turning into water vapor in the air. Most of the evaporation is from the surface of the
oceans however water also evaporates through both evaporation and transpiration through
plants. So oceanic evaporation is the first step in creating fresh water for use by terrestrial
and aquatic organisms. Water can also evaporate as we said through the process of transpiration
we also called plant sweating. This is a critical factor in plant metabolism and literally and
water in this instance literally serves as the plants bloodstream moving materials around
the plant. So later on when we're going to be considering the role that urbanization
plays on landscapes one of the things that happens is the amount of vegetation is reduced
and so that evapotranspiration that combined process is profoundly altered when we take
plants away from an ecosystem. We're focusing on the physicality of the water right now
so as the water vapor rises up into the atmosphere it cools and finally condenses to form clouds
which are tiny frozen crystals of water and dust. These clouds formed by water vapor and
dust particles move throughout our atmosphere and eventually gravity and temperature variation
compels the water to fall down as precipitation and this precipitation can come down as rain,
snow, sleet or even hail. Now if the rain lands on a plant leaf well it's a pretty short
journey as it will be quickly evaporated back into the atmosphere when the sun comes out.
However if the precipitation falls onto the earth it'll often return to the liquid form
and flow to rivers, lakes, oceans and streams where it is again warm by the sun and the cycle
begins again. While the precipitation is on the earth the water can remain on the surface of
the land and move a sheet flow where it will eventually move into streams and rivers or
it can percolate into the soil and become part of this great reservoir we call groundwater.
Now the surface and the groundwater interact in many ways and they're actually part of
the same system but we divide our understanding of surface and groundwater from a functional
standpoint because to us surface waters are relatively easy to access, groundwater is a
little bit more complicated and in some instances impossible for us to access. So for example as
groundwater is pumped out of wells nearby streams and rivers will actually fall in level as the
water table adjusts to its reduced volume of water. Now here's something you probably haven't
thought of and there are exceptions but in general when you're traveling about and you see streams
and especially when you see lakes you can imagine that the lake is actually the water table. It's
actually the level of water in your area and as you move away from the lake the landform tends
to increase in height and you could imagine actually that in a very rough way the level of
water actually stays the same within the ground level. Now for different geological reasons it
might sink or it might rise and if you're in a community that has seawater around it that's a
different story as well but we can really think of lakes as openings in the water table and that's
why there's such an intimate connection between groundwater and surface water. Now this relationship
is particularly cute in coastal communities where the freshwater literally floats on top of the
seawater. There's a slight difference in density and freshwater floats on top. Now as the freshwater
is pumped out of the ground localized depressions in the aquifer will encourage saltwater to rise up
and infiltrate the freshwater lens. We call this saltwater intrusion and once that happens it's
very very hard to reestablish your freshwater supply and this is particularly cute because such a
high percentage of the world's population now live on coastal margins and we're consuming more and
more water from the coastline so not only are the water tables falling making it more of a challenge
to pull water from the ground but as the water tables fall the freshwater lens becomes susceptible
to saltwater intrusion and again once that occurs your freshwater supplies are probably permanently
compromised. Now we consider these systems of water to be lotic because the bodies of water in
constant motion flowing downhill towards the ocean and this idea of a lotic and moving water system
leads us to a conversation about the ecology of the distribution of water in ecosystems and for
that we need to introduce the idea of a watershed. Now although water is highly mobile it's useful
to consider the natural geologic factors that tend to constrain its movement. Now when water falls
to the earth as precipitation it strikes the ground and flows in response to gravity towards a
stream and then a river maybe to a lake and eventually out to the ocean always flowing down
downhill. For a given stream or river all of the land in which its water comes from is called the
watershed so we can think of a watershed as sort of like a big bowl surrounded by mountains going
down into into planes and into lower areas and eventually into into streams then into rivers
and out to the ocean. So a watershed with a river at its basin all the water all the land that
collected the water that is in that river or lake is part of the watershed. So in the community that
I live in in the Charles River air the Charles River watershed in Boston the Charles River is
approximately 80 miles in length. It comprises a watershed of about 300 square miles. So theoretically
and actually that you can you could trace all the water in the Charles River to somewhere in that
watershed. It fell to earth as precipitation it moved either a sheet flow or penetrated and became
part of the groundwater that moved in to the Charles River. We can also assume that pollution
found in the river must have come from that area as the water in the river was delivered from that
land area. So watersheds are a natural ecological boundary for planning and management. This has
made even more prescient when we consider that an average of 4200 billion gallons per day of fresh
water falls on the watersheds of the contiguous United States. Now this is an important ecological
consideration and when we have talked about this model for understanding ecosystem services the
so-called ISSE model we've talked about bringing together the the drivers of biogeophysical systems
and the drivers of human social systems and when we talk about watersheds we are at that either
confrontational or collegial space and here's what I mean. Think about the boundary of a watershed it
makes a wonderful ecological sense. So the watershed is the land area that captures all of the water
that we find in the river. So if we want to manage the Charles River water quality we should be
managing from an ecological standpoint all of that watershed but that watershed consists of dozens
of towns and even more complicated when we think of the political boundaries that are overlaid on
ecological boundaries they often are pretty ill fit. So for example the Charles River which divides
the cities of Cambridge and Boston the actual boundary between the city is right in the middle
of the river. Now that makes perfect sense if you're worrying about taxation or where children
should go to school because any house is going to be built either on one side of the river or
the other so it's pretty clear who you should be paying your taxes to and where your children should
go to school and if you have a fire at your house what fire department do you call. But from an
ecological standpoint think of what a challenge that is because if your city boundaries are right
in the middle of the river then where is the benefit for one city to manage their pollution
which is very costly if the other city is not going to do so. It returns us to the tragedy,
the commons challenge that we have in ecological restoration and management. So in order for
these kinds of political and ecological incongruences to be solved we actually need a sort of
additional contribution to the idea and so we actually have the emergence of things like
watersheds associations and watershed management districts to try and get around this problem
between an ecological and a political boundary. Now watersheds are particularly useful concept as
many ecological outcomes of water movement are associated with watershed dynamics. Now later
we're going to see how watershed models help ecological resource managers especially when we
talk about urban watersheds. Now watershed dynamics are impacted by local topography,
weather conditions and parent soils. For example mountain ranges cause upwellings of air that
squeeze out the rain on the upwind side of the mountains and create a rain shadow on the downwind
side. So those end up being two separate watersheds right you have a set of mountains one side of
the mountain the water flows towards one set of rivers and the other side of the mountain it flows
towards another one side if you if this mountain range is intercepting a prevailing wind direction
one side is going to be a very wet watershed the other side is going to be a very dry watershed.
In addition salt and rock characteristics will determine the rate at which rain water infiltrates
the ground and percolates through the layers beneath. As humans alter the soils through
development compaction and agriculture surface and groundwater relations change typically in ways
that reduce the amount of fresh water available to watersheds. This is critical because as land
becomes compacted as it becomes altered generally water flows faster which means less of it gets
into the groundwater which means less of it's available for us as humans. One impact of this
is something called desertification it's a huge global problem that we're going to focus on in the
next lecture. One of the important aspects of water is its chemistry and it's very interesting
and it enables us to understand some of the ways in which water does so much for us with respect
to ecosystem services. Now most all of you know that the basic structure of water is a central
oxygen atom bonded with two hydrogen molecules but due to the polar nature of the bond because the
electrons involved in the bond are not shared equally between the oxygen and the hydrogen
it creates a charged environment and so due to the positive charge of the hydrogen molecule
and the negative charge of the oxygen the water molecule forms a particular shape
and this molecule is also considered polar and it gives it properties that are essential to life.
First of all water molecules stick together or bond through the hydrogen bonds
which also contribute to its ability to have high surface tension adhesion and cohesion.
Water also has a strong capillary action which means it will climb up the sides of surfaces
which enables water for one thing to move up plant xylem and flow. It's one of the characteristics,
chemical characteristics of plants that allow movement of water to be possible.
Water also has a very high specific heat which helps it moderate the earth's climate
which is a fancy way of saying that you can put a lot of heat relatively speaking into a molecule
of water before it changes its temperature which means as it cools down it releases significant
amounts of heat. Water is also a universal solvent. The erosions of valleys and soil transport
are critical factors associated with its solvency. It's also typically slightly acidic
and therefore water solubilizes many chemicals including salts and metals.
Now water is also less dense when frozen and this has some very interesting implications.
Among other things lakes will freeze from the top down despite the fact that the cold water is more
dense than warm water and holds more oxygen so these appear to be disparate statements so let's
take a moment and make sure we understand this. Typically as molecules are heated up their motion
increases and the space between them increases and water is the same way so as you heat water it
becomes less and less and less dense. As you cool water down it becomes more and more and more dense
and in fact holds more oxygen while that is happening which is why high metabolic demand
organisms aquatic organisms like trout or tend to be found only in fast moving streams
that are cold and have lots of oxygen but something very interesting happens to water
as it gets colder it gets denser and denser and you know this to be true I don't need to explain
this to you on a summer day when you walk into a lake to go swimming the surface waters are warmer
and then your feet are pretty cold in a in a big lake because the lower waters stay very dense and
cold but something very interesting happens as the hydrogen bonds begin to slow down and become
permanent at the moment water forms ice they take up a little bit more space and ice now has
less density than cold water and so as a result we have on our surfaces of lakes for instance
we have the ice freezing at the top and it usually leaves a layer of air between the ice and the
water which serves an insulation without that if if water behaved like some of the other
chemicals and and became more dense when frozen ponds would freeze from the bottom up
and that would have a profound effect in temperate climates in the distribution of life
Sunlight penetrates water and allows for photosynthesis and aquatic plants not all liquids
allow sunlight to penetrate another critical piece of water's chemistry now one of the most
important things that water does is to modulate the climate areas near water are more moderate
so communities that are placed near water don't get as hot in the summer nor cold in the winter
remember water's chemical structure and high specific heat capacity moderate the earth's
climate especially those areas or cities near a large body of water that will experience these
kind of effects now approximately 40 of the world's population lives within 50 miles of the coast
areas near oceans and large lakes experience temperature differences differently than areas
that are not near lakes and oceans for example on Cape Cod a coastal community during the fall
temperatures remain warmer and milder for longer than inland communities and the leaves change
color later than interior massachusetts this is because the surrounding ocean water is warm
and helps warm the air however during the spring on Cape Cod the opposite occurs the ocean waters
are still very cold and take a considerable amount of time and heat to warm them up so the air
temperature on Cape Cod during the spring time remains cooler and it takes longer for the spring
time to arrive in these coastal communities this plays out in something we call lake and ocean
effect snow where warming air masses suddenly get very cold when they hit the water and then they
dump their snow and so areas around the great lakes and areas around coastal communities are very
familiar with what we call lake effect snow buffalo new york is a place that's famous for the huge
amounts of lake effect snow that it encounters now according to andrew goodie and a team at
oxford university key changes in the hydrologic cycle associated with an increased concentration
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere has resulted in pretty significant climate changes
including warmer conditions which increase evaporation rates and result in more intense
precipitation events over the past 50 years the u.s and canada have experienced 15 percent in
overall increases in precipitation rates that's resulted also in changes in the seasonal distribution
and the amount of precipitation changes in the balance between snow and rain which is pretty
significant remember when in the winter when precipitation falls as snow it creates an
insulating blanket on the surface of the earth which prevents additional moisture from being
lost from the ground when that precipitation falls as rain the snow is melted the snow is removed
and then on dry cold days significant amounts of moisture are lost from the ground
as the climate changes as an increased fire risk and an accelerated melting of glacial ice
that has led to an increased risk of coastal flooding and changes in the dynamic relationship
between the growth of plants and the stability of ecosystems you know one of the biggest changes
with respect to our understanding of water has to do with our sort of political considerations of
how ecosystems store water and one of the changing ideas is how we think about our wetland areas
you know it wasn't long ago a hundred years or so when swamps and wetlands were considered a
pejorative part of our ecosystem and we had strategies for draining swamps we had strategies
for filling wetlands in fact many of our coastal cities many of our oldest legacy cities in north
america in fact have significant portions of their built environments on top of wetlands
and this was before we understood how critically important wetlands were in storing floods in
modulating climate in filtering the water in being important areas of biodiversity and so one of the
interesting parts of my own career as an ecologist has been to see the general public understanding
of wetlands change from this pejorative nature of we must drain the swamp to this expectation
that wetlands actually do have critical ecosystem services that they provide for us
you know in the next lecture we'll continue this conversation with water and we'll investigate
the impact of water consumption by humans on the ecology of the planet
