Hello and welcome back. We're going to continue our conversation about water today as we consider
the human aspect of the equation with respect to water dynamics. You know, 1.5 billion people
live under extraordinary water stress that leaves them vulnerable to disaster at any moment.
It's predicted that by 2025, nearly 70% of all the world's accessible fresh water supply
will be used each year by humans. As more and more water is impounded in reservoirs for human use,
many more rivers will simply dry up. The result is a major change in surface hydrology,
which is going to result in the complete collapse of certain ecosystems.
Now to begin this conversation today, I want to talk about an incident that occurred a few years
ago that may not directly sound like a conversation about water, but in reality it is. I was coming
back from a meeting and I was just about sunset, and I was driving along one of the small country
roads on Cape Cod that gets very busy in the summer, and the traffic all of a sudden ground to
a halt, and it turned out there was a large female snapping turtle in the middle of the road,
and she had stopped traffic, she was quite large, and people were wondering what to do,
and it turns out that it was near a neighbor's house, and she recognized my car and she came
up to me and said, you need to help this turtle. What do you think we should do? Well, we had to
get a big trash can and put her in the trash can and move her to the pond that she was headed,
and the issue here is that she was moving from one area of the ecosystem in which she lived to
the other, and her movements were completely water dependent, because although she spends part of her
adult life in the water, she actually has to lay her eggs on soils that are reasonably well drained,
so that the eggs can breathe but not dry out, and even though she's a terrestrial animal,
the relationship that she has with water both as an adult and for her eggs are so incredibly critical,
and both aspects of what she does have very specific water dependent uses, and although we
think of this as a metaphor, it's actually a real aspect of their ecology, so she needs very
different environments, and so she was crossing the road to get from the wet watershed area that
she was in, the sort of basin of the watershed over to drier soil, so we helped her do that and
got the traffic moving. You know, when we consider the consumption of water by humans,
we must factor into this considerations of the overall water budget for a region.
So for example, in North America, if we take all the precipitation, it's either going to end up
evaporating and forming a relationship that we call runoff, so precipitation minus evaporation
ultimately equals runoff, and each year about 18,000 cubic kilometers falls on the surface of
North America. About 10,000 cubic kilometers is evaporated, and about 8,000 cubic kilometers,
or two quadrillion or two million billion gallons, flows as runoff, ultimately captured by streams
and lakes and makes its way back to the oceans. You know, huge reservoirs are available as groundwater,
but often groundwater is quite hard to access. You know, there's approximately five times 10 to the
16th gallons of groundwater available. That's 50 million billion gallons, but that groundwater
can be very difficult to access and very, very costly to bring for human consumption.
Humans are having global impacts on water supply and distribution, and that's really one of the
core conversations that we're going to be having today. You know, human population growth is one
factor contributing to the shortage of water supply. According to the U.S. Geological Survey,
the average per capita water consumption each day in the United States is approximately 1,300
gallons per person. That works out to almost 400 trillion gallons of water per day, 142,000 trillion
gallons per year. On a typical day, 164 gallons are used for showers and laundry and toilets through
direct consumption by people living in the United States, and surprisingly, 485 gallons of that
water consumption is used for agriculture, and we're going to talk more about that later.
70 gallons are used for industrial use and about 580 gallons for the production of electrical power.
Now, there's huge variations worldwide, typically about 70 percent for irrigation,
20 percent for industrial use, only about 10 percent for direct human use. So when we see
calculations of the way people use water, often we're only taking into account that 10 percent
that is used directly, when in addition there's huge amounts, even larger amounts of water,
that are being used to support the infrastructure and the metabolic needs of humans.
Now, in Europe, the consumption of water is about half, and in certain arid regions of the world,
people live on five gallons a day or less. Now, in order for us to really understand this,
we have to work with essentially two ideas here. First, we have the idea of
consumptive and non-consumptive use, and second, the idea of in-stream and off-stream use.
So let me work with the idea of consumptive and non-consumptive use first.
In consumptive use, the idea here is that water being utilized by humans is not returned to the
ecosystem. In a non-consumptive model, the water is used for human needs, but stays within the
ecosystem. So for instance, the turning of a water wheel is a non-consumptive use. The removal of
water where it is used for irrigation or something else, and it is lost to the ecosystem, is an
example of consumptive use. Now, in addition, we have in-stream and off-stream use, and here
we're talking about the difference between where the water, when it is returned, where it's returned.
So in in-stream use, we're essentially talking about a lotic flowing system.
Water is utilized, and then it's returned to the same system.
Off-stream use is where it may end up going back into the aquifer, but not at the area in which
it's captured. And that's one of the most important aspects of human water use that we're going to
be talking about. We're essentially talking about diverting water from one loaded system
and having it used in an entirely different ecosystem. Now, climate change, due to humans,
has increased carbon emissions, and it's also depleting the amount of water that's available.
As the earth warms and less snowfall occurs in some areas, towns that once dependent on
snow melt for water are experiencing less available water supplies.
This pattern is part of a positive feedback loop, as the melting of snow and ice reveals
dark substrate, which in turn warms and hastens further melting of ice and snow.
This is why roads and colder climates are dyed black as it facilitates the melting of ice.
But in ecosystems, this is pretty dangerous. So instead of the snow cover, as we said before,
holding in moisture, and because of its albedo effect reflecting heat, we now have snow melting,
exposing the dark surface, adding additional heating, which reduces snow cover even more
dramatically. We also know that warmer climates will most likely generate more storms that are
severe as more energy is available to the systems as storms form. Think about this.
We mentioned before in a previous lecture that one measure of heat is the movement of molecules.
If we add more energy to the system in the form of climate warming,
then there's more energy available as the storms form. Now, the millennium ecosystem
assessment made it quite clear that climate change will alter the intensity of precipitation,
snow melt, and runoff. Loss of surface water and disrupted soils leads to
desertification of impacted lands, especially those that are grassland ecosystems.
Now, we've had a significant environmental wake-up call,
if we think globally about the impact of human water use, and there's no more important lesson
that we can learn than that from the RLC. It's one of the world's largest inland bodies of water.
It's a saltwater lake located in the countries of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
During the Soviet era, central planning gave birth to the idea of a cotton growing region
that would be fed by the two main rivers that feed the lake, the Amu Darya and the Sir Darya.
Water diverted from the two main rivers that fed the lake have caused
massive ecological destruction as the result of lower water levels. Remember, as we said,
lakes and rivers represent the tops of the water table. If we're using this water in an
off-stream model and we begin to lower the water table, it has profound effects.
The surface area of the RLC has decreased by 90 percent and the volume by over 50 percent.
This has caused an increase in salinity and it's destroyed the sturgeon fisheries that were
the original attractant of populations to that region. As a result, the tourism industry has
collapsed and it really has been an environmental disaster. A once thriving ecosystem with vibrant
marshes is now ringed with salt flats that don't support the previous biotic community.
Dust from the shoreline has created a serious air pollution problem
and the climate has become much more severe. With the collapse of the Soviet Union,
the five surrounding countries with the help of the World Bank have launched an
$85 million project to restore a portion of the lake that is isolated from the rest.
A dam has been constructed that allowed the smaller portion to fill with fresh water
and bring back the former ecosystem, at least in that pocket of the lake.
Overflow from the dam is now feeding the rest of the lake. Not enough, however,
to re-establish the previous ecosystem. However, at least in that small portion,
the lake is beginning to return some of its original ecosystem function. Now, the only way
to return the ecosystem-wide function of that lake would be to stop borrowing water.
From those two rivers that feed into the RLC, and that's unlikely to happen,
but at least the efforts are being implemented to have a small portion of the lake recovered.
Now, there is a direct link with respect to human water use and poverty,
and we talk about this in the context of the nexus of water stress and poverty.
Now, the World Bank reports that 80 countries now have water shortages that threaten health and
economies, while 40 percent of the world, which represents 2 billion people, have no
access to clean water or sanitation. And the lack of safe drinking water has profound health
implications. Now, data from the World Health Organization is really pretty quite striking
with respect to the impact of waterborne diseases. You know, diarrheal diseases now impact a billion
people a year and kill 3 million each year. Intestinal helmets or parasites kill 100,000 people a year,
and impact almost a billion people as well. Schistosomiasis, which is another waterborne
parasite, impacts 200 million people each year and ends up killing 200,000.
And one of the most devastating waterborne diseases is malaria. 400 million people each year
get malaria and it kills one and a half million people. Over half of them are children.
Dengue fever, another waterborne disease, 1.7 million people impacted by that,
on an annual basis that kills over 20,000. And trypanosomiasis, 275,000 people made sick each year,
130,000 people dying, and so-called river blindness impacting 17 million people each year and killing
40,000. Now, according to the World Bank, the demand for water is doubling every 21
years and even more so in certain regions. Now developing countries like India and China
are seeing drastic water shortages as their growth skyrockets and their populations undergo
demographic transition. We think about the challenge that's happening in these nations.
First of all, India and China are two of the most populous nations in the world.
And although there have been some interventions with respect to their population growth rates,
those countries still continue to grow at rapid rates, even though their fertility levels are
dropping, but there are so many young people who are reaching adult age, the populations
continue to grow. Remember our conversations around population growth. But in addition,
these populations are shifting to a different model of consumption.
Those nations are beginning to have populations that want to consume as we do in the West,
and so their per capita use of water resources is going up. China is shifting
from an agricultural-based economy to a manufacturing base, and more people are moving
into cities. More people in cities means that there is a higher demand for water in concentrated
areas, which puts a large stress on their ability to deliver sanitary potable water.
The quality of water is therefore deteriorating because of the increased pollution caused by
higher densities of people without the appropriate infrastructure available for support of clean
water supplies. And so this cycle ends up aggravating existing water shortages.
So other nations, poor nations like Nicaragua, will now have even a reduced amount of portable
water available because of this intensity of cycle that happens in urbanized areas.
I mean, let's review this for just a moment so you understand, because we've talked about a wide
range of nations from the most populous one in the world, like China, which is emerging as an
economic power to developing nations like Nicaragua in Central America, which are still struggling
to find an economic footing. All of them are moving towards a more urbanized demographic
distribution of their human population, and this has profound ecological effects.
We end up with a situation where higher densities of people are putting more demands
on an already overtaxed water supply system, and the water supply system is being impacted by the
fact that increased amount of sewerage is not being treated appropriately. That sewerage and
these waterborne diseases are leaking back into the water supply, and the water supply then is no
longer safe. So we end up with a diminishing water supply, increasing demand, and more stress within
the infrastructure, and it's a recipe for ecological disaster. One of the strategies that people use
in response to this increased demand and reduced supply is to think about diverting water, the
so-called off-stream model. Let's take water from a river, move it somewhere else, and we can use it,
and let's think about this. Let's think about the ecology of this diverted water,
and we're going to focus on the Colorado River as part of our conversation.
Worldwide, nearly 45,000 large dams, those that are more than 50 feet high, have been built,
and at least 3,000 of these dams hold back in excess of 25 billion gallons of water each.
Collectively, they flood 120 million acres of land, and they store 1500 cubic miles of water.
Now, these large dams have enormous ecological and social impact.
Nearly 40 million people have been displaced by the construction of such dams,
and the wetlands once nourished by the natural floodings of these river basins are now dry.
For instance, of the salmon that try to spawn on the once rich Columbia and Snake rivers
in the western United States, 95% suffer premature mortality as they try to negotiate the dams and
obstructions. The use of these dams has been primarily directed towards a production of
electricity, and the values of damming were calculated only with the hydropower in mind.
Long-term ecological damage is now being factored into the equation of water management,
and the Colorado River is an excellent example of water use in humans having a lasting impact.
You know, the Colorado River starts in the Rocky Mountain National Park. It flows through Colorado,
Utah, Nevada, Arizona, California, and finally Mexico. Prior to diversion and construction
of the Glen Canyon and Hoover dams, it used to flow into the Gulf of California.
Now, because of the holdback of the water caused by the dams, the river rarely flows through Mexico,
and when it does, it's often polluted and very saline.
It was established that those who discovered and used the water source first had legal rights over
the use. I mean, this is an interesting public-private conflict that arises when
water becomes rare, and this has become a tremendous basis for tension as the Colorado
waters have been diverted and used throughout the years. Diversions to the Imperial Valley and
California have nearly dried up the Colorado River Delta in Mexico, so what we have is a
situation where upstream users of the water are gaining an ecological benefit and downstream
users are suffering because the volume of water being delivered to those communities
is drastically reduced. Now, other major aquatic ecosystems have suffered, too,
and altered local climate as well. The Rio Grande River, one of America's mightiest rivers,
no longer flows to the sea, as most of the water is diverted for agricultural uses. The river no
longer brings rich sediments to the delta to support that near shore ecosystem, so what you
have here is a rapidly escalating feedback system that leads to ecological decline. I mean, the very
fact that rivers flood and bring silt helps to create wetlands and the alluvial fans of nutrients
that make for rich near shore ecosystems build marsh environments that help protect the mainland
from storms and flooding, and by altering dramatically the course of these rivers and the
volume of water that they deliver, it's changing the delivery of these nutrients downstream that
have significant impacts. Now, we can as a society manage some of this through technology,
but the technology to manage this is so expensive, many feel it would be better off to have allowed
those natural ecosystem services to have been provided, but undoing some of these things is
pretty difficult. You know, damming rivers is a controversial strategy for our quest to achieve
sustainable power. You know, this flowing or low-dick water has powered human industry for
thousands of years, going back to the earliest water wheels at Mesopotamia. At the current rate
of world industrial expansion, 260 new dams come online each year, which is an actual reduction
from the thousand plus that were being built in the early 1900s. No conversation about dams would
be complete without talking about the world's largest dam project, which is the Three Gorges
dam, which is under construction in China. It has two purposes, really. It's designed to
both control flooding along the Yangtze River and generate electrical power. This project has huge
impacts on the biogeophysical and social landscapes of that region. We consider it a mega driver of
ecosystem change, both short and long pulse duration. You know, flooding along the Yangtze
River was legendary, and nearly 300,000 people have lost their lives in floods during the 20th
century alone. The dam, when it's fully complete, will create a reservoir 370 miles long. It'll
generate 22,000 megawatts of electricity at peak capacity from 32 main generators, plus two more
that are used to run the plant itself. But in order to build this, over 1.2 million people were
moved, and entire cities are being flooded by the process. The ecological costs of this project
are great and mounting as the weight of the impounded water appears to have geologic scale
impact and may actually increase earthquake behavior in the area. When completed, the reservoir
will cover nearly 250 square miles at a depth of about 500 feet.
The dam will hold back approximately 10 cubic miles of water. However, as we mentioned before in
these other river systems, along with this water comes 500 million tons of silt delivered annually,
some of which gets clogged behind the dam. And that silt would normally nourish downstream
ecosystems and is denied to them by the action of the dam. But these are complicated systems.
The upside of this is that the power produced from the water turbines can offset 30 million
tons of coal per year, which in turn offsets 100 million tons of greenhouse gases.
So when we think about the solution space that we moved to with these ecological conundrums,
something like a dam has tremendous positive potential, but also tremendous challenges with
respect to long-term ecosystem impact. Now, we can t really talk about human water use without
addressing the notion of water conservation. It s probably the most important part of creating
sustainable water practices. Water conservation is the preservation of freshwater resources
at its source. And it requires really a switch in philosophy from an historic approach to water
management of how much water do we need to a more ecologically manageable perspective of
how much water do we have and how do we best use it. The most likely candidate is agricultural
reform. It s a key element in both reducing water use and modulating climate change.
40% of the food grown in the world must be artificially irrigated.
And nearly half of all irrigation water is lost to evaporation and runoff.
Now drip systems and computer controlled surge systems are a key to transforming
the kind of water largesse that we have used with flood irrigation.
Studies indicate that drip irrigation not only saves water but can actually increase crop yield
by 10 or 15%. However, with the exception of Israel and Australia, both water-starved regions,
most of the world is still using flood irrigation methods. And that s about 97%
of the irrigation in the United States. Now, the cost for conversion to drip systems is expensive.
It can be $1,000 per acre. But under current conditions, the real cost of water
is borne by the government through construction projects and subsidies.
And this is a classic tragedy-the-common scenario that we visited earlier in the course.
But as water becomes more expensive to the end consumer,
existing and newer technologies await the adopters.
Home water is another important area for positive change. You know, the U.S. water use per capita
now exceeds about 1,300 gallons per day, among the most affluent if all the uses are factored in.
Many of the world s people live in arid areas on 5 gallons per day or less.
Now, U.S. personal and supplemental consumption could be drastically reduced without sacrificing
our quality of life. One example includes Costa Rica. The country realized early on
in their protection of natural resources and that fresh water was going to be vital to their country.
Costa Rica was proactive in protecting and establishing ecological reserves that contain
their water resources. The children s eternal rainforest in Monteverde, for instance, is
54,000 acres that protects a large part of the region s most important watersheds.
Not only does it protect the water source, but they have established ecotourism that keeps the
visitors concentrated to one small part of the reserve so the rest can remain untouched.
This practice has preserved 6 of the 12 critical life zones in Costa Rica
and helps preserve the plants and animals that live in these areas.
Now, one of the challenges in dealing with water is this public-private interface that
we ve made reference to a couple of times here in the lecture. And in one of my roles as an ecologist
I ve served on a regional regulatory board that manages the wetland resources. And one of the
biggest challenges we had, for instance, was the placement of docks and piers along public water
bodies. And here we have the idea that people who bought land next to a body of water want to be
able to put a dock from their land out into the water so they can use their boats more easily.
And it s an interesting dilemma because the public actually owns the water space,
but people own the land next to it. And it s extraordinary the struggle between these two
systems. And in fact, for instance, in Massachusetts, if you put a dock into a public water sheet,
you actually have to provide passageway for people walking along the shore so they can get past your
dock without impeding their activities. In our next lecture, we re going to tackle the forces
that shape climate change overall. And you can bet that water is a key player in this process.
So until then, thank you very much.
