Music
Hello and welcome back.
You know, in previous lectures we've been building a foundation for understanding how ecosystems work.
We've talked about energy, the unidirectional movement of energy.
We've talked about the cyclical movement of nutrients through ecosystems.
We've tackled some of the big problems of climate change and e-waste and things like that.
And now we need to add to that an understanding of the ways in which ecosystems are characterized
and some of the major abiotic forces that shape the nature of ecosystems.
You know, in this lecture we're going to investigate how ecosystems are characterized by their climates,
the interplay between temperature and precipitation that drive the long-term climate of ecosystems.
We're going to examine the critical role of water as it moves through an ecosystem
and ultimately determines what species can live there.
We'll also examine the adaptations that plants and animals have evolved in response to water stress,
both in hot and cold climates.
Now I want to begin with a story today about the spring peepers that are
chorusing in the early spring in the eastern half of the United States.
The image that you see on your screen is of a peeper and these peepers are found in wetland areas
and their scientific name is pseudocris crucifer.
And the crucifer comes from the black cross that they have on their back.
It's a field mark. They're about an inch long.
And they breed in the earliest phases of the spring.
And I think they're interesting because they come out when it's raining really, really hard.
You know, as a species, we don't really like being wet for the most part, especially wet and cold.
But some species, such as this toad that you see pictured,
requires rain to release its capacity to reproduce.
Now our house on Cape Cod is located right next to a wetland.
And during the early spring, when there still can be snow on the ground,
you will hear these peepers chorusing.
And that's the sound you're hearing now.
This is the chorusing that they do.
And as they are moving around near these wetlands,
it's not unusual for us to step out at night and see them cleaning to the shingles of the house.
It's really quite an adventure.
They're reproducing at this time.
And they're doing it all together.
We call it a scramble ecology.
And they do it in such a way.
In fact, most of the toads are reproducing at the same time.
They're doing it in such a way that it literally out swamps the predators.
And so predator might be attracted to that sound because they're going to come and eat the toads.
But there are so many of them, they simply can't devour them all.
And so these animals depend on the presence of water in order to complete their life cycle.
If we have a particularly dry spring, it tremendously suppresses their capacity to reproduce.
And the habitats that they use are these temporary pools of water that form in the spring
when water as a resource is most available.
Now you might ask the question, and if we were having a final exam,
I think this would be a great question.
Why don't these toads simply go and reproduce in lakes or ponds that have water year-round?
If I give you a moment to answer that, I'm sure you'd come up with the right answer
or you'd get close to it because we've talked about this relationship between predators and prey.
One of the risks to any amphibian that's going to nest in a freshwater environment is the risk of predators.
If water is available year-round within a pool, before long you'll have fish.
And the fish will eat the eggs and the tadpoles laid by the toads.
So the toads have to be able to find water in order to lay their eggs,
but they have to find water that doesn't have fish.
And so the only bodies of water that are fish-free are those that will dry up at least for part of the year.
And so they go to these pools that are wet in the spring.
They have a couple of months in which the tadpoles can develop,
become toads, and hop away before the pool dries up.
How does this link to our conversation today?
Well, regional climate patterns are the result of these biophysical drivers,
including precipitation, solar energy, and topography.
The reason these toads don't live everywhere in the world
is because these variables play out in different ways in different ecosystems.
And these particular toads, the spring peepers, need a certain type of dynamic ecosystem
in order to complete their life cycle.
And if the elements aren't there, we don't find them there.
And so all species, spring peepers included,
have a limited distribution of range because of the particular tolerances they have as a species.
And this idea of biomes and floristic regions help us to classify the different kinds of ecosystems in our globe.
And they are based on the availability of energy and the relationship of that ecosystem to water.
So hot and dry ecosystems have different community structure than do cold and wet ecosystems.
In order to understand the ecology of biomes, which will be the focus of our conversation today,
we need to first investigate why the conditions vary on Earth in the first place.
Now, temperature varies across the globe on a seasonal basis.
And the variation is most pronounced at the poles and least variable at the equator.
And this is due to the differences in solar radiation and the tilt of the Earth's axis.
And we can see this in the image before us.
You know, when I talk to students about why it gets cold and hot on a seasonal basis in a temperate climate like New England,
you'd be surprised at the answers I get.
Some students think that it's because the fact that the Earth has an elliptical orbit around the Sun,
and that during certain times of the year the Sun is closer to the Earth than others,
and that is actually an engine that drives the seasonal change.
Well, that isn't true. In fact, our summer occurs during the period of time when we are farthest away from the Sun.
But it turns out that we can boil down the difference in energy from solar radiation that hits the planet
by simply thinking about the way in which the light strikes.
Now, if you can imagine a given circumference of light arriving from the Sun striking the Earth
at the equator that is very much concentrated.
The alignment is such that the Sun is striking at a nearly perpendicular attitude.
But at the poles, the angle is more extreme, and so that same amount of light is actually spread out over a larger area.
And as such, it doesn't receive as much heat.
So if you look at the way in which light strikes the surface of the Earth, which you can see here in this diagram,
you can see that the same amount of light is more concentrated at the equator than it is at the poles where it's spread out.
And if you add to that the inherent 23-degree tilt of the Earth,
then that piece gives you the seasonal variations that exist with respect to the different parts of the Earth.
The seasonal variation and variation in the strength of sunlight that reaches the surface of the Earth
that gives us the variation in our ecosystem.
Temperature is a critical abiotic factor for many species.
Pictured here is a eastern box turtle found in the study area in which we work.
Habitat fragmentation, urbanization has been particularly tough on the species
in many urbanizing areas.
The local populations of this turtle have become extirpated.
As a team, we're particularly interested in the life history patterns of this species
and we have radio transmitters on a certain number of them,
so we can follow them around and look at how their patterns are changed by human disturbance
and also by seasonal variation.
So these are ectotherms, meaning that they are cold-blooded creatures,
and so they're forced to hibernate when temperatures fall below about 35 degrees.
And as a result, they have to be able to shut their systems down
and burrow under the ground until the temperatures rise again.
This brumation allows them to save energy at a time that would be very costly and risky to be outside.
As ectotherms, they are severely limited by the season.
Mammals, however, can be active year-round if there's food available.
That's one of the issues that very highly metabolically active organisms face.
Most mammals are not deterred by cold.
Most mammals are deterred by the lack of food.
So when you think of the bird species, if you live in an area that's temperate
or if you live in a warm climate and you're blastering the wintertime
to have so many of the migratory birds in your backyard,
remember they're either leaving your yard when it gets cold
or arriving in your yard in the winter when it's cold somewhere else,
not because birds can't tolerate cold.
Man, their metabolic engines run at a very, very high rate.
They're resting heart rates are sometimes in the hundreds of beats per minute.
So they have no problem keeping warm.
What they have problem with is accessing food.
And in ecosystems where it gets cold enough for water to be turned to ice,
that locks up heat energy and makes it very, very difficult for warm-blooded organisms
not to survive, they can survive fine.
But it disrupts their ability to get energy.
This is important because it begs the question
of what are the fundamental forces that limit a species' geographical range?
Now, one model that we have for understanding these limits
is something called Rappaport's Rule,
which suggests that range sizes for species,
in other words, the distribution of the species as a whole,
decreases as you move from the very high northern or southern latitudes,
the poles, towards the equator.
An Argentinian ecologist Eduardo Rappaport developed this idea
in the 1970s.
And his model was that climatic variation is greater in colder regions.
In other words, the absolute changes in temperatures are more extreme
as you go away from the poles.
And species there must be more tolerant
and hence be more like ecological generalists.
In other words, they have to be able to consume a wide variety of foods
and live in highly variable habitats.
So as such, they have very large ranges
and we'll look at some of those data in a moment.
Now, the polar bear is a good example of a mammal
with a very, very large range that is found near the poles.
In the image you see here, the shaded image
depicts the overall range of the polar bear,
which is huge, although that range is shrinking with climate change
as the available habitat for the animal actually melts into the ocean.
Now, compare that with the golden toad of Costa Rica.
This is a species that is endemic and found only
in a small area of Costa Rica called the Monteverde region.
So it has a tiny fraction of the habitat range that the polar bear has.
An additional model that helps us to understand this dynamic
is something we call ecological specialization theory.
And the idea here that species with narrow diet and habitat requirements
tend to be specialists and are going to have a smaller range and smaller abundance.
Generalists are just the opposite.
So species that are going to be in difficult, complicated,
and highly variable environments are going to need to be generalists
and as such will have wider ranges.
This theory predicts that most species will be specialists
and have relatively narrowed distributions.
Now, if we look at some other data that were produced
by doing a meta-analysis of over 1,000 species of birds in North America,
1,370 to be exact, the ranges of these species were investigated.
And by the way, I used a new term here, meta-analysis.
And it's a term of the art of doing science that is a study of studies.
So in our own lab, when I go into the field with my colleagues
and we're working with the coyotes that we study,
that is an analytic approach.
We're studying our group of animals.
When we do a review of all of the folks who were doing coyote studies
across North America and we're comparing data from Massachusetts
to data in Illinois and Rhode Island and New York
and other places where these great studies are taking place,
that's called a meta-analysis because we're combining data
from other labs and other researchers.
Doing so is complicated because we have slightly different techniques.
We may be trapping the animals differently.
We may be using different radio collars.
We may gather our data in a different way,
but it's still a very powerful tool.
And with the right controls,
meta-analysis can reveal a lot about the natural history of species.
So in the chart that you see here,
what we have is a curve that is smooth
because of all the data points that have been put in.
And we see that what we have is the geographic range of the species
that are being investigated on one axis.
And the percentage of the species in the sample size on the other,
on the vertical axis.
And what you see is that the vast majority of North American birds
that are part of this sample have relatively small geographic ranges
and only a few are distributed over very, very large areas
and those tend to be generalists.
So we have a data set from North America
using one taxonomic group, admittedly birds,
that seem to support Rappaport's model.
So the question is how do we understand
what limits these species from being widely distributed?
Some work was done in the middle of the 19th century
that created a foundation for this aspect of understanding.
It was a German chemist by the name of Justus von Leibig
and he postulated that for every species there is a critical limiting factor.
Now he was actually a plant biologist and his work with fertilizers,
he was an interface between chemistry and botany.
His work with fertilizers happened to really be important with respect
to expanded crop yields at the end of the 19th century.
And he suggested that the yield on a hypothetical crop
could be envisioned as the capacity of a barrel with unequal staves.
And for those of us who don't routinely have coopers in our neighborhood
and cooperages, remember that barrels are built with curved pieces of wood
held together by vans and the curved pieces of wood
that run the length of the barrel called staves.
And he envisioned an ecosystem as being filled with water
and having staves of different lengths.
And this was a metaphor and he said,
look, the barrel is only going to hold as much as the shortest stave.
And that you can envision that each stave is an available nutrient or condition.
As such, some factor will always be limiting.
If that stave is lengthened, then another one becomes limiting.
Let's visualize that metaphor.
Here you can see that this barrel has unequal staves
and water is pouring out of the stave that is lowest.
In this case, nitrogen is projected as the limiting factor.
Well, if this stave were a little bit taller and nitrogen wasn't limiting,
then some other stave might be limiting,
like magnesium or some other micronutrient that the plant needs.
But that in these ecosystems, there will be some factor that limits.
And traditionally, these factors are...
these limiting factors are driven by the...
ultimately by the amount of heat energy and water that's available.
Another model for understanding this is Shelford's law of tolerance.
And here we understand a species distribution
is determined by the environmental factor for which the species has the narrowest tolerance,
such as oxygen or pH or salinity from marine organisms.
Remember the trout we mentioned before in a previous lecture?
They need really, really high levels of oxygen.
So as temperate streams warm in the summer,
the amount of dissolved oxygen decreases.
Trout need at least five parts per million of dissolved oxygen.
They like it if there's much more.
If it drops below that, they have to leave.
Despite the fact that all the other aspects of the ecosystem are in place.
The benthic community they like, the depth of the water that they like,
the snags or material that was growing there, it's all still there.
But the oxygen level dropped, so they had to go.
Now, the small and largemouth bass and carp and catfish
that we tend to find in slow-moving, warm, fresh water
can withstand much, much lower levels of oxygen.
And so they don't have to leave because they're not limited.
In that sense, what they are limited is having a much slower metabolic rate.
Trout, because of this rapid metabolic rate,
are able to have relatively high metabolisms.
So water is really a key limiting resource.
And the amount of water readily available affects the amount of evaporation
and transpiration that take place within an ecosystem.
The more water and heat, the more evapotranspiration takes place.
And evapotranspiration is a combination of the physical movement of water
and transpiration as it moves through plants.
So it's really a measure of biological activity.
And the water on earth is in constant motion.
And we call this the water cycle.
As we review the chart before you, you can see a conceptualization of the water cycle.
You see land that gently slopes down to a large body of water.
And you see arrows that are going up into the sky.
This is water that's evaporating as it either evaporates out of streams.
It evaporates off of the land.
It rolls as sheet flow and as rivers and underground flow into large bodies of water
where it's evaporated again.
It goes up into the atmosphere where it condenses in the form of clouds
and comes back down as rain.
So water is consistently recycled into the ecosystem.
And what makes different ecosystems is, in many ways,
the amount and duration of how water remains bioavailable
or available to living systems within an ecosystem.
And it's this availability of water that gives rise to the creation and regulation
of regional biomes like deserts and temperate forests.
So I said we were going to get to biomes and we're here.
Biomes are these major biotic communities that occupy large areas of land and water.
Now the terrestrial biomes of North America break down into about 14 different floristic regions.
We have an example here that looks at nine of the most important regions.
And if you notice, again, we've distributed this on a graph
and the horizontal axis in this graph has the average mean temperature,
which is a surrogate measure for the amount of heat energy that's available,
the higher the average annual temperature, the more the heat energy is available.
And on the vertical axis we have the amount of precipitation.
And if you simply look at the amount of precipitation and the average annual temperature,
you can actually make predictions about the kind of biome that will be formed.
So not surprisingly, the hottest and wettest terrestrial ecosystems are rainforests.
And it's not surprising that with the most amount of water and the most amount of heat energy,
they're incredibly biologically productive.
Rainforests are some of the most important ecosystems on earth.
If you leave the heat cranked up, but you take the water away, you get a desert.
If you leave the water away and turn the heat down, you get arctic tundra.
And in between, where you turn the heat up a little bit and get a little bit more water,
you get temperate forests.
You add a little more heat, but you don't add much water to the system.
You get temperate grasslands that have seasonal fluctuation.
Now, if you go to the northwest corner of the United States,
you get lots of water, not so much heat, and you end up with rainforests,
but they're temperate rainforests.
So it's really quite interesting.
You can actually make profound predictions about the nature of an ecosystem
by knowing how much rain it gets and how warm it gets.
Later, we're going to discuss how this plays out in mountain regions,
because mountains, although they're geospatially anchored to the earth,
as you go from sea level up,
you're dramatically changing the precipitation and temperature regimes.
And you can go through these mini biomes.
You can go through a number of different little mini biomes
by moving a short geophysical distance on a mountain,
but you're changing the altitude.
Now, ecological adaptations of many animals living in harsh conditions
have proven effective to their survival.
And we're going to take a look at a couple of examples.
This is the pocket gopher.
Like many desert rodents, it has super-efficient kidneys
that help to reduce its need for any water beyond that that it gets in its food.
And if you remember, our kidneys are the organs that filter out the nitrogenous
or nitrogen-based waste.
And from the previous couple of lectures that we had,
you ought to actually be able to remember where that nitrogen or waste came from.
It came from the breakdown of proteins in our diet.
And so we discharge our nitrogenous waste,
but we also have to use water to get that done.
And so for most terrestrial organisms,
that places a burden on us to take in a significant amount of liquid water in our diet.
Pocket gophers don't have to do that,
but they also alter their foraging behavior to avoid the hottest and driest parts of the day.
So by avoiding those hottest, driest parts, they can help reduce their water loss.
Think of the last time you took a long airplane ride,
how dehydrated you felt at the end of the flight.
That's because cabin air inside an airplane is kept particularly dry,
dry as a desert, in order to reduce the rate of rust and corrosion
that would happen to metal parts inside the airplane.
So you're literally breathing this really, really dry air.
And even though you're not very active and you're sitting in your seat,
you get very, very dried out because there's a huge gradient
between the moisture in your lungs and the lack of moisture in the air.
Another African rodent called the pebble herdsman stacks rows of pebbles in front of its burrow
to catch the interface between the warm air from its burrow,
escaping into the cool air at night,
and it creates a catchment for the dew that forms.
And so the warm air from the burrow hits the cold air at night,
and the dew collects and condenses on those pebbles,
and then just before dawn, the mouse can come out and lick that water back up.
It's literally the water it lost from its own metabolism in breathing,
but it was captured as it flowed outside of its own little burrow,
and it could recycle that water.
Another example of an animal that can withstand enormous water stress
is the desert tortoise,
and it's developed the capacity to dig very deep burrows into the sand
to keep out of the desert heat.
In addition, it stores water that it ingests from plant material in a special bladder
that allows it to store water for times that it needs later.
In fact, it can go years without drinking water.
Now, ultimately, the abiotic or non-living aspects of ecosystems
serve as hard boundaries of where organisms can eke out a living.
Later in this lecture series, we will investigate the biological forces
such as disease and competition, predation and cooperation
that can forge the characteristics of a living community.
Now, I want to leave this lecture today with a question.
We brought this up before, but we're bringing it up again in a different context.
We've talked about the role of humans as introducers of exotic species.
So we think about organisms that live in our community
that have been introduced by humans moving around the planet.
So we've talked about zebra mussels.
We have talked about English sparrows.
We've talked about a whole variety of species.
So what do you think would be the most important aspects
of an introduced species with respect to its success in its new ecosystem?
What are the characteristics that would make it most successful?
And this is an interesting question.
There isn't an absolute correct answer to this now
because we're working hard to understand this component
because it will help us to understand the dynamics of introduced species.
But if you think about it for a moment and connect us to Rappaport's rule
and think of an invasive species as expanding its geological range,
I'm hoping it would lead you to at least a conclusion
or towards a conclusion or to a testable hypothesis
if you wanted to design an experiment to test this
that suggests that invasive species are probably generalists.
And this generalist capacity allows them to be adaptable to new ecosystems.
Many, many species from other areas get brought into new locations
and most of them don't make it.
So the question is, what are the characteristics of those that do?
You know, in our next lecture, we're going to tackle one of the most vexing issues
in all of ecology and that's understanding climate change
but from an ecological perspective.
Until then, thank you.
