Hello and welcome back. You know, in our last lecture, we investigated the impact that humans
have on ecosystems, changing use of land and those kind of variables. But in this lecture,
we need to begin to look at the process of microevolution and to think about how we measure
change within populations and why variability on a genetic scale within populations is so
important as a way of buffering the impacts of ecological change. Healthy populations of
organisms have enough genetic variability to withstand ecological change over long periods of
time. Healthy populations depend on having enough genetic diversity to maintain those
populations in individual communities, even when those communities are in flux.
Populations can gain and lose diversity over time, and that's something we need to investigate.
We will consider the forces that shift the balance of diversity within populations,
especially with respect to isolated populations or those that are in danger of extinction.
There is a trade-off between high diversity and specializations in populations,
and we'll investigate that as well. Now, we're all familiar on a day-to-day basis with some
variation in animal systems and ecological systems in general. Think about all the variation
among the domestic dog breeds that we see. All dogs, all domestic dogs, are derived from
wolf populations, and yet over the thousands of intervening years between when wolves migrated
into human populations and became integrated into the lives of humans, we have used selective
breeding techniques to produce breeds of dogs that weigh as much as 200 pounds to breeds that
weigh only a few pounds. And think of all the tremendous variation we see between the sporting
dogs, and the terriers, and all these other kinds of dogs, all derived from a single genetic
complement of wolves. But by selectively creating, in essence, isolated populations,
we've been able to create very, very different breeds of dogs. But as you know, some of these
more intensively inbred populations of dogs actually have significant metabolic and physical
problems that we have to compensate for as dog owners, and that's really an indication of populations
that are in a bit of genetic trouble. Now, healthy populations of organisms in the wild
have enough genetic variability to withstand ecological change, and it's evolution that is
the phenomenon that shapes populations. Remember, individuals do not actually evolve.
Now, in our own sort of general language, we talk about the evolution of our ideas, or
the evolution of our careers, and we use that in casual language, and that's okay. But remember,
the genetic dose that we're born with, the bag of alleles that make up our overall genotype,
doesn't change over our lifespan. We will either pass that material on to our offspring,
or we won't, but we don't actually evolve. It's populations in which evolution takes place.
Individuals are the unit of selection. So, in order for us to understand evolution,
this process must be tracked over time, as the changes that occur are intergenerational,
not within the extant adult individuals. Now, natural selection's role on the individual relates
to the impact of the phenotype on fitness. Does this bag of genes travel to the next generation
or not? It is the population, not its individuals that actually evolves. Our topic today is
microevolution. It's the process that creates variable populations and occasionally new species.
At its most fundamental level, evolution occurs when there is a change in the allele frequencies
of an interbreeding group or population. To understand that, we need to engage the study
of population genetics. Now, population genetics is the study of these processes,
and is the foundation of our understanding of the microevolutionary process.
This emerged from something we call the modern synthesis, which took place in the 1940s,
and launched this new science and provided the underpinnings for all of our understanding
of population processes. Drawing from taxonomy, paleontology, and Mendelian genetics,
we saw the emergence of this field of population genetics. Now, the modern synthesis emphasizes
the following, that natural selection is the critical driver of evolutionary change.
Now, populations, as the scale is modified by selection, this is where evolution takes place,
but individuals are the units of selection, right? So, it's individuals that will either
be reproductively successful or not. Another critical idea with respect to the new synthesis
is the predominance of gradualism. The idea that the accumulation of genetic change over
long periods of time is the key factor that results in the kind of microevolutionary change
that we can measure. Now, the great contribution of population genetics was and remains the
quantification of the Mendelian ideas of transmission genetics, i.e., how these bags of genes get
assorted each generation and whose bag gets to travel through time. And it's allele frequencies
that allow us to characterize the population. And we can consider a population as a local cluster
of individuals of the same species. And the key piece here is to remember that we're talking
about the potential to interbreed. Isolation from each other can be actually a critical factor in
thinking about this possibility of interbreeding. In some cases, genetic material may be only rarely
exchanged. Emerging from these ideas is the unequal movement of new alleles through a population.
And isolation can lead to biological races and ultimately to speciation. For example,
seaside sparrows. There are at least four recognized subspecies, but they actually map out onto two
distinct clusters as defined by molecular analysis. Now, sometimes this level of isolation can even
lead to extinction. And if we think about the ground nesting flightless birds, a group of
birds called the ratites, on various continents, we've seen that as the continents have moved apart
and the populations have become isolated. There have been considerable extinction events
among flightless birds. Now, compare that, as we will talk later on, around the nature of birds
as measures of ecological health. One of the hallmark characteristics of birds, of course,
is that most of them can fly. And as ecosystems decline, if birds don't like it there,
they just fly somewhere else. But the flightless birds provide a very, very interesting insight
into the process of extinction, because as flightless birds, they are unable to move to
new ecosystems as easily as other species that have retained their capacity to fly.
Now, let's think about a population's gene pool as an idea. This is the equivalent of opening up
all of the alleles that would be in our individual bags and dumping them into a big bin. So all the
alleles of all the genes in an interbreeding population. Now, remember, each of these alleles
in collection are stored in the bags that we call individuals. And typically, the information from
each gene is found twice in each bag, because most organisms are diploid, meaning that we have two
copies of every gene, one we got from our mothers, one we got from our fathers. Now, for a given gene,
we can be homozygous, which means we have two identical alleles at that location or locus.
The, in other words, the genetic information we got from our mothers and got from our fathers for
that particular piece of genetic information is identical. Or at that particular locus, we can
be heterozygous, which means we receive different information from each parent. We have two different
alleles at that locus. Now, over time, because of natural selection or random events, if the
population is small enough, alleles can actually become fixed in a population and be completely
homozygous at a given locus. And that generally means trouble for a population. And in fact,
as a general measure of ecosystem health, the degree of heterozygosity in the population
is a key measure. The more heterozygosity or the more individuals that are heterozygous for
particular trait, in general, we consider that to be a healthier population. Now, we have to be
careful not to get fixated on the fact that they're two different alleles. Sometimes there can actually
be many more than two alleles for a given gene. Think about the alcohol dehydrogenase gene in
fruit flies, for instance. There's actually dozens of allelic variations. So in the population,
there's multiple alleles for that particular locus. However, each individual fly, which is
diploid, can carry only two. Now, we actually have a tool that we can use, a set of mathematical
equations that we can use to help us understand the movement of genes throughout the population.
And we call that the Hardy-Weinberg theorem. And it relates directly to quantifying population
genetics. The Hardy-Weinberg theorem is a tool for measuring the genetic behavior
of a non-evolving population. But it turns out we can actually use it to measure evolution.
But as it was first envisioned, it was a measure of essentially genetic homeostasis.
What this means is that the allele in question will remain randomly distributed within the
population unless it's acted on by a suite of evolutionary forces. In addition, that allele
can impart any fitness advantage or it will be preferentially removed or increased in the
interbreeding population. This prevents natural selection or genetic drift from altering
its distribution over time. Why? Why is this so? Well, because after meiosis and fertilization,
according to the calculations of Hardy-Weinberg and in fact, according to what we see in the
natural history of the way genes distribute, after meiosis and fertilization the genes are
randomly shuffled. Thus, the gene pool of the population remains essentially unchanged through
time, it's self-correcting. So really it's a genetic homeostasis that's maintained over time.
No change in allele and genotype frequencies. The population remains in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
So the Hardy-Weinberg theorem in use is actually quite interesting.
Geneticists will use specific letters to represent the different alleles and in a two-allele system
we generally use P to represent the frequency of a certain allele especially if it's a dominant
allele will be P. Q to represent the frequency of a second allele and if it's recessive then
generally P will be dominant, Q will be recessive. And these combined frequencies in a two-allele
system of course have to add up to 100% of all of the alleles in that population for that particular
locus. So therefore P plus Q must equal 1. If P plus Q equals 1 then P equals 1 minus Q and
Q equals the 1 minus the proportion of alleles taken up by P. So the total genotype frequencies
which are the combinations of these alleles that get sorted out into the bags we call individuals,
well we have all the individuals who are homozygous dominant which would be
the two P's or P squared. The individuals who are heterozygos which are P. Q and if we were to
use a Mendelian-Punnett square to look at the population level of how that's generated we actually
can generate heterozygotes two ways. So it's P plus Q generating its two different ways which is
two P. Q and then the proportion of individuals whose genotypes are homozygous recessive or Q
squared. So we have P squared plus two P. Q plus Q squared equals one and this is starting to look
I hope like a pretty traditional linear formula that you probably saw in your early mathematics
work in high school. So we can actually use this equation geneticists can quantify the gene pool
if we know any of the following. The frequencies of any of the alleles, the frequencies of the
genotypes and so if we do that we can actually plug them into the formula and populations at
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium will remain so if the population size is large enough to swamp out any
impacts from random changes in the frequencies that are actually the hallmark of a process we call
genetic drift and genetic drift are sort of the mathematical anomalies that happen in theoretically
random events. Now the large size of the population will prevent any single individual
from having a disproportionate impact on the population a concept we call the founder effect.
Now the population can't have any new arrivals either as they may bring new alleles so migration
has to be a net of zero. If any new alleles arise which is what happens when mutation occurs
then the equilibrium is immediately upset because there's a new gene that must be factored in.
Now if the allele or gene in question imparts any advantage or cost to the organism
over time the frequencies will respond to that fitness differential and ultimately
alter the gene frequencies within the population. Any of those things happen we say that evolution
happens because this is the process that tends to upset Hardy-Weinberg and in fact most populations
are actually evolving but the power of the Hardy-Weinberg formula is that not only can we use
it to detect the process of evolution because the frequencies will drift away from equilibrium
but we can use it as a predictive tool and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium tends to reset itself every
generation so it becomes a very very powerful tool for geneticists to model the genetic behavior
of a population. Now the whole process of this intergenerational gene transfer reduces the overall
risk of extinction for any population and there are competing forces in this whole idea of genetic
variation. Natural selection tends to winnow out alleles in the population that are at that have
relatively low fitness at the time the selection takes place. The diploid genome that most organisms
have helps actually to maintain genetic diversity because if you go back to this model for instance
of a dominant recessive allele for a given locus we can actually have an allele that is silent
genetically because it's overshadowed by the dominant gene. We also can have something called
balanced polymorphism in eukaryotes which enhances variation. Now as we said before these recessive
alleles can persist in individuals who are heterozygous. The exposure to selection of that
allele only happens when the two recessive alleles come up together in homozygous individuals.
So heterozygotes thus help maintain a gene pool of alleles that might be useful under future
ecological scenarios. Balance polymorphism also protects entire phenotypes by a natural selection
and let's explore that a little bit because really I think the whole idea of balanced polymorphism
is pretty interesting and it gets to the heart of why diversity is so important in living systems.
Let's take a look at an example of Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar. Most males are anadromous
which means they hatch in fresh water, mature in the ocean and return to their home rivers to spawn
and die. However a certain proportion are known as precocious par wherein they mature more quickly
and breed in their home rivers without ever leaving them. Now both strategies
or phenotypes are actually stable and so you end up in a population with a certain number of
individuals who are precocious par and a certain percentage of individuals who express the normal
phenotype and as a balance it works pretty well. Now it's interesting because if you think about
some of the other conversations that we've had about habitat loss, the impact of climate change,
the impact of overuse of river systems, it is actually becoming more and more difficult
for anadromous males to make the journey from the ocean back up to their spawning grounds in
the headwaters of some of these rivers and as a result the precocious par are actually
becoming a critical ecological resource preventing some of these salmon populations
from becoming locally extinct which we call extirpation. On that note extinction
or the loss of a species is a threat to many species. Now causes of extinction can be grouped
into four essential risk categories. Now random variations in populations can cause a species
in low abundance to become extinct and this is a very high population risk. For example the
North American buffalo was hunted to near extinction in the early 19th century. They used to roam the
western plains and cover as far as the eye could see over a million buffalo lived on the great plains.
Their population has rebounded due to buffalo ranches and wildlife management practices but
what about their genetic diversity? The population went through a bottleneck because the numbers got
so low. Another example are elephant seals which were hunted to the brink of extinction by the
end of the 19th century only about a hundred remained. These seals live in the eastern Pacific
ocean migrating between Alaska and Baja California. The giant males average 5,000 pounds in size of
females about 1,500. In fact this is an extreme example of sexual selection which we investigate
in other lectures. Now these elephant seals were favored among seal hunters for their meat and
blubber. Conservation efforts along the California coast have yielded significant gains in the
absolute number of these seals. The populations are growing dramatically.
Now pup production in some of these local rookeries has increased over 40 percent per year from
1962 to 68 in some of the early efforts to restore them and then onion oevo as much as 47 percent per
year has been an extraordinary change in the reproductive output and today approximately
100,000 seals live along the west coast of North America. However the population was derived from
a very small bottlenecked ancestry and genetic diversity is still relatively low and therefore
the species is still at risk for extinction. Now population sizes can be affected by the
changing environment. The changing climate is affecting many species of birds as are the effects
of the changing in the timing of seasons. Red-caucated woodpeckers are a cooperatively breeding
species that is listed on the federal endangered species list. They live in groups that include
the breeding female and up to four adult helpers and usually those juveniles, the helpers are
juveniles from the previous year's breeding attempts. Karen Shee, again her team from Virginia
Polytechnic Institute, analyzed the reproductive data from a 19-year study where there were detailed
nesting information available and they've been collecting these data from known breeding individuals.
In other words they've put color bands on the legs of these birds so they know the individual
identities and can track them through time. They were studied in two locations in North Carolina
and some females in the two populations of woodpeckers have shifted their median laying date
for egg clutches typically four to five days earlier correlating with climate change.
It's very interesting because at one of the sites the climate change has resulted in earlier rainfall
at the other site it's higher temperatures. Now the experienced females those who had bred before
were more likely to nest earlier as were experienced breeding pairs of these woodpeckers
some of which will change mates. The more inbred birds were not adapting to this change in climate
very interesting. These individuals are not laying their eggs earlier and it was found that older
birds mating with new mates were also more likely to adjust their laying dates. Inexperienced females
those breeding for the first time showed no such trend over time with similar with respect to this
plasticity. However the increased laying activity did not actually result in higher reproductive
success. So a very interesting story emerging in this population that's being stressed not only by
habitat destruction and declining populations but now a changing ecological environment as a result
of climate chaos. So many of these traits in birds like egg laying, molting when they change their
feathers and in other populations like leaf drop and plants or migration patterns and animals
have shifted dramatically in response to global warming trends and we were going to invest and
we will investigate this much more closely in other lectures. You know natural catastrophe like
fire and floods or earthquakes volcanic eruptions can cause extinction by completely wiping out
entire ecosystems. Small populations are at much higher risk for extinction because of their lack
of genetic diversity and the potential impact of change being able to out swamp their ability to
respond. Now genetic drift or changes in the gene pool from mutation or migration can also affect
the population. A genetic bottleneck can occur when a small population remains and this is reduces
genetic variability. So the bottleneck comes from the idea that you know you have a lot of fluid in
a bottle and when you pour it it goes through this narrow neck and it's coming through more slowly or
more in a more restricted fashion and this metaphor holds when a population suddenly gets smaller
and only a few individuals become represented in the breeding population of the next generation.
We call that a bottleneck. For example for example cheetahs are at very high risk of extinction
because of inbreeding within a small population. The world's cheetahs seem to have very very
similar genetic profiles as a result of some kind of genetic variability reduction
that occurred early in their history. Somewhere at the end of the Pleistocene era it appears
that a big chunk of the parent population died out. But through recolonialization smaller
populations have served as the base for the emergence of these sort of subpopulations cheetahs
have become genetically very very similar. In an original survey of this done by O'Brien 47
loci, alozyme loci were actually found to be monomorphic which means they were they were
completely homozygous. Current phenotypic profiles include things like defective or
apyrene sperm which means they don't the sperm don't have the heads that actually
carries the genetic material defective teeth limbs that are badly malformed and a whole slew of
natal developmental abnormalities have become a hallmark now of cheetah populations.
And some biologists now believe that they are too inbred to even survive as a species.
It's interesting though because the cheetahs are actually beginning to require more variation due
to apparently higher mutation rates which which remains a bit of a mystery for the species.
When the mitochondrial DNA of cheetahs and puma and other severely threatened cats were compared
the overall mitochondrial DNA nucleotide diversity. And by the way most of our DNA as you know is
carried in the nucleus of our cells the so-called nuclear DNA which we are diploid we also carry
some of our DNA in the organelles of our cells in the mitochondria and the mitochondrial DNA
are not diploid they're haploid having only single copy and we get all of our mitochondrial DNA
from our mothers we get none from our fathers. So it's a very interesting DNA to track because
it moves as a whole unit from generation to generation it's not rescramble by meiosis.
Also mitochondrial DNA does not have the same repair mechanisms that nuclear DNA has so its
mutation rate is quite a bit faster so you can actually detect changes evolutionary changes in
mitochondrial DNA faster than you can in nuclear DNA. Overall mitochondrial DNA nucleotide diversity
was 0.0018 for the cheetahs and 0.0035 for pumas therefore suggesting that the cheetah has rebounded
some from its original bottleneck. Now another species the giant panda its populations are
becoming more fragmented as habitat used by humans in China has changed. A recent study conducted
by Lewin Johnson examined three isolated populations of pandas by looking at four different molecular
genetic markers in the bears they were able to determine the genetic variability. Signature
alleles were found for the sample and there were multiple population specific signature alleles
suggesting that there had been some isolation. One of the populations in Kinling showed signs
of experiencing moderate geographic isolation. Now compared to other breeding carnivores by
comparison we reveal that the pandas genetic variation is moderate to low. The pandas heterozygosity
measures range from about 0.277 to 0.465 with an average of about 0.44 cheetahs are at 0.43
pumas are about 0.36 and lions are about 0.37. These data suggests that giant pandas are not at
risk of a genetic bottleneck but conservationists need to keep watch on their habitat and potential
isolating factors from each other. Now genetic variation is critical for humans too
and the genetic variation that humans have contributes to our ability to adapt to different
ecosystems and in fact in other lectures we investigate the impact of malaria on the genetic
structure of human populations. In our next lecture we consider the impact of climate change
on the timing of natural events and ecosystems but for now we're out of time.
