Hello and welcome back. You know in our last lecture we focused on the forces that limit
the size of populations. We looked at carrying capacity and competition and in this lecture
we're going to turn the lens using those same tools and begin to look at humans. You know
humans have undergone a massive demographic transition all over the world. Over half the
human population has moved from rural to urban lifestyles. This transition from relatively
low to high density population settings has created a unique set of ecological characteristics
that has never been seen before in human history. We will discover the ecology of people living
in cities and the challenges posed by urban infrastructure on environmental sustainability.
Now this is a story about people but we're beginning with turtles and for good reason.
The image that you see before you is of a diamond-backed terrapin hatchling
and they're a focus of our study group. We've been working with the species for about 35 years
and they nest in barrier beaches on Cape Cod along the east coast of the United States
and they spend their adult period most of their adult lives in the salt marsh. But in order to get
to those areas they have to cross roads and because of increases in human use of areas
especially construction the areas that they would put their nests are now parking lots
and driveways and homes and so they're essentially being squeezed out. And our interest as ecologists
in this aspect of their conservation biology is to figure out if these animals given a little
bit of assistance from us can find alternative strategies with respect to the areas that they
will choose for nesting. And so we're doing a program called Headstarting where we take turtle
eggs that have been laid in areas where they would be bound to fail because they've been
laid in parking lots or in areas that will flood or in areas that are too close to roads
and we raise the hatchlings in the laboratory and the next image you can see us
measuring one of the little hatchlings they're only about an inch long when they come out.
And we have them for about a year we feed them an exaggerated diet so that they grow rapidly
and then we take them back to the place where they hatched out and we let them go.
And the hope is that that kind of investment will help to mitigate the impact of urbanization
and this expanding human population. Now these animals don't breed until they're seven years old
and our project's been going at this aspect of our project has been going about 10 years.
So we're hoping to see some of these turtles coming up to nest in the very near future.
Now the human population is still growing like mad and although there's been a demographic
transition these populations are continuing to grow the transition has been from a high to
low birth rate in developed nations and it's been particularly rapid in Asia and Latin America as
those nations have modernized and also in Europe and North America. The birth rates in Africa have
remained relatively high however but even though the birth rates have come down that instantaneous
sample the overall growth is still 1.2 percent per year and that works out to 200,000 additional
people added to the planet every day. And remember that's the net addition accounting for those people
who pass away on that day. Remember the population is a function of the birth rate which is additive
and the death rate which is subtractive. The UN estimates that by 2050 there'll be somewhere between
7.3 and 10.7 billion people on the planet and that growth rate is a function of that J-shaped
curve and the exponential growth that humans like other organisms are possible to achieve.
So if we take a look at this growth curve of the human population you can see like most populations
it starts off very small and actually takes quite a while to get going. The human population took
thousands and thousands of years to reach the first billion on the planet
but then the succeeding billions were reached relatively quickly. So over the past 100 years
humans have shifted from living in low density rural settings to living in high density urban
complexes. Now what do we mean by urban and this is a term that has been used both casually and
remember we talked previously about this challenge of using words and science that are also used in
the general population we talked about diversity. Well what does urban mean? Well in the broad sense
urban takes in the whole range of habitats that humans live in within the scope of a petroleum
based commuting network. So that's a greater metropolitan concept. Some call this the urban
mosaic referring to the great variety and kinds of areas included in this larger broader version
of urban. Now urban in a strict sense refers to the densest and paved components of the settled mosaic.
Now why do we think it's important to include an urban an urban perspective and thinking about
ecology? Well think about this with more than half the world's population living in cities
and two-thirds of Americans living in cities. Remember that the quality and character of
urban landscapes are going to shape how people view nature. With two with two-thirds of Americans
living in cities when they open their door in the morning they don't see Yellowstone Park.
They see the urban mosaic in which they live and that becomes the interpretation and the
experience of nature. Nature is all around us and urban environments are legitimate ecological
domains. Our hope of course is that research efforts on urban ecology can make cities more
livable and sustainable. And I also think that one of the most interesting outcomes of this
bringing together of the social and natural sciences to understand the urban landscape
allows the nature of urban challenges to be understood from an ecological perspective.
So historically what might have been a social issue of poverty and race is when factored into
the environmental components the ecological perspective is actually an environmental justice
issue and there's a new approach to solving problems. Another reason we need to understand
more about urban ecology or the ecology of urban landscapes is that there is a tidal wave of sprawl
and it's likely to come from developing nations.
Now the growth of cities has been most pronounced when the data are measured as changes in land
use practices. So for example in the 20-year window from 1970 to 1990 the growth in Chicago
was relatively small it's a legacy city it has a long history and in that 20-year period of time
the population grew only by 4% but the growth in urbanized land was 46%. So a relatively few
additional people was translating into a much larger use of land. And during the same time
as we talked about before Los Angeles the population increased by 45% but there was a
300% increase in urbanized land use. It's an extraordinary phenomenon.
Now the impacts of urbanization are affecting humans both in cities and those living close
by. In urbanized areas the temperature can often be much higher than the surrounding rural areas.
We call this phenomenon the heat island effect and it is caused by the modification
of the land surface. So most cities have a large amount of impervious paved surfaces
that are dark and absorb large amounts of heat. These materials radiate the heat and thus increase
the temperature in the cities. The temperature difference is usually larger at night than
during the day and larger in winter than in summer and it is most apparent when the wind is still.
Now buildings in cities also block the normal wind patterns and upset normal
convection currents. So what we have then is this island of concrete that because of the darker
colors heats up more than the surrounding landscape and then acts as acts to radiate that
heat back out and it can be a significant difference compared to the environments around the city.
For example there was an incident that many of you probably remember in the mid 1990s when
there was a heat wave that swept across the world and across the world in the northern hemisphere.
It was a staggering impact in Europe in which thousands of people died. But in Chicago it's
remembered as the heat wave of 1995 and in a relatively short period of time it caused over
700 deaths. Humid air hung over Chicago in the summer of 1995 and they recorded temperatures
as high as 106 degrees. The city was warmer than the environment around it and that's the
physical and biogeo the sort of the biogeophysical component. But remember urban ecology is about
the social dynamics as well. Now to read in the newspaper one of the emergency workers said it
was like having a large jetliner crash in the city every day for three days. There were 700
people that died and thousands upon thousands of people that were made sick by the heat.
So the issue here is what are the social factors what is the human ecological dynamic
that caused this mortality? Eric Kleinenberg wrote a very influential book about the event
called Heat Wave a social autopsy of disaster in Chicago that was published in 2002 and his findings
were very interesting. He found that mortality was human mortality was highest among the very
young and the very old and that's not surprising because individuals who are very young are very
old often have weakened immune systems or weakened physical conditions and hence they're more susceptible
to external insults such as high heat. Also the highest mortality occurred in poor neighborhoods
sadly that was not surprising either. But here was the surprising component and the thing that I
think is most hopeful about the potential interventions into urban areas. All the poor
neighborhoods did not have the same rates of mortality. It turns out that the social ecology
of the neighborhood was actually the key variable with respect to mortality and it turns out that
neighborhoods with high social capital avoided these heat deaths and by that I mean the social
networks that were in place. So think about how this plays out. It's a poor neighborhood often
these are multi-story old buildings with poor ventilation systems. In communities where there's
poor social capital, fear, unabated crime, people are essentially frightened and they live in very
small autonomous units afraid to venture into other people's apartments that kind of thing. The
social networks are very weak but in communities with high social cohesion and social capital
individuals know each other and they know about each other's circumstances. So the old woman who
might be living up on the third floor of a tenement without air conditioning who might have died
unnoticed until her body decomposition was noticed by people in the environment
in a neighborhood with low social capital. Compare that to what happened in neighborhoods
with high social capital. The people living on the second floor knew the woman who lived on the third
floor and were able to assist her before it became a crisis. And so the notion that the critical
differentiating point was only the economic wealth of the community would have been to
understate and misunderstand the complexity, the real complexity, the real critical variable
with social capital. And it turns out as we'll look later in this lecture series that social
capital can be built with environmental infrastructure. It's a wonderful story but we're
going to save it till later. Now human design influences the ecology and ultimately the layout
of urban habitat. We mentioned before that a study of bird species richness in Madrid
is negatively correlated with the amount of paved ground within the park boundaries.
Biodiversity declined as a fraction of the pavement increased.
There was a five-fold difference among parks with respect to avian biodiversity. Those parks that
had more vegetation had five times the number of birds. So these data suggest that park design
can not only positively influence biodiversity but in fact it's an essential component of a
sustainable ecosystem. Now we know because of the increased density of humans that pollution is
increased in urbanized area. Air quality is often diminished and smog is common in many
cities across the United States. Now air pollution occurs because the rate of emissions
in an urbanized area is dramatically increased and the topography and weather also influence
air quality. We talked about the various kinds of pollution in a previous lecture. We had the
primary and secondary emissions and fugitive emissions. Well these all take place within cities.
Now cities located near an ocean or large bodies of water often experience an onshore breeze or
sea breeze which moves the air from the city's inland. Thus coastal cities often have clean air
and the pollution gets moved further inland and downwind and those communities experience
poor air quality. Cities located in valleys or near mountains may experience more air pollution
because the air gets trapped by the physical barriers and this is well documented in Los Angeles
which has mountains surrounding it to the east. It has an air mass that moves primarily from
off of the ocean from the west to the east and it literally concentrates the pollution right over
the city. And of course air pollution can increase the respiratory problems for children and the
elderly resulting in soaring asthma rates in urban areas. Now another consideration of humans
that are imposed on the urban landscape is noise and light pollution which are quite common in urban
areas. Noise pollution in cities affects both humans and wild animals. Now birds living in
urban areas have been found actually to switch the frequency range of their calls and songs to
adjust for the increased background noise found in cities. And we're going to talk about a couple
of studies in just a moment but think about this challenge. When we think about what healthy
ecological systems provide what are the ecosystem services let's put our let's put ourselves in
the mind of a bird. What are the ecosystem services a bird needs? Well it needs access to clean water,
needs access to nesting habitat, it needs access to food.
And in many urban areas all these three things are available but the birds aren't there
because there's another ecosystem service which is the ability to ecosystem to support the
communication networks that those birds have. And that's been the focus of a set of studies
that look at the bioacoustics or the noise environment of cities and as an investigation
of how that impacts bird populations. Now one such study was conducted in Oregon
looking at song sparrows and here Wood and the research team looked at the the the lowest
fundamental frequency of songs being done by these sparrows and compared it to the background noise
that was taking place. And in the graph you can see that noise is measured along the horizontal axis
and noise is measured in decibels which is the traditional measure of the power or the the amount
of power that a noise has is the amount of energy. It's actually a ratio it's a ratio of the quietest
sound that can be heard with respect to the loudest sound that can be interpreted and so
that's why when you look at charts it's a little bit confusing sometimes because you see something
at zero decibels and you think oh that must mean there's no energy. No it turns out that zero
decibels is the quietest sound that a human can hear. And this chart goes from about 30 decibels
to 60 decibels and the decibel system of measurement is logarithmic. So when you go from 30 to 40
decibels you are increasing the energy by a factor of 10 and so you have decibels measured
on the horizontal axis in the range it's most important to birds which is the one to four
kilohertz range or one to four thousand cycles per second that's the quality of the sound.
And then on the vertical axis you see the frequency at which the birds are singing
and as the noise increases and most of the noise occurs in this lower frequency range
the birds are shifting their calls higher to get them up over the rumble of the city.
And so their ability to do that is an adaptation and the question is why don't all birds do that?
Well because not all birds have that internal adaptation to shift their to shift their song
frequencies. Sometimes as is the case with with certain songbirds they they have evolved the
capacity to shift their song frequencies as a result of their social position only the most
dominant males get to sing at the low frequencies and the less dominant males sing at the higher
frequencies. It's a way the birds dividing up the bandwidth of available sound that's available.
You see you see the same thing with with with frogs and toads singing in a in a pond setting and
you see the same thing with the ultra high frequencies that bats use when they're doing
echolocation they have to divide the bandwidth up. Another study that was done in the Dutch
city of Leiden by Hans Slavikorn and Margriet Piet study chickadee like birds Paris major in
in Leiden and they found that the lowest portions of the song frequencies range from
about 2.8 to 3.8 kilohertz and was very closely correlated to the ambient background noise.
Another study of chickadees in North America studied by Ingeborg Hansen and her colleagues at
the University of British Columbia found that the chickadees altered their density as a result of
habitat changes caused by human disturbance. So we've talked about urbanization changing the
communication capacity and here we're looking at birds that also are shifting their population
densities. So in the data that you see here what they did was they went into areas of various
levels of disturbance and they classified them either as disturbed or undisturbed.
And they did what we call point counts which is a standard method of censoring bird density.
So basically what you do is you go into a particular area and you go at the period of time
when the birds are singing at their most intense which is at the dawn we call it the dawn chorus
and they're reestablishing their their territories at that time. And so you go into a point count
you go and stand in a particular area and for some number of minutes you listen and you write
down or record as many birds of that species as you can hear and the fact that you can
spatially locate because we have stereo hearing you can tell whether you're hearing one bird or
two birds or three birds. So their data indicated that the average number of birds heard in their
point counts were higher in the undisturbed area versus the disturbed area and that was both true
for the average number of birds that they heard and the maximum number of birds they heard in any
point count. It was higher in undisturbed versus disturbed areas. Now animals living near near
cities are also being affected by light pollution. Birds migrating at night collide with brightly
colored buildings. Nightingales and black birds have exhibited very strange behaviors of singing
at night or at other unnatural hours when an artificial light source is installed. Insects
often swarm towards light sources and become easy prey for other bird and bat species. And if you
get a chance in the summer in your neighborhood you ought to go out and look carefully at the lights
around athletic fields at night and you'll see that there are lots of insects that are focusing
on the light and we tend to glance up see the insects and then we stop but look for a little
bit longer and chances are especially at night you'll see bats flying in and out of the light
pools as they fly in to capture the insects. Now sea turtles at night they nest at night
and show a natural predisposition for dark beaches and with coastal development turtles
are finding less and less suitable beaches for them to nest. And this is all a result of the
fact that the human population is growing and shifting demographically. The world is becoming
increasingly urbanized and it's rising from about 37 percent urban in 1970 to a projected
worldwide distribution of over 60 percent urban in 2030. Urban areas will see 95 percent of the
population growth between 1996 and 2030. One researcher at University College in London Ruth
Mace has found that reproductive strategies of humans in urban areas are not only shifting
but she sees a bit of a paradox because in most systems the more resources an organism has
the more offspring it can produce. However what we see in wealthy urban areas is that humans tend
to have much smaller families and invest more per child than in rural areas where the cost of
children of raising children is actually lower. The populations are showing a demographic shift.
Now let's take a look at some of these data and granted the the figure is a little bit hard to
interpret and so let me help you through. This was published recently in the journal Science
and you see that on the horizontal axis is wealth increasing as you go from left to right.
On the vertical axis is fertility i.e. the number of offspring produced increasing from bottom to
top and you can see in these large blocks that that urban communities tend to be more wealthy
but parents they're having fewer offspring. In rural environments there's less wealth but
more offspring are being produced and this appears to be a paradox but but here's the
explanation of the paradox the cost per child is lower in rural areas so even though communities
are more poor the investment per child is lower and so families are having more offspring
because it's the only way to achieve any social sustainability or any physical sustainability
within that family. Now there's a gradient that's established which you can see is the gray arrow
to the right that as you move from rural to urban you see an increase in per child investment by
the parents as you move from urban to rural that that investment is decreased so again this paradox
emerges but what it suggests and these boxes that are that are in the middle between these two large
boxes suggest that within individual neighborhoods those paradoxes are resolved because really when
when parents are making choices they're making choices in the narrow context of their local
neighborhoods not in the not in the global setting as a whole you know when you when you're making
choices about your life you're making choices about what you encounter on a daily basis not
what's happening halfway around the world and so within these local neighborhoods these dynamics
are playing out and what we're seeing then are these global scale at the global scale are these
meta patterns that are emerging now when fertility falls from high to low levels
it changes the number of people in the prime working age category
and what it does is shift the the distribution of of individuals who are at different life stages
now let's take a look at at the way that these data play out these are essentially what we call
age pyramids now in rapidly growing nations in developing nations what you see is a very very
broad base of people who are very young and then increasingly fewer people as you go up to through
adolescence and middle age and finally late stages of life there are the maximum number
people that who are young and and these age structure pyramids show increasingly fewer
people as you move up the age structure what that means is that that population is growing
rapidly because ultimately those individuals the base of pyramids are going to become of
reproductive age and have offspring and the base is going to get wider and wider and wider
in populations that have essentially zero growth the pyramid becomes constricted and what you see
is the base of the population the youngest the number of people the number of youngest people
in the population is about the same as those who are middle aged and then you see the cone begin to
reduce as individuals get older and we see that in a number of sustainable countries in europe and
also north america and then finally in some populations you actually have negative population
growth where you have more people who are in middle age than you actually have children
placing them and those are populations that are actually shrinking and there are populations in
europe such as germany germany and italy where the domestic population is actually shrinking
because of changes in reproductive demographics you know high densities of human human populations
present a tremendous challenge now living in high densities has impacts for other
organisms as well and in the following lecture we will look at how species can influence each
other's trajectory process we call co-evolution and until then take care
