Hello and welcome back. In today's conversation, we're going to focus on the migration and movement
patterns of animals. But when we think about this, we're actually going to be engaging
the whole idea of dispersal. You know, ecological systems are dynamic and resource availability
is often ephemeral. Populations or organisms are ultimately limited by their patterns
of dispersal. Dispersal ecology is complex and interdependent upon many different factors.
Dispersal of animals often occurs at sexual maturity. Somebody has to leave. Because of
the tilt of the Earth's axis, much of the planet is plunged into cold winter and water
resources become locked up during these cold periods as ice, forcing animals to move.
Some organisms have to move long distances in order to complete their life cycles. These
patterns of movement are driven by resources and the avoidance of predation. Migration imposes
a unique set of limitations on these species, and we're going to be investigating that.
The costs and benefits of migration have different outcomes for different species, and we will
investigate both avian and mammal migrants. And we're also going to explore the challenges
they face in completing their own complex life cycles.
Now let's consider migration and first take a little piece out of human history. You know,
many of you probably remember the Irish potato famine of the mid-19th century. It was an
extraordinary time in human history, and in particular, there were three million people
living in Ireland at the time, and because of political and ecological collapse of their
food resources, nearly a million people starved, but nearly a million people left Ireland to
other places in Europe and then mostly to North America. And from an ecological perspective,
this was a dispersal of people from a focused location into new landscapes, and other animals
do that kind of migration too on occasion, often in response to animal politics and also
to limited resources. And we're going to talk about that in the context of migration today.
So let's begin by talking about scrub jays and the notion of dispersal. Scrub jays are
species of bird. They live in central Florida, and they're species that are actually in pretty
big trouble because of habitat destruction. They prefer sandy open space within oak woodlands,
and by doing this, it reduces their competition with other bird species. So studies by a team
led by David Beninger found that over half the nest in open habitat fledged at least
one nestling compared to the thickly settled habitats where only about 38% were able to
fledge. Now remember, this is a critical aspect of an animal's natural history cycle, the
ability to produce new offspring. I mean, it all boils down to from an evolutionary sense,
can you reproduce or can you not? And what we're seeing here is that different habitats
are affecting the life history patterns of these animals and directly impacting the reproductive
success. Now, typically, natural fire within these ecosystem dynamics will keep these patches
open over time. However, in Florida with human fire suppression, these habitats become thick
with vegetation. Now this favors blue jay nesting, a different but closely related species,
and they're highly aggressive and will outcompete the scrub jays. And in fact, they also prey
on the eggs of the scrub jays, which reduces their fitness. Now this has led to a massive
decline in scrub jay populations across Florida. Now, in natural vegetative succession, the
birds would move to a new location. But in this instance, there isn't any new habitat
for them to move to. So we think about the solutions for the scrub jays. And remember,
one of the things we've talked about in our other lectures is that in human dominated
landscapes, succession or the natural changing of habitats is frozen. It doesn't take place.
We sort of create habitats, we decide how they're going to be, and then we maintain them.
And so in the Florida scenario, we suppress the fire, which would naturally reduce the
thick vegetation. We're not allowing the ecosystem to mature normally through the process of
succession. And so what we're seeing is a degrading of the habitat for scrub jays, moving
in of a competing species and an overall reduction in reproductive success within these scrub
jays that then in the larger context reduces the biodiversity of that central Florida scrub
plane. And so what it does is suggest that there's a long term cost to this kind of management.
And so the trick, as we'll talk about here, but also in later lectures, is that we can
add additional management to these ecosystems, and it may be introducing fire into these
ecosystems to keep them open, because that's what this particular species needs.
Now it typically normal patterns of dispersal will prevent these habitats from becoming
completely saturated and overrun. In the scrub jay situation, what would normally happen
is that adults would leave and find new habitats, and they would disperse, but the habitat's
not available. So let's take a look at lions. Lions are good example. Often at the time
of sexual maturity, one gender will leave the natal habitat and disperse to new locations.
Now lions are some of the most famous social animals on the planet, and I think it's impossible
to turn on any sort of nature programming and not find lions. Part of the reason is
they're so interesting to film, and from an ecologist standpoint, they're actually quite
tolerant of scientists watching them. They sort of go about their lives, and so they're
a great animal to study, and they tend to do much of their social behavior out in the
open. And it's sort of interesting. We know a disproportionate more about lions than we
do about other large predatory cats, partly because lions are easier to study. And that's
because they live in social groups called prides, which in this case are controlled
by related females. So all the females in the pride are mothers and daughters and grandmothers
and sisters. This is a matrilineal structure, and it depends, and it demands that the young
males disperse from their native, their native, their natal pride. And this has two fundamental
impacts. First, the dispersal of young serves to spread the genetic fitness of the breeding
females over a larger geographic area. So in other words, remember, we've talked about
individuals as being temporary bags of genetic material. Well, your offspring are your investment
in the future. They're your bet in the future, and you really don't want all of your offspring
to end up in exactly the same location. So dispersing sends your investment, your genetic
investment portfolio into a wider geospatial distribution. Now here's another critical
piece. Dispersal also prevents inbreeding within the pride, which would cause the population
to become weak. So as these animals reach sexual maturity, either the brothers or the
sisters have to leave. Otherwise, you're likely to have problems of inbreeding. And in this
particular population, the males disperse. Now, Belling's ground squirrels are an example
of a differential dispersal. This species has a different social structure than lions.
Females have their own burrows, but will occasionally assist in group defense of a breeding colony.
So it's not the same social structure. In this case, both genders disperse at maturity,
but males disperse farther away than females once they mature. So the females remain relatively
close to their natal burrows as it aids in group defense of the colony. Now, in a very
few number of social species, it's actually the female who does the major dispersal at
maturity. And one example are African wild dogs, along with spider monkeys and chimpanzees.
They're all examples where females will leave their natal social group at maturity. And again,
this is most likely as a way of avoiding inbreeding. Now, males in these systems maintain their
tenure over the social group for long periods of time and also defend territories. And this
pattern may favor males remaining in their natal territory because of the coalitions
that they might be able to build. And we're going to talk about this a little bit later
in our conversation about social ecology. But I think you're picking up here that the
social dynamics are also an important driver to this notion of dispersal. And in the case
of lions and in the case of other social animals, quite often an individual male is unable to
defend or gain access to territory. And they have to form coalitions. They have to have
cooperative units in order to achieve that. So many of the forces that drive dispersal
within social groups really have yet to be elucidated, very complex, and we're still working
through that. And we'll talk a little bit more about this in just a moment, actually
in a later lecture. Now, some species engage in an annual dispersal pattern we call migration.
So this is different from what we've just talked about. Up to this point, we've talked
about essentially a once in a lifetime event, a young organism, a young animal grows up
in its social group and leaves. And it could be the male, it could be the female, it could
be both, and they move different distances. This has the effect of investing in your genetic
material in new geospatial distributions and avoiding inbreeding. Now, annual migrations
are different. Annual migrations are typically driven by the need for food resources or to
find predator pre-areas for raising offspring. So the metabolic and survivorship, the metabolic
and survivorship costs for migration are very high and they vary within individuals.
So seasonal variation is one driver for migration because the change in season impacts the energy
availability for animals. It's generally not temperature that limits animals, it's the
available energy. So think about this for a moment. We tend to think of birds leaving
temperate climates in the winter and going to, quote, warmer environments. Well, in colder
climates water gets locked up as ice and is unavailable in response, and is unavailable.
And so in response, the animals are moving not because it's cold, the birds are leaving
not because they're cold. They're leaving because the available energy is shut down.
And as such, they have to move to other areas. Now, before we move on and think in more detail
about bird migration, let's think about these two challenges that are related to migration.
One is to find new energy sources, which is food, and the other is to avoid predators.
And this is an interesting balance because the two things animals have to do in their
lifetime, all animals have to do, is to get enough energy to survive and then to find
a safe place to have their offspring. And these are often conflicting situations because
in areas where there's lots of food availability, not surprisingly, there are lots of predators.
And we're going to see as we look at these migratory examples from birds and mammals
that quite often where the cafeteria is open is also rich in predators as well as it is
rich in food. And so the animals will go one place to get calories and to fuel their metabolic
engines and they'll go somewhere else to have their offspring. It's a fascinating balance
that these animals have to do. So let's begin by looking at bird migrations. Birds as a
taxonomic group are the most likely to migrate. Well, part of the reason is that it's so easy
for them to move long distances. And also because they have evolved the capacity to fly, they
have very, very high metabolic rates that demand enormous energy resources. Remember,
some of the songbirds that you have in your backyard have resting heart rates of hundreds
of beats per minute. And they can during their migratory cycles lose as much as half their
body weight. So they're talking about enormous investments of energy that are needed to run
their machines. Nearly half of all the songbirds, the so-called passerines that live in north
America during the summer will spend their winters in central or south America. Many species
of birds migrate 5,000 miles or more to locate food resources. And again, as we've mentioned
before, the other major reason that animals migrate, and birds in particular, is to avoid
predators. Arctic terns are one of the most energetic long distance migratory species.
They are perpetually reliant on summers in the extreme latitudes for their fuel. They
must travel from the Arctic to the Antarctic and back again each year. You know, their
annual trek can be as much as 25,000 miles as they move from the northern summer to the
austral summer. Now, the breeding distribution is circumpolar and continuous, so it's interesting.
They're distributed all around the world, but there are actually no subspecies that
are recognized. And typically, when a species is cosmopolitan that is distributed across
the globe, you get isolated populations where gene flow is limited between those populations,
and they don't form completely new species, but they do form what we call subspecies.
And we will talk about that in another lecture. But what's fascinating is you have these
terns that are distributed all around the world at the top and bottom of the globe,
but yet they're no subspecies because they're so mobile that their genes are mixing, which
is a testimony to the incredible sort of durability of their capacity to move. Now, I think even
more extraordinary when we think about the natural history patterns of these terns is
that not all the adult birds breed every year. Some take as much as two years to return
to their northern breeding sites. Now, these birds pair bond for life, and they may live
as long as 30 years. And one of the interesting things that we do find about long-distance
migrators is that long-distance migrators tend to have relatively long lifespans. And
it's sort of understandable because just the whole process of figuring out and surviving
the process of migration is pretty arduous. And it takes a long lifespan to be able to
do that cyclical process, have a window of time to produce your offspring, invest in
those offspring, and so forth. So this long-distance pattern of cyclical dispersal assures these
terns of an abundant food supply and a relatively predator-free site for their reproduction.
Because they're ground-nesting birds, they've got to lay their eggs on the ground, which
puts them at relatively high risk, so they need to find areas when they're nesting that
are relatively predator-free. Now, another good example of a long-distance
migratory bird species are the large predatory birds, such as Osprey. Now, this is a four-pound
bird, and it has a six-foot wingspan, and it spends winters in tropical climates, but
breeds in temperate areas where the seasonal availability of fish is high. Now, here the
engine that drives the migration is a little bit different. So Osprey nests in very high
trees, and in fact, there's been an effort along the east coast of North America to reintroduce
Osprey into their former habitats. Their numbers declined dramatically as a result of DDT pollution,
but the good news is that Osprey are coming back. They're a great success story with respect
to ecological management. They're one of our reasons for hope that we have about the future
of our strategies for managing ecosystems. So because of where they nest, their risk of
predation is relatively low. So the challenge for them is actually to have their nests in
areas that have very high amounts of resources, high available calories, and so in areas that
are constantly warm, we tend to see a relatively even amount of caloric resources available.
But in areas that are temperate, like the northern parts of the United States, we have
very, very short, relatively very short summers, which means all of the energy transformations
that might take a whole year to play out in a Caribbean ecosystem have to happen in three
or four months in a temperate system. And so what does that mean to an Osprey? If you're
nesting in Massachusetts in June, you have some of the richest fish resources in the
world right off of the coast. And so by moving to what is a colder climate, but during its
summer, you're able to access the peak fish resources of the year. And so by moving up
to this area, to cooler areas in the summer, they can actually gain access to more fish
than if they stayed in the Caribbean. Now there are some exceptions. There are a few
Osprey nesting in southern Florida, in the Caribbean, and in Baja, Mexico that don't
migrate at all. And they're a sub-population, and in fact they may actually exhibit some
genetic, some genetic distance from the other populations. That's still sort of being investigated.
Now Osprey in particular exhibit what we call very high site fidelity. They tend to return
to the same nest for many years in a row. And in fact, the Osprey towers that are built
by people tend to attract the very same pair year after year. And in fact, the Osprey become
an important measure of sound ecosystem management across North America. It's one of your sort
of ecological seals of approval if you have an Osprey in your marsh system. It suggests
that there's at least some level of natural functioning taking place. Now measures have
been taken to increase local populations of Osprey, and we said this through the production
of these Osprey towers and these artificial breeding platforms, and we have some footage
of that to show you later. Now let's think about the critters that can't fly, the mammal
migrations. Now mammals can move great distances, but they don't move with quite the ease that
birds do because they're tied to the ground. And some are in the ocean, so both terrestrial
and aquatic mammals, they're a species that have relatively long distance migratory behavior.
Mammals are also driven by the need for food and water, and they usually migrate in order
to ensure that those resources are plentiful when they need them. Now the most important
group of migrating terrestrial animals is the ungulates. Those are the grass eating mammals,
and they tend to follow grass availability as the seasons change, and in areas that are
warm as it goes from wet to dry seasons. And in North America, we have the caribou, and
in Africa we have the wildebeest. And let's take a look at North American caribou first.
The ones we tend to classic caribou that we think of when we think of these long range
migrators are the porcupine caribou, and they are barren ground foragers, and they feed
mainly on lichen and low bush cranberry, small shrubs and mosses. Population is probably
about 130,000 individuals. They end up being censored by the Alaska Department of Fish
and Game. They use radio telemetry and spotter planes, and it's important for us to understand
that population. There's a lot of investment to make sure that that population is healthy
and that we understand its fluctuations. And really they represent the last of the great
migrations of terrestrial ungulates in North America. The others are gone, the great herds
of buffalo and so forth. So these porcupine caribou, they give birth or cav on the summer
part of their range on the coastal plain of Alaska, and they form these tight bunches
to ward off the warble flies and bot flies which are seeking blood meals in order to
complete their own life cycles. And the caribou move to the south in the Brooks Range for
their wintering grounds, which is an annual journey of about 800 miles. Now it's still
pretty wintery in the Brooks Range, but at least they can get their heads through the
snow and be able to forage on the lichens and shrubs that are underneath the snow. Now
the summer grounds offer early vegetation and relative safety from predators. And believe
it or not, the biggest threat to the caribou are to their young calves and its predation
from golden eagles. And their wintering grounds provide cold weather forage for them to survive
the winter. Now let's go to the other side of the globe and let's take a look at wildebeest.
Now wildebeest migration is an extraordinary thing. It bears witness to over one and a
half million animals moving in a vast annual arc across East Africa in search of grass
reserves for feeding. In fact, the movement of wildebeest represent one of the most important
eco-tourism attractions to the continent. Although there are actually two species of
wildebeest, only the white bearded canoe, Conokites tyrannus, survives in large enough
numbers to mount that kind of mass migration. Now they alternate between the short grass
ecological zones near the rainy season and the tall grass or woodland zones in the dry
season. Now they can't stay in the same location because during the rainy season the short grasses
get so muddy that they actually get foot rot and other kinds of problems. And so they
have to move away from those in the rainy season and then they come back and so forth.
So their annual track covers hundreds of miles and they actually do most of this at a run.
It's pretty extraordinary. By the way, the young wildebeest when they're born, they're
born in the open, they're very, very vulnerable to predation. And one of the adaptations since
wildebeest can't move to predator-free areas to have their calves like the caribou can,
their offspring have adapted to this high risk. And in fact, a baby wildebeest can get
up within about four or five minutes after birth and within a couple of hours can run
as fast as their mother. Now birthing takes place in a very short period of time. All
the calves are born in about three weeks. The calves can stand a few minutes after birth
and can run in this relatively short period of time. And again, this is a critical adaptation
for the migratory lifestyle out in the open and it's, that is accessible by predators
on a year-round basis. Now some aquatic mammals, such as dolphins and whales, also migrate
long distances in order to acquire the appropriate food resources. The timings of these migrations
are dynamic, sometimes and often in balance with the timings of males and females arriving
differentially to their breeding grounds or feeding grounds. And this has to do with
the different biology and ecology of males versus females. And we're going to look at
that whole question of the differential ecology of males and females later on, but we just
need to put a marker in the sand here that it exists and it plays out, I think, in interesting
ways in our understanding of marine mammal migration.
So remember, humpback whales migrate on an annual basis between the cold, high-latitude
waters where they feed and the warm, tropical waters where the females give birth during
the winter. Most of their intensive feeding takes place in the cold, oxygenated waters
of the higher latitudes. Upwellings bring rich nutrients from the benthic zone and this
enriches the trophic dynamics of the ecosystem. You know, an adult whale will eat 2,000 pounds
of food in a day. The northern waters, they're eating krill. And as they move down to the
Gulf of Maine, copepods and herring form a significant portion of their diet. And finally
off the Stellwagen Bank of Cape Cod, they're eating sand lances and copepods again. In
the warmer waters where females give birth, they'll also mate again. And these warm waters
are excellent for calving, but they're devoid of food resources. You know, as you probably
know, when you step into Caribbean waters, it's incredibly crystal clear. Well, the fact
that it's crystal clear means that there's not much organic material in there and there's
not much food. So these whales feed in one part of the world and give birth in the other.
So while in these warm waters, the adults don't eat at all. Instead, they rely on fat
reserves that they have built up while foraging in these rich arctic ecosystems. Now, not
all migration is long distance. Some of it we call short distance migration and not all
migratory patterns are seasonal. For example, honeybees, which is talked about some of the
largest animals on Earth, whales. Let's talk about some of the smallest. Honeybees migrate
to new areas when their population densities become too high. During the summer months,
when these honeybee colonies exceed 50,000 individuals, they must divide up the colony
and migrate. Now, in order to prepare for migration, they must produce new queens. Scoutbees
from the original hive have to look for new locations. And when a new location is found,
the new queen and half of the workers will leave the hive and rebuild in a new location.
Now this migration is risky, but it's necessary as the new hive disperses the genes from the
colony to a new location and adds to the resiliency of the hive's original population.
Now dispersal is the key for survival of populations. Those species that become isolated are at
very high risk of extinction. And geospatial isolation is like a genetic island where the
residents are stranded. And as the degree of isolation goes up, so does the risk that
new genes will not enter the population. Genetic diversity is the lifeblood of evolution
and it's key to ecological resiliency. Now let's return to the osprey for a moment.
Our team has been working with osprey for years in a really extraordinary, extraordinary
organism. And as you can see from some of the footage here, what you're actually seeing
is a camera that is placed remotely on the platform. And we can control that camera from
a computer interface so our students or folks working with us can actually change the focus
of the camera and can pan. And there's also software that's built in to the system that
will track the osprey while we're not watching. And it's actually security software. And so
it picks up any motion. So when the osprey comes into land or there's an incubation change,
it automatically turns the recorder on, gathers the data when everything's quiet. Again, it
shuts it back off. So it actually allows us to gather remote behavioral data from the
species when we're not there. And it's one of the tools that we use as ecologists to
get into the life history and behavior of an animal without disturbing it. The German
term for that is umwelt. We really need to understand the animals world without disturbing
it to any larger degree. Now in the next lecture, we're going to investigate how human development
patterns influence the process of dispersal and migration and what it is that we can do
as ecological managers to facilitate some of these areas that have been degraded. So
until then, farewell.
