Hello and welcome back to the final lecture in our course.
You know, humans struggle to balance the short-term and long-term needs of people.
Human activity has put many ecosystems at risk.
However, degraded communities can be restored.
Human activity can be used as a tool for transformative public policy and action.
We will examine some of the ways ecological thinking and action can serve the human condition with respect to public health and well-being.
Now, human activities put many ecosystems at risk, but much is happening to mitigate and transform these wounded ecosystems.
Understanding how these ecosystems work, we've been able to correct historic mistakes.
We have much better fisheries management around the world as a result of ecological knowledge.
We've recovered hundreds of thousands of acres of temperate forest and see for the first time an actual movement towards increases in temperate forest available habitat.
We've seen a reduction in the world use of dangerous pesticides.
In the U.S., Clean Air, Water and the Endangered Species Act have had measurable success in recovering ecosystems.
Ecological principles have transformed urban planning.
Now, remember the ISSC framework that we looked at earlier in our conversation is an entirely new vision for the interface of the human and natural ecosystems.
So it's a way of looking at the human-dominated landscapes and how these activities of people and the biogeophysical drivers will frame and modify the dynamics of ecosystems.
We've spent a fair amount of time talking about this, but I remind you of it because it's such a powerful new way to envision the way in which ecosystems work.
Now, the world's biomes are rich and they are varied, but they have been constrained by human development.
If you notice in the map system we have before you, we have a distribution of the biomes around the world.
But what's amazing is when you take a look at the proportion of those lands that have been modified for use in agriculture.
And then if you layer on top of that the extraordinary impact of human cities and high density areas of human habitation,
you can see just how infused these biomes are with the human footprint.
And these activities, as we've learned throughout this course, the human footprint is more than just the built environment.
It's the way in which we've extracted resources. It's the way in which we've used resources.
It's the way in which we have polluted ecosystems that have left both a complicated hallmark of human presence and left us with big challenges to rectify.
Now, a significant portion of humans live along the Earth's coastal margins or riverbanks.
These fragile ecosystems are the most biologically productive on Earth and yet they are also the most at risk.
They have been badly degraded by human activities such as construction and pollution and filling in in order for additional development.
Now degraded communities can actually be restored and the existing ecosystems can be sustained.
One such success story is the saga of the wetlands in the San Francisco Bay.
Now San Francisco Bay is an ecological treasure of national significance.
The wetlands there are gigantic and they're part of an intricate ecological system that provides a variety of ecosystem services to both the wildlife and human residents of the Bay.
You know, we started off our course. We said it's okay to think ecologically when we ask the question, what's in it for me?
Well, for the citizens living in the Bay Area, what's in it for them is that the Bay itself provides extraordinary services that would otherwise be
prohibitively expensive to produce.
And it was, of course, the very resources that the Bay provided that attracted the European settlers in the first place as they followed on the heels of Sir Francis Drake.
Unfortunately, over the intervening centuries, people left more than their hearts in San Francisco and the Bay marshes suffered from pollution, physical garbage and massive land conversion.
The Bay's wetlands were dramatically reduced in size as a result of dredging and filling plus the building of dykes.
Most of the tidal wetlands were converted to other uses, especially salt pans that were used for producing sea salt.
At the highest level of ecological loss, more than 80% of the marshes were degraded.
Nearly two centuries of misuse was tackled by a series of assessments and reports first seeing daylight in the early 1990s.
Verging from this was the San Francisco Estuary Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan, and it helped to shape a new direction for the management of the Bay using sound ecological principles.
In fact, one of the elements for rebuilding the salt marshes, lost to salt production, was a simple reflutting and allowing the natural estuarine processes to both leach out the salt and recolonize the substrate.
And it worked.
You know, this particular element of success springs from a strategy not unique to California, but novel in California to link natural areas management to effective ecological scale.
Remember our conversation earlier in this course, we talked about the watershed as a natural boundary.
And the challenge, an example we use in Boston, where at the Charles River, the boundary between Cambridge and Boston is in the middle of the river.
Well, that doesn't lead to particularly easy management of river resources, because we have the hardened tragedy of the commons thing going on here.
Why does one city want to clean up one side of the river when the other municipality might not be as committed?
So to solve that problem, for example, the California Coastal Commission was established to get around the management roadblock of California's fragile coastline being in hundreds of various municipal jurisdictions.
And that's a sure recipe for a tragedy the commons approach to management.
The commission has broad powers that help to create a systems approach to coastal management, which is really the only scale that's ecologically effective.
Now let's look at another example.
An example are black-footed ferrets.
And one might ask, well, ferrets are interesting animals, but why are we bringing this up as an example of significant advantage or a significant sample of what we're doing well as a population ecological recovery?
Well, I think it represents an example of a complex, successful outcome in the face of extraordinary environmental challenge.
So ferrets are actually emblematic of the subtle and complex nature of ecosystem recovery.
Began with significant degradation of ecosystems and depredation and hunting of these ferrets and trapping, human rescues that were screw-ups along the way, some bad luck, success a little like a classic Greek play.
Now the natural home for these ferrets is the North American prairie, which has suffered disproportionately in the United States from ecological degradation.
Most of the native prairie has been destroyed in just the last 150 years.
Over 90% of it is lost according to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
And historically fire was an important element in both forming and maintaining the prairie.
By 1900, the 60 million bison that once roamed the Great Plains had dwindled to one last band of 20.
The millions of prairie dogs that had been on the plane were poisoned, many of which were poisoned, because they were believed to be competing with the grazing cattle.
Now, black-footed ferrets once occurred in grassland habitats throughout the Great Plains in 12 states and two of the Canadian provinces.
In fact, black-footed ferrets were not officially even recognized as a species by scientists until 1851.
But by the 1960s, the only known population of black-footed ferrets was a small colony in southwestern South Dakota.
The colony was studied from its discovery in 1964 until it completely disappeared a decade later.
Now, initial recovery plans failed with the species due to a combination of canine distemper disease and silvatic plague that ran rampant through a captive population.
And it also extirpated the remaining wild animals. It was really extraordinary.
The population went down to an incredible genetic bottleneck of only seven individuals.
Now, intensive captive breeding restored the numbers and provided the opportunity for the population to increase.
Now, what makes this particularly interesting to me as an ecologist is that most reintroductions tend to fail because the conditions that cause the failure in the first place have not been ameliorated.
But in this case, the restoration attempts were coinciding with the re-release in a way that permitted the process to ultimately be successful.
Now, research by Martin Grenier and his team from the University of Wyoming reported in science that the recovery has been pretty successful so far.
And this really marks the first success for a captive reintroduction program for the species and actually for many species.
Now, the endangered species program in the United States is tracking over 1,300 species and plants and animals that are listed either as endangered or threatened.
Those are two different levels of concern. Endangered species are those that are likely to go extinct immediately without intervention.
Threatened species are those whose populations are at significant risk for extinction.
So far, about 600 recovery plants have been drafted to manage these species and it's a huge undertaking but critical to our efforts to recover degraded ecosystems.
Now, let's take a look at some of the data from Grenier and his colleagues.
It's really pretty extraordinary if we take a look at the number of these black-footed ferrets beginning in their initial surveys in the 1990s.
You can see that even though the number of released were put back into the population, the actual minimum number alive remained incredibly small.
And then this terrible outbreak of the diseases in the mid to late 90s nearly wiped them out.
But beginning at the onset of the 21st century, we've seen significant recovery from the minimum number they know to be alive and also the projections and the growth rate seem to indicate that the population is really on its way to recovery.
And again, why does this matter? Well, it may be a bit of an ecological stretch but when I look at the Great Plains as they exist now, the ferrets are really like the lions of the Great Plains.
The largest of the predators that would have been there historically are not there anymore and unlikely to make much of an impact, wolves and grizzly bears and so forth.
But ferrets are incredibly important carnivores in exerting top-down predatory influence on the whole trophic dynamics of these ecosystems.
And just like we talked about coyotes and urbanized ecosystems, the presence of ferrets in the Great Plains puts top-down pressure on smaller rodents,
and it helps to establish a more normal method of control of the population trophic dynamics of small mammals within that ecosystem.
And in return, we get a more healthy ecosystem that has lower risk to things like sorenotic disease.
Now another lesson that ecology has taught us is the sort of law of unintended consequences to some respect, and I think for that reason we need to revisit what we know about the Green Revolution.
Now current patterns of urban areas and croplands are not really sustainable, and new patterns of organic farming and integrated pest management have reduced the negative impacts of human agriculture.
You can consider it a second wave of the Green Revolution. Remember we talked about the Green Revolution in previous lectures, how it transformed in the 1950s and 60s and 70s it transformed the way the crops were developed and developing nations,
and really has done enormous service in alleviating hunger around the world, but we're really entering the second phase of the Green Revolution.
Novel patterns of planting and crop rotations are replacing and historic dependence on petroleum-based fertilizers and their long-term cost to the ecosystem.
Another extraordinary example of a Green Revolution is that which is taking place in the continent of Africa, Africa's green belt movement and incredible personable and energetic leader Dr. Wangari Mathai.
This is a tremendous example of a grassroots movement leading to environmental and social transformation.
Dr. Wangari Mathai, the Nobel laureate, was the first woman in East Africa to earn a doctoral degree, which she did in 1971, and she remains committed to poverty reduction and she's worked tirelessly to create an awareness between ecological wealth and human sustainability.
Her projects all revolve around the planting of trees, which due to deforestation and political strife have become rare resources in some of the poorest parts of Africa.
And not only is the effort directed towards planting trees, it is focused on using women as the resource to be the shepherds and caregivers of these trees,
which in turn empowers women in these communities to have more of a say in the social dynamics.
So far, she's helped the community-based organizations plant over 40 million trees across Africa.
And when you talk to folks in the green belt movement, you talk to Wangari Mathai, which I've had the great pleasure of being able to do.
She said, look, we're just getting started with the number of trees that we hope to plant.
Consistently acclaimed as one of the world's great eco-heroes, her goal remains expanding the pan-African green belt movement.
Now, according to Green Belt Movement International, Kenya has a current tree cover of less than 2%, and their goal over time is to reach a 10% tree cover, which is nearly a 500% increase.
These trees provide social capital, environmental services, and forest products for local people.
Now, let's think about strategies for healthy ecosystems.
Now, revisiting the tragedy, the common debate, we remember that individual best interests traditionally trumps the interest of the group.
An example that we had used was the herdsman who was using common grazing ground, and even though the grazing ground was being degraded, it's at his best interest to get as many cattle out there as possible, even though there's a general cost to the population.
Now, a number of investigators are trying to look at and model the tragedy, the common's theory to try and understand the mechanisms of actually how it works and how we might be able to use our understanding of that to actually increase the general good by thinking about expanded self-interest.
And a German ecologist by the name of Manfred Molinsky and his team at the Max Planck Institute in Hamburg are interested in maintaining this sort of habitable climate and thinking about this challenge of sustainability at the world level as probably the largest public goods game that's ever been played by humans.
And as such, it would seem inevitably that selfish best interests would win out, and altruism related to self-sacrifice for the Earth would be a weak strategy from the perspective of evolution.
However, Molinsky proposes that an additional variable, something he calls expert knowledge, about the overall impacts of climate change on future generations could actually modify the decisions that people make.
Now, in a paper published in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, he reports the results of an investment game in which a pool of about 150 players were asked to invest a small amount of money that they were given in a public goods experiment.
The likelihood that they would invest was contingent on two key factors.
First, was that they had received specific knowledge about the nature of climate change and the effect their contribution would receive.
Two, and I think this is the most intriguing fact, is that they were highly likely to contribute if their name was attached to the contribution, suggesting that reputation, another critical component of selfish best interests, had a powerful effect on behavior.
Consider that the climate degradation game that we're playing is actually a six billion person game.
Results like this suggests that real positive environmental decisions and outcomes are possible, even under the situations of sacrifice, if the correct mixture of sanctions and rewards are in place.
And this is actually a key piece of Hardin's theory.
Now, another thing that has to take place if we're going to be truly sustainable is a reevaluation of ecosystem services.
For example, healthy forests provide much more to humans than just wood products.
Forests clean the atmosphere, protect the soils, store floodwaters, modulate temperature extremes, and prevent erosion.
To perform these essential services through technology is prohibitively expensive, and that recognition is driving a new set of ideas about the value of nature.
Now, reevaluating the value of nations from an ecological perspective is a critical step in developing new strategies.
In a recent appraisal of traditional assessments, the World Bank asked, what are the elements of a nation's wealth?
What does it mean to include the environmental cost and benefits into this equation?
Well, there are essentially different types of capital that we need to talk about.
First of all, this produced capital. These are the human-made buildings, the structures, highways, the savings, and stocks that are required to produce the necessary goods and services.
Stuff is produced, but the machines wear out, the roads fall apart, and the buildings crumble.
This degradation is generally referred to as capital consumption.
And that's sort of in all of these economic models.
Second is intangible capital, usually divided into three domains.
Human capital. These resources are the intrinsic human resources in a society that are nurtured through education, and they provide skills in the economy.
Social capital. This is the social and political environment that people create for themselves.
This includes both the formal structures and relationships codified by government, religious authority, and the horizontal relationship among people in the neighborhoods.
This is critical for harmonious living.
And then there's knowledge capital. These resources are the formal knowledge and technical information systems imparted through libraries, the internet, schools, and universities.
Now, here's the very interesting part from an ecologist's standpoint. There's natural capital, and these are the goods and services provided by the environment.
The ecosystems that we discussed earlier fit into this analysis. So do the minerals extracted from the earth.
The renewable natural capital, which includes forests, fisheries, water resources, and agricultural products.
And included here is climate modulation, flood storage, carbon sequestration, just to name a few.
So the challenge is to measure the capital accurately.
Now, watershed paper by Robert Costanza and a team published, was published, a bold article in the late 1990s in the journal Nature,
and it attempted to assess the dollar value of the ecological services that the earth provides. It was a real eye-opener.
They calculated such services as food production, the genetic resources embedded in nature, water supply, soils enhancement, climate modulation, all the things we've been talking about throughout this course.
And they estimated that the annual services in the United States is somewhere between $16 and $54 trillion, and that's each year.
And that compares to a global growth, gross national product, which is about $18 trillion.
So you can see that from this analysis, and the analyses have gotten more effective and have been used for different purposes as we've moved on from those first few papers,
but you can see the extraordinary environmental infrastructure that makes the gross national product at the world level possible.
Now, on a more concrete example, New York estimates showed that new water treatment facilities would cost $6 to $9 billion to construct,
whereas those same ecosystem services could be obtained by investing in the wooded areas of the city's watershed at a much smaller cost.
And in fact, this recognition has led to the initiation of the Million Tree Initiative in New York City,
where over the next couple of decades they're planning to increase the number of trees in the New York metro area by a million.
In short, the sources of capital are complementary and additive,
and when considering the overall wealth of nations, all sources of capital must be factored into the calculation.
Too often, natural capital is undervalued.
In fact, the World Bank found, not surprisingly, that overall wealth was very unequally distributed,
and that as nations become more wealthy, the percentage of their wealth in natural capital actually falls.
They caution that this reflects a failure to calculate all of the ecosystem services that are performed by the natural capital that are not measured by harvest.
For example, traditional measures of forest capital would be in board feet of extractable lumber, but not in the climate and social impacts of healthy forests.
So these impacts of natural capital on intangible capital, especially human social capital, is far-reaching and developed in urbanized ecosystems.
Remember our conversation about Francis Quo and William Sullivan's work with respect to social harmony in urban areas that include green space.
These kinds of errors of omission are acute in the kinds of calculations on such measures as gross domestic product,
which ignore such services as subsistence farming, which would be ignored, or, for example, clean water would be ignored,
but the production of the drugs to combat waterborne diseases such as malaria would not.
So clearly, an enlightened analysis of environmental services would strengthen our resolve and bolster our understanding of efforts to achieve a more resilient and livable environment.
For example, the U.S. Forest Service and the American Forest Organization each have developed sophisticated software programs for analyzing the economic costs and benefits of trees in municipal settings,
called I Tree and City Green both assist planners and managers in implementing sustainable high net value trees in their cities.
According to the analysis, a typical stand of 100 trees over the 40-year life cycle of those trees in an urban neighborhood will yield a positive value to the city of nearly $150,000,
and that takes into account the costs of pruning, liability, disease, and blowdown from storms.
This enlightened analysis and action can lead to economic expansion, especially in wealthy nations.
No question, healing the ecosystem can be expensive.
In a recent study, the Environmental Protection Agency estimated that the cost of compliance with federal regulations imparts a 3% burden on our gross domestic product, somewhere in the neighborhood of $300 billion.
This is roughly a third of the national expenditure on healthcare, for example.
But at the same time, these green jobs result in approximately $350 billion in industry sales, $60 billion in government revenues, and 4 million jobs.
So these data suggest that environmental investment is less of a burden and more a transfer of wealth.
The EPA, which came into existence in the Nixon era, has had a net positive impact.
A report prepared by the EPA in 2004 had much good news to report.
A reduction in toxic air emissions of nearly 25% since 1990.
Community water systems that met all the federal standards for safety was up from 79% in 1993 to 94% at the turn of the century.
Average lead levels in children have plummeted, mostly as a result of deletting gasoline and house paint.
Nearly a thousand of the Superfund sites in the United States have been completely remediated.
David Foltz, a political scientist from the University of Tennessee, reports that recycling as an effort has been a phenomenal success from a municipal standpoint.
Data gathered through detailed questionnaires filled out by recycling officials in over 260 cities fed back some very interesting data.
In his studies of these cities, he found that recycling costs averaged about $85 per ton compared to traditional collection costs that averaged $131 per ton.
So the recycling was paying off, partly because the recycling involved the recyclers paying the municipality for access to these valued goods.
And these calculations did not even include the value of the landfill avoidance benefits of the recycled materials.
This was making cities more livable and the trends that matter with respect to the transformation of livable cities include some very, very exciting trends that we're seeing.
First of all, this notion of demographic inversion in cities like New York and Vancouver and cities across the nation and across the world.
People are moving back into cities with smaller families and this is actually generating additional wealth and decreasing the ecological burden.
From an ecological perspective, the inversion term refers to the change in population structures that occur in urban families.
In some circles, the term demographic inversion has actually become coded language for gentrification, but we're using it here in its ecological sense.
There's also a critical role for the individual in neighborhood level transformation.
Personal decision making is a critical part of what we do and there's also an important role for top-down government intervention.
There's certain kinds of problems that only governments can help us to help us get through.
Remember, Hardin's mutually acceptable coercion is one example.
It takes a government to enforce those kind of regulations.
And of course, like in all human interactions, the notion of justice and honesty and humility are part of the way that we can move forward as a species.
You know, I hope this course has stimulated you to consider the world around you in new ways.
The biosphere is being changed by humans at an unprecedented rate, but we also have the capacity to learn,
judge the possible outcomes and make positive social and physical transformations with the ecological knowledge we have.
Ecological theory, research and practice tell us we are nature's most prodigious ecosystem engineers and her most important keystone species.
This capacity can do great good as well as harm.
It is up to each of us to be the Earth's steward.
So for now, farewell and may the bounty of the Earth be shared by countless future generations of humans living with health, peace and grace.
