These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day you can finish even the longest course in just
weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Doctors, The History of Scientific Medicine Revealed.
The lecturer is Dr. Sherwin B. Newland.
Dr. Newland is clinical professor of surgery at the Yale School of Medicine and fellow
of the university's institution for social and policy studies.
He serves on the executive committees of Yale's Whitney Humanities Center and its interdisciplinary
bioethics project.
Professor Newland is a graduate of the Bronx High School of Science, New York University
and the Yale School of Medicine, from which he received his M.D. degree in 1955.
After training in surgery at the Yale New Haven Hospital, he practiced and taught there
for three decades.
He considers the bedside and operative care of over 10,000 patients the most rewarding
work of his career.
He continues to teach bioethics and medical history to undergraduates and medical students.
Dr. Newland is the author of eight books including, Doctors, The Biography of Medicine, and The
Wisdom of the Body.
He is also the author of How We Die, A Reflection on the Modern Way of Death, which was on the
New York Times bestseller list for 34 weeks.
It won the National Book Award and was a finalist for the 1995 Pulitzer Prize and the Book
Critics Circle Award.
He has written dozens of articles for magazines and periodicals including The New Yorker, Time,
Life, National Geographic, Discover, The New York Times, and The Los Angeles Times.
Dr. Newland prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 – Hippocrates and the Origins of Western Medicine
Well, here we are at our course, the first lecture of the course, on Western scientific
medicine.
This is Western, it is scientific, it is not Asian medicine, it is not any of the mystical
medicines that we have heard about and read about, and it is certainly not alternative
medicine.
We are sticking to science during this course, and we are doing it using biography as our
reference point.
Thomas Carlyle, who is one of the early and serious and good historians, is reputed to
have said that history is the essence of innumerable biographies.
He said this about 1830.
Well, if that is really true, and most historians do accept it, then it should be able to be
traceable history should.
Any discipline of history should, any aspect of history should, any cultural aspect of
history should be traceable through the lives of its greatest contributors.
And so that is essentially what we are going to do.
And during the course of these 12 lectures, we will go from classical antiquity, and I
mean 500 B.C., as early as that, to modern biomedicine.
We are going to go from a period of mysticism and magic to open heart surgery and to organ
transplantation.
We are going to go from the supernatural and the deity drenched to skepticism and that
beautiful scientific quest that has led us as far as the molecular medicine of this current
moment.
And geographically, we are going to go from ancient Greece to the greatest of our cutting
edge American medical centers.
So this is quite a journey that we are about to take on here.
We are going to trace the path of medical discovery from country to country.
We are going to trace it from culture to culture.
We will meet a group of men and one woman, as a matter of fact, who are among the most
fascinating and I might say the most daring individuals that you will ever encounter in
life or in your reading or even in going to the movies.
Now each of them, those that are likable and those that are obnoxious, those that are modest
and those that are egocentric, and I am sure you won't be surprised to know that some scientists
have been egocentric, those that are serene and those that are crazed, each of them has
a unique story to tell us, but all of them, the thing that unites all of them together
is their extraordinary zeal for discovering, for discovering as you will see the secrets
of nature, what one of the greatest of them, William Harvey, in the 17th century would
eventually come to call nature's closet secrets.
And there are some tasty side dishes to this stew, this cassoulet, as it were, of genius,
because here are some of the things that will come up as we discuss these people.
The rise of the universities, their beginning and how they influenced medical education.
The appearance of the scientific method and of what we call inductive reasoning from the
smaller to the higher.
The influence of individual personality on achievement.
Influence of national character and of the surrounding culture in each country as we
go from place to place.
The role of the church, interestingly, which may surprise you as to its quality, and always
pervading everything, the part that's played in discovery by the psychological makeup of
the discoverer.
What he or she brings with this, strange, often, always unique personality to the laboratory,
to the clinic, wherever it is.
Sir William Osler, who was probably the greatest of the American medical teachers, we call
him American, although he was born in Canada and eventually finished his days in England,
but most of his time was spent here at the United States at Johns Hopkins.
William Osler once said that we study history, among other reasons, for the silent influence
of character upon character.
So ultimately, what this course becomes is a series of character studies of the great
doctors.
So let's begin.
And where do we begin?
Clearly, we begin at the beginning.
And what's the beginning?
The beginning is the father of medicine.
The beginning is Hippocrates himself, the great Hippocrates.
When we look at all of the writings that have been left to us by this great man, what is
called the Hippocratic corpus, the Hippocratic body of writings, we recognize significant
differences between the various books.
They're different in style.
Some of them contradict one another.
Some of them just say things that others don't say.
Some of them deal with very hard, practical stuff like surgery, and some of them deal
with very theoretical stuff like ethics, even, morality, religion.
So we find that it doesn't really sound, except that they're all written in the Ionic dialect.
It doesn't really sound as if they were consistently done by one man, and it turns out that they
weren't.
They were written as it turns out.
Over a period of about 200 years, by a large group of men, there may have been some women
contributors, we're not sure of that, but primarily by a large group of men whose primary
interest and whose primary focus was to separate that which is supernatural from that which
deals only with nature.
It is nature that they were concerned about.
Their thought was, as opposed to those who had come before them, that sickness arises
out of something in the environment, sometimes something within the person, but never anything
that has to be explained through the various deities that they believed in, and therefore,
if you're going to treat this illness, it has to be treated using natural methods.
It cannot be treated by appealing to the deities.
Who were these deities that they were fighting, that they were opposing, that they essentially
overthrew?
Who were these deities against whom they wrote what some historians have called the declaration
of independence of medicine, the separation from those awful times when no one really
understood illness, and it was always described to something up there in the clouds?
Well, the deities were a large group of gods, but primarily under the control of the great
god Apollo, who was also the god of healing.
Apollo was whether married or not to a nymph named Caronus, and their offspring was said
to be this other god whose name was Escalapius, the great god of healing.
Prior to the days of the Hippocratic Physicians in the fourth and fifth century BC, if one
was sick, one of course said prayers to the great god of Escalapius, but it was more formalized
than that.
It wasn't just a matter of saying prayers.
There were temples devoted to shrines of the god Escalapius.
They tended to be off on breeze-covered hills where the sun could easily reach them.
They were near beautiful springs and streams, cultivated gardens surrounded it.
There were statues of the god.
They had some idea of what he must look like with his long, curly waves hanging down in
his shoulders and the statues around him to which one could pray.
Robe priests would wander through singing incantations, and there were sacred snakes.
They believed in the power of snakes, and the god was said to hold this large staff around
which a single snake, the healing serpent, was wound, and that is where of course we
get the symbol of medicine today.
The caduceus, they were animal sacrifices, but the primary focus was on what we might
call the therapeutic dream.
This isn't a Freudian thing.
This is a very different kind of a dream.
The idea was to stay in the temple for days and days and days and have a dream.
And if you could remember the appropriate dream, you would come to the priest with it,
and he would interpret it, and he would tell you what you had to do to get better.
Because he would simply say, well, the dream says you will be better in four days, go home
and be healed.
But sometimes it would be more complicated than that.
He would say, well, you've got the wrong job.
You really ought to go to Thessalonica and become a numbers runner or something like
this.
This job of yours, taking care of the sheep in the constabulary in Athens is not the right
place for you.
You'll go do this other thing, or you need a wife, or your wife needs a child, or eat
ham instead of pork, whatever it might be.
He would give these instructions.
Sometimes he would say, you've got to purge yourself.
Take some awful a medic until you're having terrible diarrhea, and it will go out of you,
or drink from a special stream.
This is what the gods have said to do, and people would do that, and some people got
better.
In fact, of course, a lot of people got better, because one thing we do know about medicine
is that 90% of us get better regardless of what we do, so they, of course, had a reputation
and because people were religious following all of these various gods, especially Apollo,
whose representative Escalapius was, there was this huge power of suggestion.
This was not the way of the Hippocratic physicians.
I tend to refer to them, of course, as the Hippocratic physicians, although sometimes
I slip into the old pattern of saying Hippocrates.
Again, we're dealing with a lot of people over the course of about 200 years, from about
400 to about 200 BC, so as I say, I will by and large call them the Hippocratic physicians,
but once in a while I'll say Hippocrates.
What about Hippocrates?
There really was a Hippocrates.
We don't know anything about him.
We know only that his father was named Heraclides.
He was a hereditary Escalapian physician.
They did tend to be hereditary.
He, Hippocrates, was born in 460 BC on a little island named Kos, C-O-S, which is off the
southwest coast of what is now Turkey, where there was a large Escalapian temple.
Just to give you some idea of the exciting time in which this man made his appearance,
it was what we call the Golden Age of Greece.
It was the age of Pericles, Euripides, Escalus, Sophocles, Aristophanes.
He was born when Socrates was still alive.
His life spanned the entire life of Plato, and he lived for at least a decade during
the early years of Aristotle, so this is the best time.
This is the time we all read about and study in our classics courses.
But that's it.
We know only beyond that that he was an itinerant physician, as all of these Hippocratic physicians
were.
Somehow, and we don't know how, they came together, probably started on that island
of Kos, and eventually migrated onto the Greek Peninsula, and found their way all over this
enormity of a Greek empire.
What did they leave us?
This so-called Hippocratic Corpus, this body of knowledge.
Where does it come from?
What was it who wrote it?
Well, as I've said, it was written by groups of these men, sometimes individuals, sometimes
groups.
It's thought that it is the remains of a library that was found on that island of Kos, and
it's also thought that a good part of it was eventually transferred to the Great Library
in Alexandria that, as you know, was eventually destroyed.
It consists of 70 different texts.
They are, in the true sense, variegated.
They just cover this entire span of things.
Over the years, as historians have studied them, especially during the 19th century when
there was a lot of interest in studying Hippocrates, a conclusion was reached that there were certain
of them which had particularly high moral or ethical value, or they were particularly
useful in understanding the disease process.
Somebody or other, some medical historian, although they weren't formal medical historians
in the early 19th century, someone who was working on these things, called those works
the genuine works of Hippocrates, and today you can go to an antiquarian bookstore and
get one of these books that originated in 1850, 1860, called the genuine works of Hippocrates.
They are those genuine ones, distinguished by a particular clarity of thought, by a high
moral message, and every one of them, by what we can only call a scientific objectivity.
They're stepping back, these writers.
Again, they're taking away any notion of the supernatural, and they're looking only to
use their own personal observations which they would record again and again and again
and teach to their students, and that's what we find in these genuine works, but the rest
of the books have this as well.
One of the most famous books, and when people own nothing more than one volume of Hippocrates,
what they tend to own is a book called the aphorisms of Hippocrates, pithy, sententious,
clear in individual statements, it tells you how to take care of sick people and how to
live a high moral life, and of all of those hundreds of aphorisms which were first translated
into Latin from the Greek and then into Hebrew and Arabic, and of course now we have them
in English, of all of them, the one that's most famous is the very first aphorism because
it sets the stage for virtually everything that these people did over the several hundred
years that they were in existence, and I'll read it to you, life is short, the art is
long, opportunity is fleeting, experience is delusive, judgment is difficult, the art,
they called medicine the art, the art of medicine. There are people today who tell you that it's
a science, it's never going to be a science, it is indeed an art that uses science, and
I think they recognize that, whenever it's translated that word art from the various
Hippocratic writings, there's always a capital A on it to distinguish it from other forms
of art and artifice, so life is short, the art is long, no doctor can learn what he or
she needs to learn in a lifetime, that's the point of that. Opportunity fleeting, a patient
comes to us at a particular time in his or her disease, that's a small opportunity to
make that diagnosis and cure that patient, if he comes before that time, it's hard to
make the diagnosis, he comes after that time, and we make the diagnosis too late, we can't
do anything about it, experience is delusive, every doctor likes to say, well in my experience,
well the fact of the matter is that any individual doctor's experience is delusive, it can fool
him or her, so we use statistics nowadays, that's the big thing in modern medicine of
course other than molecular biology, but what after all are statistics except the combined
experiences of thousands and thousands of patients and doctors, with all of the errors
that are inherent in that way of looking at experience, because of course every person
is always different from every other person, which is why penicillin for strep throat will
work 99.8% of the time, but there will always be two tenths of one percent of people for whom it
doesn't work, not to mention the therapies for cancer and so on that certainly don't have
good records like that, so experience is delusive, judgment difficult, judgment is the most difficult
thing of all, that's what doctors do, that's why they sit at the bedside, it doesn't take
someone like me for example, eight years to train a surgeon because I'm training him in technical
things, takes eight years because he or she has to learn judgment when to operate, when not to
operate, how to understand the disease, when to get a consultation, what the outlook is eventually
going to be in this disease, so the father of medicine, Hippocrates or whoever they were,
first told us this and first pointed it out, now what are some of the principles of Hippocratic
medicine, the principles that changed what had come before, once again diseases are events
that don't happen except within the entire life of an individual, so unlike today where physicians
tend to think of a disease and the patient who brings the disease, they thought of the entire
patient, when they treated they treated the entire patient, nature needs to maintain a condition
of equilibrium, that's what they believe, there's an equilibrium within the body it must be maintained
and part of the way of maintaining it is with what they call innate heat, the heat of the body is
generated within the heart, so we have a situation in which there has to be balance and if anything
gets out of balance, the person gets sick, what is the balance of, it is of a group of four fluids,
this idea of the four fluids had actually been inherited from Egyptian and earlier medicine
but they codified it, there's blood, yellow bile, black bile and phlegm, those are the four fluids,
every one of us has a particular personality and a particular character based on how much blood
we have, how much bile we have, how much phlegm we have, if we have a lot of blood, we tend to be
filled with energy, we are sanguine, the latin word sanguine personality, a lot of yellow bile,
we are bilious, we are quick to anger, black bile, melas coli in greek, black bile, melancholic,
if you've got too much of that, you're of a melancholic disposition, phlegm comes from the brain,
you make too much of it, you lose some of your brain, you're phlegmatic, so that's where our words
come from, they come from the greek notions of these particular fluids and of course some of
those fluids are hot and some are cold and it was the mixture of them that as I say major
personality and character and if they went out of whack, if there was one or another that was too
much, you got sick and the other basic principle or one of the other basic principles was that the
human body tends to heal itself, so the trick, the Hippocratic medicine was an expression that
translated from the greek into the latin was primum no noche, first do no harm in treating
people first do no harm, so how did they go about this, how did they go about their treatment,
first place they kept accurate notes and they passed them on to their students,
they looked at temperature change, color of the skin, facial expression, skin appearance,
they took the history, they looked at abdominal contours, they looked at hair and nails, they
smelt and tasted the urine, they tasted the earwax and sweat for any signs that these
humors were out of balance, was it sour, was it sweet, was it hotter than it should be, was it
cooler, they took the pulse not in the sense of timing but the strength, the quality, something
about that pulse could tell them what they needed to know everything had to be observable, you were
not allowed to imagine anything, observation was the key and as I say it was all recorded,
recorded so that other students could be taught, well how does nature cure in this system and how
can the doctor help nature cure, they believed that nature tried always to get rid of the excess
humor so that if you had an upper respiratory disease you could observe the enormous amount of
phlegm that was coming out of your nose and mouth or if you had tuberculosis not an uncommon disease
at that time or one of the other pneumonia type diseases they'd see that phlegm coughing up,
diarrhea could be either yellow bile or black bile depending on what the diagnosis had been so
the trick was that nature was trying to expel the excessive material but the doctor had to help,
now if a patient had a fever, if his skin was hot, if his pulse was fast, clearly you'd have to get
rid of what, blood of course, so they would open up a vein and they'd let the blood pour out trying
to get rid of this excessive humor which was blood so they used purgatives,
ametics, baths, wet poultices, anything that would bring heat to the surface, they would cup people
as a matter of fact, bloodletting was a major thing but before they went into any of these
treatments which over the years have come to be called not surprisingly heroic treatments,
they would try to change diet, they would give people bland drinks, change where they lived
like the escalapians had done but then they would go right to it and try to get rid of this humor.
Another characteristic of these physicians was their notion of prognosis because they kept such
accurate records, they were the first doctors to be able to tell you you're going to live,
you're going to die, you're going to get better on the fifth day and really mean it and really be
right, this wasn't like the escalapians who figured it out in their heads or by prayer,
they knew enough about each individual disease they studied so that when they saw you they could
predict what was going to happen because they had this highly developed knowledge of disease
and what did that do for them, gave them reputation, reputation was an important thing
for Hippocratic physicians because they were itinerant and they needed to make a living.
Well, when you want to make a living and you're an itinerant doctor, people have to remember
when this man was here two years ago, he told Ioscarides that this jaundice and this fever
would go away in seven weeks and my god it did when the escalapian doctors saw him he said
three days and it didn't happen. Reputation was very important for the Hippocratic physicians
and people began to understand that they were different from other doctors so when you knew
a Hippocratic was coming to your area, he was the one you were most likely to go to,
which was one of the reasons that so many young men went to the Hippocratic schools
and learned Hippocratic methods because it was really a good way to make a living in addition
to the fact that the morality appealed to a large number of them. They did surgery,
they splinted fractures, if they thought blood had accumulated in the skull after an injury they
would make little holes in the skull just as the Egyptians had done hundreds and thousands of years
before and they became experts in the use of their hands. Some of the Hippocratic literature
is filled with telling people little things like how to move your fingers when you're doing one of
these operations. There's even a section, how to cut your nails so they shouldn't project too far
off the ends of your fingers and hurt people. So they were very practical in addition to being
theoretical and of course the most theoretical part of their work was their code of ethics,
which was the beginning of Western medical ethics. Why a code of ethics? Well once again
it set this doctor apart from all other doctors. He was not going to take advantage of his position
to let's say seduce a female member of the household. He was not going to run around telling
everybody the secrets of any patient who had come to him. You could depend on him to do that.
Their ethics were expressed primarily in the Great Oath, the Great Oath of Hippocrates,
which is an interesting thing because it has two parts, the Covenant and the Ethical Code. The
Covenant is at the very beginning and if you look at it carefully you see he is swearing the
physician by Apollo, by Escalapius, by Hygia and Panacea, Escalapius' daughters. To uphold this
ethical code and at the end of it he says, if I don't do this, may something bad happen to me,
if I do it, may something good happen to me, but the rest of it is an ethical code. They are the
ground rules of a professional society and they are the ethical principles that permeate the entire
Hippocratic corpus. I will not help anyone commit suicide. I will not give any abortive remedy to
a woman. I will not cut for stone in those days. Cutting for bladder stones had a hugely high
mortality. It was very dangerous. There were many, many complications so the Hippocratic
physicians stayed away from it, but most importantly in that code were matters of
tact with patients, matters of personal morality, matters of confidentiality and as I say,
never ever the possibility or the allowance of a doctor taking advantage of his position.
There have been arguments most recently about what does this mean that the Hippocratic physician
would never give deadly medicine. What does that mean to us today in the debates about assisted
suicide? Of course that's a discussion for yet another day, but it's a fascinating discussion.
What does it mean when he says, I will give no remedy to produce an abortion in this day of
Roe v. Wade, another argument that today's current medical ethicists argue over why did the Hippocratics
put this in their oath, but what's important is that for the very first time in the history of medicine
about 300, 350, 200, 100 BC, we have an ethical code that brings doctors together and marks this
group of doctors as being different from all others and this becomes the ethical code that is
carried down. The young people becoming doctors swore to it, young people becoming doctors today
still swear to it. To me the whole Hippocratic corpus is exemplified in two statements that are not
in the oath but that are in other parts of it and I'll read those to you.
With purity and holiness I will pass my life and practice my art is one and then in the book
of precepts, where there is love of humankind, this to me is the greatest of all, where there is
love of humankind, there is also love of the art of medicine.
