Lecture 4, Harvey, Discoverer of the Circulation
By general agreement, the greatest gift that has ever been made by one man to the science
in the art of medicine was the discovery of the circulation of the blood by William
Harvey, described by him in a book in 1628.
In the first place, it solved what had been up until that time an elusive puzzle.
As a matter of fact, something is only called a puzzle if people know it's a puzzle, most
people didn't even realize that they hadn't figured out what the blood did within the
body, because of course Galen had left them that information, which everyone was somewhat
certain after Veselius was correct.
One of the other things he did was to reintroduce the notion of the experiment.
I say reintroduce because you'll recall this is what Galen had done.
Galen had done experiments on animals, but they were not remembered.
What was remembered were his philosophical contributions to medicine, the general notion
of healing, and how it was done, but nothing about how he had arrived at his ideas of the
functioning of the body.
And also this book, when Harvey presented it, was the very first use, presented the
very first use of quantitative methods in medical science, no one had ever done before
what I'm about to describe that Harvey did.
And he also introduced the notion of inductive reasoning, which is a fascinating idea in
itself because he was a contemporary of Sir Francis Bacon, who usually gets the credit
for this, not only that, but he was his doctor.
Bacon was the Lord Chancellor.
Harvey was his physician.
He never read any of Bacon.
He thought Bacon was foolish and didn't understand basic philosophy, you know, in those days
the word philosophy included science, and so he rejected the idea of inductive reasoning
and yet he used inductive reasoning as we'll see in working out his theories.
Modern science was born in that 17th century, and of course it's been called the scientific
revolution, and that scientific revolution was largely based on skepticism.
Very much like the Enlightenment, which was soon to take place.
The scientists were beginning to question every given that had been handed down to them.
They were skeptical about everything.
It was the same skepticism that had driven the Salius in the 16th century.
In fact, many of them were motivated by the Salius with the realization that something
new could be found if you simply didn't believe the something old.
Just think back on the names of some of the great scientific contributors of the 17th century.
And I'll just read you off a partial list, Galileo, Newton, Boyle, Van Luenhoek, Christopher
Wren, who people forget was a physician and a contributor to medical knowledge, Francis
Bacon himself, Bernoulli, Descartes, Halley, Hook, Kepler, Leibniz, Malpegi, who discovered
the capillaries, and Pascal.
So before describing just what it was that Harvey did, the discovery of the circulation
of the blood, let's just review for a moment what the current theories of blood flow were
at the time that he started his work.
Blood was manufactured in the liver, according to Galenic theory, still obviously prominent.
The food is swallowed, it is cooked up within the stomach.
It passes by a large vein called the portal vein, which does in fact exist, into the liver.
The liver makes blood out of it.
And then the large veins that leave the liver, and the other large veins actually called the
vena cava coming down from the heart, carry the blood all over the body so that the tissues
are drenched with it.
The tissues take what they need, which is almost all of it.
And then what is left, flows back.
So it's a little bit like a flow and an ebb phenomenon.
It goes to the tissues, what's left just comes back.
It was never quite explained how it got back, how it managed to walk past the blood on its
way to the tissues, but at least that was what was understood and accepted.
It was thought that this pneuma, this ethereal stuff, this vital principle that was out in
the air, was inhaled constantly from the very first breath into the lungs and from there
transported to the left side of the heart.
The left ventricle is big pumping chamber.
And the pneuma mixed with the blood, and the pneuma was then shot out to the rest of the
body through the arteries.
So that this blood that was coming out of the arteries was bright red because it had
the good pneuma in it, and the blood that went out through the veins to drench the tissues
where their nutrition was dark.
Well this was all true because Galen had said it was true, and so it had to be true.
Even though Veselius had debunked the anatomy and Veselius had come to be accepted, Veselius
had not talked about the circulation.
He hadn't gotten that far, had he continued with his research instead of going off and
becoming a doc, he might have done that kind of thing, but he didn't.
So it took Harvey, the brilliant Harvey, to do it.
Let me tell you a few things about Harvey.
He was born in 1578 in Folkstone in Kent.
He was what they call the oldest of a week of sons.
He was the oldest of seven sons.
His father was what was referred to in those days as a turkey merchant.
He traded with the east, and he made a lot of money.
He was a very wealthy man.
He wanted his son to be a classical scholar.
The son was interested in medicine, and he was supported in that endeavor, but first
he studied the classics.
In fact, he studied the classics so much that he had very little interest in contemporary
literature.
In fact, he had nothing but contempt for contemporary literature, and there is a very famous phrase
in the man who wrote almost nothing autobiographically.
There's a very famous phrase in one of his writings in which he refers to the contemporary
authors, the authors of the time as, quote, a bunch of shit britches.
So who were they?
They were Ben Johnson.
They were John Dunn.
They were John Milton.
They were John Dryden.
They were Edmund Spencer.
They were Christopher Marlowe, and of course that fellow a few years older than him may
be 30 years older than him, Will Shakespeare.
Those were the shit britches of the 17th century to our boy.
Our boy was really serious.
He was enormously serious.
He was not only serious, he was hyperkinetic about it.
He was frenetic about it.
He was a short little man.
He had dark olive skin by other people's description.
He had black eyes, raven hair, they called him, and he was always moving around, always
moving around.
One of his friends referred to him, Lord of Rundle, as this little perpetual motion machine
that is our Dr. Harvey, because his hands were always moving, his feet were always moving,
his eyes were always scattered around.
He used to carry a dagger in his belt.
He never used it, but he had this, well, getting back to Galeonic talk.
He had this choleric disposition.
He was always getting angry, and this bursting with energy meant he had a sanguine disposition.
So even though he was one of the people who debunked the Galeonic theories, he was indeed
imbued with the Galeonic characteristics.
He went to Keyes College in Cambridge when he was 16 years old, then as now, Keyes College
was known as a place where people who wanted to be doctors would go to study.
He got his bachelor's degree in 1597, and where would he go to medical school at that
time?
He would go to what had become the very greatest medical school in the world, which was the
University of Padua, not unexpectedly, of all the great men who had worked there.
Vasilius was probably the greatest.
Padua, as we've noted before, was very happy to have an Englishman.
They had lots of Englishmen.
They welcomed Protestants.
They welcomed Jews in these nations, and the person elected to be the director, the president,
the chair of his nation was called the counselor, and who should be elected but our hyperkinetic
William Harvey, so he was the president of the English nation.
If you're the president, your family seal, your so-called stemma, is kept permanently
in the wall or in the ceiling, and if you go to Padua today and you walk into the first
floor portico or loggia and look up at the ceiling, if you look hard enough and keep
looking, you'll find Harvey's stemma still there.
It's a big thing.
Once you find it, there's no question that that's what it is, and it's easy to read.
Unlike Galen and unlike Vasilius, Dr. Harvey did not wax eloquently about himself in his
writings.
He was so focused on science and so focused on the objectivity of his work that he never
says anything about himself.
We only know that his wife had a parrot and that they had no children, and other than that,
we know nothing except that material that we have learned from other people who have
written about him.
As soon as he got out of medical school, he was attempting to get the job of assistant
physician at St. Bartholomew's Hospital.
At that time, there was one physician, one leading physician.
Number two, man was the assistant physician.
And finally, in 1607, when he was 29 years old, he achieved this.
He was talented because he was very bright, because he never minded getting up at any
hour of the night.
And before long, he had this extraordinarily thriving practice, and it just kept getting
bigger and bigger throughout his career.
That is, bigger and bigger until he published this book we'll talk about.
And in time also, he was the doctor for royalty and nobility.
James I was his patient, the ill-fated Charles I was his patient, and of course, the Lord
Chancellor, Sir Francis Bacon, so he was hanging out in some pretty fancy company.
In modern day parlance, one would call him a clinician researcher.
He had a lot of money.
He had plenty of money from his practice.
But his brothers determined that whatever he wanted, they would give him because here
they were making lots of money from their trading with the East, and they sought to
it that he would be free to pursue whatever he wanted to.
So he decided that scholarly endeavors in his spare time, I suspect he didn't sleep
very much at night, scholarly endeavors in his spare time were just the way he wanted
to spend his hours.
In 1616, when he was 38 years old, he was given a signal honor.
This incident was one week before Shakespeare's death.
He was appointed to the Lumlian Lectureship of the Royal College of Physicians.
This lectureship involved over a period of time giving two lectures a week in anatomy
and surgery.
And it was asked that if possible new additions to knowledge were to be provided at this time,
but that was not really a qualification, especially because there weren't very many new additions
and there weren't very many people who would be able to make such new additions.
But he was working in his own house in a sort of self-made laboratory.
And bit by bit, he decided that what interested him most was to try to figure out how the
heart actually worked, which no one had tackled before.
And the reason that no one had tackled it before was that it seemed like an impossible
problem to solve.
Our hearts beat 72 times a minute, certain animal hearts beat a lot faster than that.
You can look in an open chest with an animal and this thing is going along at 120 beats
a minute.
How can you separate one movement from another?
But he thought, I want to get at this problem.
Well, his lecture notes for these Lumlian Lectures were rediscovered about 30 years ago.
And they've been studied very carefully by scholars.
And it turns out that during those Lumlian Lectures, he was working on trying to discover
the exact mechanism by which the various parts of the heart function.
The two reservoirs called the atria, which lie on top of the heart, and the two large
pumping chambers, the left and right ventricle lying below those, the right ventricle of
course pumping blood to the lungs, gets back to the left ventricle, which pumps it out
to the rest of the body.
But of course, we know that because I'm jumping the gun here because Harvey figured it out
and told us about it, until then we've been playing around with all of this Gelenic anatomy.
So that was his original intent.
His original intent was only to study how the heart beats.
Well, he had apparently been working on it a few years by the time he gave the first
Lumlian Lectures, but over the course of the years in which he gave them, he kept working
at it.
And these studies turn out to be the material of the first seven chapters in the book he
would eventually write about the circulation, called in Latin, exocytatio, anatomica, hemococortica,
cordis et sanguinis in anemolibus, anatomical studies on the motion of the heart and of
the blood in animals, or as we always call it for short now, demotu cordis.
So the first seven chapters of this book were written when he was giving the Lumlian Lectures
and actually were ready some years before that by about 1620.
And here's what he discovered, and here's how he did his studies.
In the first place, how do you solve the problem of the rapidity of the heart so that you
can look at it with a lens that magnifies two or three times, which is what he was doing?
Well, you work on cold-blooded animals, particularly snakes whose heart beat is much slower.
So although the snake's heart clearly is not a lot like our heart, it's enough like it
in the sense of having a reservoir and having a pumping chamber that he was able to use
those animals.
And he also did something that everybody who has worked in the laboratory on mammals knows
about if he or she is studying the organs of the chest or doing physiology experiments
with the chest, that as an animal does, his heart slows down at first imperceptibly until
finally is going very slowly, but the beat is still normal in every way before it succumbs
to this irregular motion that we call fibrillation and a die.
So he was doing the work on the snakes, and he was also essentially opening the chests
of animals and watching them die so that he would make observations of what was going
on there.
The first thing he did was to identify this clenching, thrusting motion, which we call
systole, in which the blood is thrown out into the lungs and into the body.
He was able to show, by his observations after a while, that what actually happens is the
blood comes back through the great veins, the so-called vena cavi, cavernous veins, empties
into the right atrium while it's coming back from the lungs via the pulmonary veins and
empties into the left atrium.
And when they become full, they really overflow down into the ventricles, the pumping chambers,
and then the ventricles pump them out, but the sequence in which it happens, as he discovered
by this method of observation, was that at first the blood does cascade down, but at
the very last instant in the wink of an eye, both of those two atria left and right contract,
and as soon as they do that contraction is spread to the ventricles, which by now are
full, contract, push the blood out through the lungs and the heart.
And as he put it so well, the atria arouse the somnolent heart, because that's the way
it looked to him.
As the heart is resting between beats in this part of the cycle we call diastole, they need
to be aroused from the rest, and that contraction of the atria does the arousing.
So this is the work of the first seven chapters of our book, which begins to lead into the
rest of it.
And by the time he had finished the first cycle of Lumley and Lectures, he was ready
to start working on the rest of it.
It had never made a lot of sense to William Harvey that all this huge quantity of blood
was going out to drench the tissues, and so little of it coming back.
Could the liver really make that much blood?
So we decided to do some simple calculations.
He took a cadaver heart, a human cadaver heart, put water into it, found that it was only
two ounces, it held two ounces, beats 72 times a minute.
There are 60 minutes in an hour, so far easy.
That's 8,640 ounces of blood that has to be pumped out of the heart every hour.
Turn that into pounds, that's 540 pounds, which is three times the weight of the average
man.
Is it possible?
First place, you'd have to do nothing but eat all the time.
In the second place, how could so much blood be created in the liver?
Made no sense to him.
There's got to be some other mechanism by which this happens, and as simple as these
calculations may seem to us today, they were the first time any quantitative measurements
were ever put into any medical experiment.
And of course, nowadays we try to do everything quantitatively if we possibly can, but this
was William Harvey, and he was indeed introducing quantitative methods.
Well, he thought about this, and he said, well, the only way we can explain all of this
blood going out is if it's the same blood, and it keeps coming back.
We just can't make that much.
And he thought, how does it come back, how does it come back?
His teacher at the University of Padua, the great professor of anatomy at that time, had
been a man named Fabricius.
Fabricius had discovered the valves in the veins.
He had discovered them by looking at superficial veins, and then, of course, he looked at some
of the valves in other parts of the body.
And Fabricius could never figure out what the valves did because the blood is obviously
going to the periphery, so he thought the function of the valves was to slow the blood
down.
Well, all Harvey did was to roll up the sleeves, and he would compress the veins at various
places and could easily show the very simple fact that blood in the arms goes from the
periphery to the center.
And the purpose of the valves, and this can be demonstrated very easily, too, is to keep
the blood from regurgitating backwards, to make it keep going to the center where it's
supposed to go.
So the more he thought about this, the more it became obvious that there's no evidence
at all that blood goes out through the veins to the body.
There's very obvious evidence that blood is moving toward the body in the veins.
There's very obvious evidence that the same blood keeps being used again and again.
So finally, he wrote in this chapter eight of his, the very first chapter after describing
how he wrote this.
I pondered often and deeply about these matters.
For a long time I turned over in my mind such questions as how much blood is transmitted,
how short a time its passage takes, not deeming it possible for the digested food mass to
furnish such an abundance of food, unless it somehow got back to the veins from the arteries
and returned to the ventricles, I began to think there had to be some sort of motion
as in a circle.
And finally, it dawns on him.
It dawns on him, and he writes what turned out to be the fourteenth chapter of this little
18 chapter book.
The whole chapter has about five sentences in it.
So he's talking about all of these things, and he says finally, it must therefore be
concluded that the blood in the animal body moves around in a circle continuously, and
that the action or function of the heart is to accomplish this by pumping.
This is the only reason for the motion and the beat of the heart.
This was essentially the whole chapter, there are a few sentences before that.
There it is.
The purpose of the heart is not to pump out pneuma.
The purpose of the heart is to pump out the blood.
It's not going out through the veins.
None of this makes any sense, and once it comes to you, he said, it's perfectly obvious,
everything we see about ourselves explains it.
You know, before that, in order to explain why, if you're wounded, the part gets read,
there were all sorts of complicated theses about blood being able to be moved from the
heart and the liver directly to an injury, all this sort of stuff.
The notion of the circulation obviated all of that.
There was always blood everywhere coming through the arteries.
It was always moving.
So the question becomes, Harvey knew that blood is being carried out through the arteries,
he knew it's being carried back through the veins.
He knew the heart is the mechanism by which it is continuously pumped, but how does it
get from the very, very peripheral arteries into the very, very peripheral veins?
And he did what scientists have done over and over and over since then through the centuries.
He postulated something.
He postulated that something would be discovered, a passageway between those peripheral arteries
and the peripheral veins.
He said it was through pores of some kind, but he couldn't prove it.
Of course, remarkably, only 32 years later, Marcello Malpighi, an Italian microscopist,
was able to demonstrate capillaries.
So he had predicted, essentially, that this mechanism that brought the blood from way
out the ends of the arteries to way out the ends of the veins would be capillaries.
So no more pneuma, no more innate heat, no more galenic, hocus pocus.
We now know exactly how the blood circulates, and we now know about systole and diastole,
and almost know all of the mechanics of the heart.
It was a lot more to figure out, but it was on a much more complex level, and it would
take hundreds of years to figure that out.
But in the meantime, people knew how things were done and how nature had created the heart.
Well, this little book, unlike the huge volume of Vestalius, is rather inconspicuous.
It's about 72 pages, five and a half by seven and a half inches, has these few chapters,
relatively few chapters.
It had little effect on medical practice.
People were bleeding, purging, puking.
They thought it worked.
There was no reason to change anything.
There was nothing practical you could do with a notion of the circulation of the blood.
And at first, nobody wanted to believe him.
One of the reasons was that he had used quantitative methods.
The other was that he'd been lecturing to a very select audience equipped to understand
it, the members of the Royal College of Physicians, and guess what happened predictably this
huge practice started to shrink and shrunk and shrunk.
But he didn't care.
He persisted.
He could live.
He had enough money.
He was upset and angry in an unusual, caloric and sanguine way.
He burst out against those who opposed him, but he kept doing research, and he got interested
in another brand of research.
He got interested in reproduction, in embryology.
And with this little lens of his, two, three, four times magnification, he studied fertilized
eggs.
So in 1651, after all these years of practice and studying fertilized eggs, well, he put
out another book.
The book was called On the Generation of Animals, the Generaciona Animalium, and it was about
embryology.
It wasn't much of a book, but the point is that it was still based, or once again based,
on all of the principles that he had used in coming to an understanding of the circulation,
namely inductive reasoning.
You make these little observations.
You have, finally, a hypothesis.
You test the hypothesis by doing experiments, and then you come up with a theory if the
experiments prove you to be right.
That's the scientific method.
It goes from the smaller to the larger.
He was the first physician to use the scientific method.
He was also the first physician, as I said earlier, to apply the principles of inductive
reasoning, again, uninfluenced, by his patient, Sir Francis Bacon.
The salius and hearty between the two of them converted the age of the ear where people
listened to authority and learned only from authority to what I always think of as the
age of seeing, the age of the eye, the age in which one had to see for oneself and prove
to others that things were, as you said, they were.
Galen had actually done this a long, long time before, some 1500 years earlier, but
his experimental studies had been forgotten.
It was his fuzzy theoretics that continued to live.
In that book on the generation of animals, Harvey said a few things about his credo of
experimentation of inductive reasoning, although he didn't use the term inductive reasoning.
In the book, he writes one of the most beautiful descriptions, perhaps the most beautiful description
of inductive reasoning that I have ever heard, and I'd like to read it to you as a conclusion
to this lecture.
Nature herself must be our advisor, writes William Harvey at the age of 73.
The path she chalks must be our walk, for as long as we confer with our own eyes and
make our scent from lesser things to hire, we shall be at length received into her closet
secrets.
