I'd like to start the story of Giovanni Battista-Morgani with a clinical case report.
The clinical case report goes back to 1705. It's about a man of 72 years of age who gives
the following history. He had begun about two weeks prior to his admission to the hospital
to have a little bit of pain around his navel. This lasted a day or so. It was accompanied
by some nausea, a little bit of vomiting on the third day. And then finally he began to
notice that the pain had migrated down to the right lower quadrant of his abdomen. And
it got worse and worse over the course of a couple of days. And about the fifth day of
the time that he was having these symptoms, they rapidly began to get worse. And he noticed
he was feverish and not only was he feverish, people were telling him that his face was red.
A day or two after that, although he was still working, how he was doing it, we're not quite
sure. He was a laborer in the town of Forley, which is near Bologna. People would say to
him, you know, you're limping, you're favoring, you're right leg, as though there is something
hurting in your leg. So he'd be walking along, almost dragging that leg. And then one day
about two days after that, he just took to his bed. He couldn't do any more. So we're
now into about the 12th day of the disease. And that night he had a convulsion. It was
actually a fever convulsion. He stopped making urine, which terrified the members of his
family. And he went into a coma about day number 13. By day number 15, it was obvious
that he was going to die. His face looked shrunk and he was pallid. He was mumbling incoherently
in the midst of his coma. And then finally, after two and a half weeks of this illness,
he died. His body was taken to the hospital. He had not been admitted to the hospital while
he was sick. It was taken to the hospital so that it could be dissected by a young man
of 23 years of age, Giovanni Morgani, who was working at that time as an assistant to the
professor of anatomy, whose name was Antonio Valsava, a very famous professor at that time
and since. They put the body down on the slab and Morgani opened it from the sternum, the
breastbone down to the pubis. And he was astonished at the horrible odor that immediately filled
the autopsy room in which he was doing the work. The odor was clearly coming from something
deep inside the abdomen. What was it? It was an abscess that had burst out into the general
abdominal or peritoneal cavity so that clearly this man had died of peritonitis. The abscess,
as the dissection went further and further, revealed itself to be in the right lower quadrant
where the man had had his pain. Clearly, he had been limping because the abscess was lying
on a muscle near the backbone, a long muscle called the psoas muscle, that actually attaches
very close to the hip so that the pain in this muscle was the real reason he was walking so
badly. As Morgani dissected through this abscess, this was in the days before gloves, so he was
doing this bare hand at least, dissecting down toward the base of the cecum, the blind pouch
where the large intestine begins. And he finds there a tiny little structure that had never
been described, although anatomists had noticed it when they did the sections, a little worm-like
structure. In later years it would become called the appendix. This worm-like structure had actually
essentially exploded. This man had died of a ruptured appendix in 1705. Many, many years before
anybody described appendicitis, a little side story. Leonardo da Vinci in 1505 had not only
identified the appendix, but had identified the fact that it sometimes got inflamed and
sometimes got ruptured. But of course Leonardo's work had been lost except to Leonardo and it was
hidden away in trunks and crypts and who knows where. So nobody knew about Leonardo's work.
So to Morgani dissecting this area, this was a shocking discovery that this little structure at
the base of the cecum could get infected, could blow out and cause an abscess. Of course millions
of people have died of a ruptured appendix, but this was Morgani's first experience with it.
So being stunned by this, he discussed it with Val Salva and the two of them made up their minds
that since they were doing so much dissecting of patients who were brought to the hospital either
immediately after death or within days of death or at the very most weeks of death, why don't they
just start dissecting everybody? And why don't they keep accurate notes of the clinical story of
each patient? They would talk to the family, if the patient was still alive and could speak,
they would talk to him. So they would have these notes and then when the patient died,
they would take him to the autopsy room. So they began doing this. And this is actually the story
that I'm going to tell you as it evolves during the course of this lecture. What Morgani found in
1705 had nothing to do with humors, and he knew it. It had nothing to do with some vague,
generalized, Hippocratic notion of disease that affects the entire body. It had nothing to do
with innate heat, and it had nothing to do with where the patient lived, whether he lived on a
sunny hillside or on a tundra. It had to do with some specific thing that had happened in a specific
place within his body. Well, so they begin doing these dissections and they begin keeping records.
Fifty-five years later, when he is 78 or 79 years old, this, at that time young man, Giovanni
Morgani, published a book with 700 case reports in it of this type. Patients, most of which he
and or Valsalva had dissected over the years. At first it was one of the two of them. Later it was
almost completely Morgani, although there are some cases that were dissected by others where
they had accurate case reports. And after that book was published, it was understood that no longer
does one look for the origins of disease in an entire body. One looks for the origins of disease
in one specific place. What an extraordinary turning point in the history of medicine this was.
It came to be called this notion of looking in one place the anatomic concept of disease.
Disease understanding had to be based on anatomy. No vaguenesses anymore. You had to know anatomy
like Vesalius had described anatomy 200 years before or you couldn't make any diagnosis.
The entire thing is epitomized memorably by a single phrase that Morgani used. He said symptoms,
the complaints that people come to you with are, quote, the cries of the suffering organs.
So from then on in diagnosis became an important thing for doctors. You had to listen to those
cries. You had to interpret them. You had to figure out where they were coming from so that
you could localize the disease. The question that doctors would frame from then on in was stated in
Latin as ubi est morbus. Where is the disease? And that became the puzzle. That became the
exciting thing that physicians would then be doing from there on in because it was understood
that disease arose from anatomical changes. None later on as the years progressed also from
biochemical physiological changes. So the Hippocratic notion that diseases are these generalized
things was on the very verge in those years of dissolution. This book was finally published
late in the 18th century in 1761 and it started the process that brought us physical examination
to begin with and then the idea of treating this localized disease as early as you possibly
could find it. So let me tell you a little bit about Giovanni Morgani. He was born in a little
city called Forle, actually the same place that this patient had come from. In the year 1682
he went to Bologna only 30 miles from Forle to study medicine under the great Antonio Valsalva.
He got his degree in 17 or one when he was 19 and such was his brilliance recognized immediately
by Valsalva that he said, you know, I need an assistant. Would you be my assistant? And what
a great opportunity it was for a young man because he was Valsalva the great anatomist. He was dissecting
some of these corpses and of course it was during that early time that they dissected the corpse of
the old man who died of his ruptured appendix. So he worked with him. Morgani worked with Valsalva
for about six years absorbing everything the older man could teach him. And then like so many
people who start out in academics, he decided what he really wanted to do was to practice medicine.
You'll remember this was Vassalius's situation after he wrote his great book. He became the
physician to the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. So he went back to Forle to his own town to be
essentially a family physician in this town and he stayed there for five years. And during that
five years he had quite a large practice and he built up an understanding of clinical medicine,
of actual patient-centered medicine that would serve him very well for the rest of his career
because at the end of that time he was invited to Padua, good old Padua again, the center of
learning still in the 18th century, a place where people from all over Europe were coming to study
medicine. Morgani, unlike some of the other great medical discoverers, had within his soul, within
his heart this extraordinary calm and serenity. He was a devout Roman Catholic. After all, his name
was John the Baptist, Giovanni Battista, and he proved his Catholicism by having 15 children in
his lifetime with one wife. He had 12 daughters. He had three sons. Every one of those daughters
became a nun. And the reason was obvious. It had to do with the very religious atmosphere
that existed in his household. And it's fascinating that someone with such a devout belief
in God should be able to put it aside when he's doing his research, which of course has characterized
the lives of scientists who have been people of faith all through the years. One obviously
doesn't have to be an agnostic or an atheist to be a great scientist, and Morgani is the perfect
example of that. So here he is invited to Padua to become Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, the
first junior professor, and then later on he becomes the Professor of Anatomy. So although
primarily an anatomist for the rest of his life, he still continues to think of himself as primarily
a physician. So he's always doing his anatomical studies with the thought in mind, what is this
going to teach me about diagnosis? Although he is an anatomist, what begins to happen to him
is that people learn about his studies, and doctors from America, from England, from Russia,
from every European country begin writing him letters, asking him to consult on their patients.
And he does this by mail. About 25 or 30 years ago, a book of these consultations was published.
They were rediscovered, the notes, his notes were rediscovered, and the so-called consulti
of Morgani were published, and they are available to read. And they're fascinating because they
describe the perfect clinician of that time. And all this period, he is dissecting, he's not
seeing patients anymore, but he's studying their case reports, their clinical case reports.
Now, over the previous century, doctors had been doing individual dissections of individual
dead bodies of people who had had diseases that they recognized and treated before.
And finally, in the year 1679, a man named Theophilus Bonitas had brought a lot of these
case reports together into the first book of this kind, which was called Repository of Anatomy
Practiced on Corpses in Latin. It was Cephalcretum, Sieve, and Atomica Practicum. It's called Cephalcretum
by historians. There were something like 470 authors in these 3,000 cases. Morgani Valsalva
had studied this book. It wasn't very helpful. It wasn't very helpful because, first place,
there was no index. There was no way to find any particular disease, any particular set of symptoms,
and the whole thing was one big hodgepodge. So, early on, Morgani decided that when he put his
book together, he would not only have accurate symptoms, accurate case histories, accurate
autopsies, but he would provide an index so that people could look at these cases and find cases
that interested them. So, he works on this for 55 years. And during the time he's working on it,
when he's in his late 30s, early 40s, he meets a young man who is interested in this kind of thing
and decides that the way he's going to write the book is in the form of letters to the young man.
So, he keeps writing these letters, and he ends up with 70 letters. And when the book is finally
published in 1761, when Morgani is 79 years old, it's composed of these 70 letters. And the book,
which in Latin is called Isetibus, it causes morborum per anatomine indigatus, the seeds
and causes of disease demonstrated by anatomy. See the wording, the seeds, where does it start,
and the causes of disease as anatomy can demonstrate it. This book, which we call Isetibus,
became one of those turning points that we've been talking about in these lectures. The 700 cases
are divided into five books. Currently, they're put together in three volumes, which is the way
the five books originally came out. Diseases of the head, the thorax, the belly, surgical and
universal disorders, and then the fifth book is a supplement. And the supplement contains those
indexes that allow any reader to find what he wants. There's one index in which you look up a symptom
and it is associated in the index with a disease that caused it, and then you know which page to
turn to. There is another index that is composed of pathological findings. So if you're dissecting
someone and you find, for example, a scar on the left ventricle, you can look up scar on the left
ventricle and find the page. And there is another index which gives the subject of each of the
70 letters. So if you are thinking about fever because you are a patient who you're treating now
has unremittant fevers, you can't figure it out. You can look up fever and there's morgani with
some descriptions, perhaps 20, 30, 40 of people whose main symptom was fever, who he later dissected,
and then he's got something else. It's a little bit like Bartlett's familiar quotations. What it is
is the names of passages that are most worthy of notice. You know, if you can remember three
words from a poem, you look it up in Bartlett and then he tells you where to go. One of my students
came to me some years ago and he said, you know, there's one case we all talk about
and thanks to the index, we can always find it. And the case is of a very tall, thin young woman
described as a strumpet out of whose home one day a man was seen to be rushing out, didn't even close
the door, pulling up his trousers and disappeared. Well, what happened was one of the neighbors
seeing the door open and being worried about what might have happened rushed in to the prostitute's
house. It was about two or three in the afternoon as described very accurately in this case report,
because the case reports are like stories. And there was the prostitute lying dead in bed,
and as Morgane puts it, the semen virially still dripping on her legs.
So what could she have died of this young woman when he dissected her body, this long, thin body,
long, thin fingers? He found that they aorta the main blood vessel bringing blood to the body
out of the left ventricle had within its layers shattered itself and dissected itself so that
the aorta had torn. It's called a dissecting aneurysm of the aorta. And in retrospect,
what she had was a disease described several hundred years later called Marfan's syndrome.
Actually, it's been thought that Abraham Lincoln had Marfan's syndrome, but that's another story
which we can tell at another time. But this is the way this book functioned how easy it was to
find what you wanted and what a great guide it was. He had provided Morgane had his readers
with a veritable museum of medicine all laid out. Well, I spent a lot of time reading this book on
cold winter nights in the northeast. I just pulled down one of my volumes and
he did not name any of the diseases. He was just describing them. So I find
pneumonias and cancers and various kinds of stroke. I find Crohn's disease. I find ulcerative
colitis. You name it. It's there among the 700 cases in over the next few hundred years. These
cases were accurately described by other people and given names. So with the publication of this
extraordinary book, the first really distinct sounds of the humoral theory's death knell
could be heard because now no one could say every disease is caused by some vagueness.
What you had to say was, okay, let's think carefully about the symptoms, the cries of the
suffering organs. Where are they going to lead us when we do that autopsy? What will we find?
So, Morgani is, has been called and will always be called the father of this particular discipline
pathological anatomy, sick anatomy. You had to find sick anatomy and he becomes something else.
He becomes, as we review the history of clinical medicine, he becomes the father of the physical
examination because you stop to think of what he did. Essentially, he's taking a history and he's
doing the physical examination after death. The trick which clinicians realized soon after
that book came out in 1761 was to try to figure out what one would find at autopsy but before
the autopsy when the patient first came to you. And that is the essence of taking a history and
doing a physical examination. That's the great game we all play as clinicians. The trick
is to find where those cries are leading you. And to this day, if you go to any teaching hospital
once a week, they have what they call the CPC, the clinical pathological correlation,
where some internal resident gets up and he gives a history and he describes the physical findings
and then everybody in the audience has to tell what are they going to find at autopsy or at
operation if the patient is still alive or at biopsy. But this, and we'll call it a game because
it's a great game and it's lots of fun. It was started by Morgani with this book with DeSettibus.
Now remember, book is published in 1761. We're sitting right in the middle of the age of enlightenment,
that great age of enlightenment where people question everything,
where nobody wanted to believe any given that had been handed down to them. This is what the
so-called philosophs, the leaders of this movement were doing. And one of the givens was that grand
theories of disease like the Hippocratics had given us must now be discarded. That notion that
everything is part of some master plan of the universe that is organized by the deity, by the
demiurge, by the great craftsman, the old galanic notion, that must be discarded. The grand theory
had to be, according to most people before this time, part of the thesis of predeterminism,
that there was no human control over it, things when the way they went because this demiurge
had decided this is how it would be. From that moment on, from the publication of DeSettibus on,
medical scientists, and of course all scientists, began to realize that now aims must be more modest.
You don't make a general theory and then make every one of your observations fit into the
general theory. The notion that Sir Francis Bacon had started, that William Harvey had worked with,
which was inductive reasoning, that notion became the hallmark of everything that medical scientists
did. They just started making little observations. And we'll hear more about that in subsequent
lectures. And as the little observations were made with nothing, usually in particular in
mind, eventually they would come to seem to tell a story that led to a hypothesis about why one
could make these observations, and then of course the experiment, and then of course the theory.
What was required at this time was the accumulation of large numbers of facts, as simple as all that.
Well, unlike some of the other books we've heard about in the previous lectures, DeSettibus
was immediately wanted by everybody who could get his hands on it. It was translated into language
after language within a few years. A second edition was needed, a third edition was needed,
and as I say, there were multiple translations from the original Latin. So
what a difference in atmosphere. What a change in point of view. What a complete
reorientation of the way doctors have to think about disease. Now, in those days, of course,
there were these huge lag phases. When I say everybody wanted it, I'm talking about every
professor wanted it. Everybody who was a doctor because he graduated from a university wanted it,
but of course the vast majority of doctors had not graduated from a university in those days.
They had learned what they learned by the apprenticeship system. They had apprenticed
themselves to a local physician who had probably learned his art the same way, and they didn't
care too much about this DeSettibus stuff. But the leaders of medicine did, and those who determined
the course of medical history did, and for them, it was no longer sufficient to just take a look
at a patient, kind of touch them a bit, feel his pulse, not to see how fast it went, but just to
see if it was strong or weak or if it told you something vague. It wasn't sufficient to hold
his urine up and look at it or just give it a taste to see if there was sugar or acetone in it.
Physicians began to make is their goal to predict the autopsy findings. That was what it was all
about, and as I say, this is how the modern physical examination developed, which we'll hear
about in the next lecture. Interestingly, when it was developed, the center of what we might call
medical education or medical progress had shifted to Paris for reasons that'll come obvious as we
talk. At Morgagne's death in 1771, which actually happened very shortly after DeSettibus was published,
he was one of the most renowned physicians in the world. He had been doing these consultations
through all of the years. He had written this most remarkable book that had changed medicine.
He died in the house where he had brought up all of those children at 3003 Theo San Massimo
in Padua. A plaque in his honor is on the wall of that house. And if anyone who is listening to me
finds himself in Padua after he has gone to the university and found Harvey's
stemma up there in the ceiling of the portico or logia, it's worth asking a taxi driver to take
you to that address to look at that plaque. But that plaque obviously is not his greatest
memorial. His greatest memorial is his book, which was one of the most significant turning points
in the long history of medicine.
