Lecture 6, Hunter, the Surgeon as Scientist
If there were a theme or a text to put us in a frame of mind to study the life of John
Hunter, who lived from 1728-1793, it would surely be something that Sir Francis Bacon
said in the previous century, and I'll quote it,
No natural phenomenon can be adequately studied in itself alone, but to be understood must
be considered as it stands, connected with all nature.
Now not only is that a basic tenet in the Gospel of all of science, but if John Hunter
were to have chosen a motto, it might just as well have been that, he took all of nature
and all of life to be the domain of his investigations from earliest childhood.
He was filled with a sense of wonder, and the result of this was, here he was a surgeon
and he transformed surgery during his lifetime from being essentially something an artisan
did, a workman did, actually not an educated workman at all, to be something that was much
more in the domain of science.
Fielding Garrison, who was one of the greatest of medical historians writing in the early
part of this century, said this of him, Hunter found surgery a mechanical art and he left
it an experimental science.
Actually the entire history of professionalism comes into play in thinking about John Hunter,
especially in some of the medical specialties that started out at a very low level of education
of prestige in the community, of authority.
You start with people who are not well educated and who are really rough craftsmen.
Someone comes along and finds in that field something intellectually exciting, and Hunter
was the man for surgery.
That in itself attracts a higher intellectual quality person into the field and then he or
later she discovers new things, so the spiral continues.
It becomes more and more attractive to people of greater intellect and a century passes
and the field is unrecognizable because a totally different type of person is going
into it.
That's what John Hunter started with surgery, this ascending spiral of professionalism.
He was born in Lanarkshire in south central Scotland.
His family were small landowners.
They'd had that land for centuries.
He was one of ten children.
He was fascinated right from the very beginning by everything around him in the fields of
Scotland.
He was always out in the countryside.
He never went to school, skipped school, was never much of a student.
His youth, you might say, was one perpetual field trip.
He was a man who liked to write about himself.
He wasn't vain.
He wasn't boastful, but he was pretty noisy, as you'll see as we go along here, and here's
what he wrote about himself.
When I was a boy, he writes, I wanted to know all about the clouds and the grasses and why
the leaves change color in the autumn.
I watched the ants, the bees, the birds, the tadpoles, the worms.
I pestered people with questions about what nobody knew or cared about.
This man was about five feet two inches tall.
He was built like a fire hydrant.
He couldn't have cared less about clothes or about whether his hair was combed or not.
He was gruff.
He was direct.
He was brutally honest with everybody.
He wasn't unkind, but he was the sort of person that you didn't cross unless you knew what
you were talking about because he certainly didn't bear fools gladly.
His older brother, William, on the other hand, was courtly and debonair.
William had gone to London, become a surgeon, actually one of the early gynecologists and
male obstetricians, and he had started, William had, an anatomy school that was one of the
most popular.
In London, of course, people wanted to study anatomy, especially in the middle of the 18th
century under the influence of people who were doing more and more dissections.
So there were lots of students there.
And John was at odds with himself.
He had no profession, didn't know what to do.
So William invited him to London to come and work in the anatomy school.
And lo and behold, William discovers that his younger brother has great technical skill
at dissecting.
And before long, he's got the anatomy school for himself.
William is off taking care of his patients, and John is doing most of the teaching.
So he decides what's better than teaching is doing.
So he goes to the Chelsea Hospital, which is not far away, and he starts studying surgery
under the great William Chesildon, one of the leading London surgeons of the time.
Then after that, he goes to St. Bartholomew's to work with the most prominent surgeon in
England, Sir Percival Pott.
And he's learned all the technique that's available at that time.
And his brother William says, well, all this is fine, but this kid never went to school.
He's got to get an education.
So they arranged for young John to go to Oxford, which was a dreadful mistake, because he hated
it.
He hated books, never wanted to read.
And before you know it, eight months, nine months have passed, and he's gone.
He's out of Oxford.
And he gets himself a pointed house surgeon, which is like an intern and a resident at
the age of 28 to St. George's Hospital in London.
And now he's on the wards, and he becomes interested in continuing something he was
beginning to do as a child, which is dissecting animals.
He lets it be known, this brash young fellow, that he wants any animal that he can get his
hands on.
And there were lots of little circuses, little menageries in London.
There were all kinds of animals in the Tower of London.
So as animals, some of them being aged, got sick or whatever might happen to them, maybe
they just couldn't walk around or needed special kinds of food that weren't available.
The owners, the menagerie owners or the keeper of the Tower would say, okay, I'll give this
to young Hunter.
And so Hunter began accumulating a large number of these animals and dissecting them and doing
comparative studies of their anatomy to try to develop some classification going up the
various phyla of creatures to man.
Well, there was a war going on.
It was called the Seven Years' War.
We know it in America as the French and Indian War, and he enlists in the army as an army
surgeon, but he doesn't see action.
Instead he decides, this is my big chance to study marine life.
So he spends the years that he's in the army, which is three years between 1760 and 1763,
studying marine life, sea urchins, anemones, crabs, eels, and he's keeping notes on everything.
He's got accurate knowledge of everything he's done when he's all through.
He goes back to St. George's, but a lot of time has passed.
He's now 43 years old, and what he's got to show for all of these years are certain experiments
that we'll talk about in a moment, plus all of the dissections and all of these notebooks.
But when he dissects an animal, he doesn't throw it away, he keeps it, he preserves it.
So he's got all the kinds of bottles and jars with all these specimens in them.
Well, here he is, 43, he doesn't have a wife.
He falls in love with a beautiful, tiny little woman named Anne Hume.
She's the daughter of a well-known London surgeon.
Very different from him.
She's cultured, she's literary in life later.
She would have literary salons that people would come to.
Then he goes into practice, and he hates practice.
What he really wants to do is dissect these animals.
What he really wants to do is be alone in this little home laboratory or working on his notebooks.
So he begins with the animals a real museum.
Before he died, by the time that museum was completed, he had 14,000 specimens preserved.
They were described in ten volumes of hand-written notes.
Over his lifetime, he spent something like 70,000 pounds on that work and that museum.
Those collections at a time when a pound was worth about $5 and you could get a six-course
meal for 75 cents.
So you can imagine how much this thing was worth for the rest of his life.
Every spare penny he had went into that museum, and although he lived very well, he was not
infrequently in debt.
Well, of course, he was 43 when that marriage began, but he had been doing work on human
subjects too up to that time.
For example, in 1766, when he was 38 years old, he was working away at his notebook
at about three o'clock in the morning, and he got up from his chair to exercise, and
he was doing jumping jacks.
And all of a sudden, he felt as boing in his Achilles tendon, which had snapped.
Well, most of us would go to a doctor, go to bed, or limp around a while, not John Hunter.
He thought, what a great opportunity to study wound healing.
What a great chance to see whether this thing will knit because he had seen people with
Achilles tendons, and he knew that most of them healed.
The question was how?
So over the course of the succeeding weeks, actually months, he took a series of animals,
live animals, made little tiny cuts over their Achilles tendons, cut the Achilles tendon,
having made that little cut in the skin, and then he would sacrifice the animal at a week,
two weeks, three weeks, so that gradually he came to see the healing process, and he
eventually wrote the first description of the way a tendon forms a scar and heals.
And he was his own experimental subject.
Of course, this started a grand tradition of doctors being their own experimental subjects.
Auto-experimentation is one of the most fascinating sagas in medical history, and there are so
many examples of that.
But he's perhaps the greatest example, and one of the other things that he did in the
very following year, when he was 39, again before he was married, was to do an auto-experiment
on, of all things, syphilis.
Syphilis was a very, very prominent disease at that time.
It was a disease of armies and camp followers.
It was a disease of students.
It was rampant.
Lots of people whose names you know from history had syphilis, so much so, that people hardly
thought about it, except when it reached its very dangerous and so-called tertiary form.
There was a big debate at that time about whether syphilis was one disease or two.
Was it syphilis and gonorrhea, or as it was often called then, clapp, or was it syphilis
with gonorrhea?
Were they both the same or were they two separate diseases?
He believed that it was one disease.
Well, you need an experimental subject.
He's not going to give syphilis to any volunteer.
You can be sure of that.
So what he did was, he found a sailor at a pub somewhere who had primary syphilis, and
he asked the sailor if he could just scrape the syphilitic discharge off his penis, and
the sailor said, fine, in exchange for a few pounds.
And then he took some sandpaper or the back of a knife, and he abraded the tip of his
own penis, and he put the pus on it, and it worked.
He got a great case, first of primary, then of secondary syphilis.
We're not quite sure, following his life, whether he ever got the so-called tertiary
late stage that may develop in about 10 years, but he did careful observations of himself
day by day and ended up writing the first thorough description, not only of the changes
of early stages of syphilis, but of the proper way to study a disease.
No medical person had done that, no surgical person had done that, and if you read his
notes, you see how this thing developed and how a physician should do a true experimental
case report of this kind.
Now this was a prelude to his career-long study of inflammation.
Inflammation was another one of the big problems of the time.
One would be injured, for example, or have something as simple as a mosquito bite.
And since the Greeks, since Hippocrates, it had been noted that four things happened
at the site, at the location of such an injury.
They called them rhubor, dolor, chalor, and tumour, redness, pain, a sort of a lump, and
heat.
Those are the signs of inflammation.
Now in actual fact, they're due to the fact that when one is injured, blood vessels are
broken, blood and lymph and plasma and white and red cells and platelets get into the area,
or some of them actually can leak through the walls or the vessels, but in any event,
they find themselves around the injured area.
There are ingredients in them that tend to wall the injury off.
If they succeed in walling the injury off, it doesn't spread through the body.
It's localized and then gradually similar ingredients cause the scarring process and
the healing.
If they don't succeed in walling it off, there's this wild infection that spreads through
the body, something that we might, for example, call blood poisoning.
So he studied this very carefully over the course of his life and kept making notes on
it, and eventually wrote the first great book on inflammation, which wasn't published until
after his death actually, it was called The Treatise on the Blood, Inflammation and Gunshot
Wounds.
His real purpose was to study wound healing.
So once again, another great first.
The first time surgeons can honestly learn how the wounds that they inflict do heal.
Its primary focus, once again, is how all kinds of tissues heal, and what a great contribution
that was.
So between these two books, the book that he wrote called The Treatise on Venereal Disease
in 1786 and the book on inflammation, again published after he died, what we've got is
prototypes of the way one should, as a clinician, as a researcher, as a scientist, study a clinical
disease in its entirety.
He used inductive reasoning to discover the general physiological principles of healing
by making these small observations day by day, and then, of course, using animal experiments
to verify the hypothesis that he came to.
And then once he had a theory about what happened, he would reason backward deductively to study
specific inflammatory diseases like osteomyelitis, peritonitis, those were some of the things
that he studied, phlebitis and trauma.
Now you don't dissect animals, keep accurate records, see sick patients, operate on them,
and become a teacher by working an eight hour day.
The John Hunter would wake up at five o'clock in the morning, and before six he was dissecting.
He dissected till about nine at home on these animals that he was working on, or sometimes
on cadavers.
He'd have a bit of breakfast at nine.
Then he would see patients at home until about noontime, never ate lunch.
And then he'd go to St. George's Hospital and make house calls and operate.
Now of course, surgery in those days had to be really fast.
There was no anesthesia, no one knew anything about antisepsis, a leg was amputated, oh,
if it took two minutes it was much, much too long, it could take about a minute.
And there were not a lot of operations because the mortality was very high, nobody wanted
to be operated on, the operations were primarily amputations, breast removals, drainages of
abscesses, things of this nature.
So they were fast, there were not a lot.
So during this period of time between noon and let's say four p.m., he was seeing the
patients doing the operations, comes home at four, he has the main meal of the day at
four.
Let's say he's through about five, probably through at four fifteen, but let's give him
that hour, he would take a nap and then go to work on his notebooks and on the classification
of his animals and preparing the many lectures that he was forced to give because students
in London and other physicians and surgeons in London came to realize that this man knew
more than anybody.
So he had to lecture constantly at St. George's Hospital.
So he's doing his lecture notes, he does this till about midnight or one in the morning
and he gets up again at five and starts the same thing all over again.
So what were some of the experiments that he did and recorded that taught us something
new?
Well, in the first place, one of the major surgical problems of the day was something
called aneurysm, a blood vessel, whether it's the aorta, ephemeral artery in the leg,
the popliteal artery behind the knee, which was a very common one for aneurysm, whether
it's one of these or some other vessel in the body, it becomes weak at a particular
point, not infrequently because of injury at that time.
Horseback riding was a very common reason for aneurysm and that was why there were
so many of these popliteal aneurysms behind the knee, the constant banging and banging.
How do you treat an aneurysm?
It gets weak, this place in the vessel, it balloons out so that it's a rounded structure,
the wall is so weak that the danger is that it will burst and the patient will hemorrhage
to death.
He got it into his head that the best way to treat these is to tie them off, put a piece
of silk or string or whatever it was around them and tie them off to keep them from rupturing,
but of course if you do that you deprive what is beyond that vessel from its blood supply.
It had been his observation in dissecting the bodies of people who had died of aneurysm
and had had the vessels tied off the few that there were, that the body had a tendency to
develop what were called collateral vessels, the area above the tie, little vessels would
spring out from it and gradually make their way around the obstruction and come out the
other side.
You know, if the interstate is blocked you go around side roads and this was essentially
what he was discovering, but he wanted to know whether this really happened in every
case and what the mechanism was.
So there was the King's Park in Richmond Park and he had some of the associates capture
a stag, a young stag in whose horn you could feel the pulsations.
He tied off the vessel that led into the horn, the antler, and the pulsation stopped and
he of course followed the course of this animal.
First the antler got cold, then it stopped growing and it started to shrivel a little
bit and then low and behold after some period of time it got a little warmer and started
to grow again and then he took the antler off and he was able to demonstrate the collateral
vessels and his way of demonstrating it was to inject these vessels with some waxy colored
waxy material so that he could then preserve the specimens.
A man came to him who had what's called hypospatias, a deformity of the penis which makes it very
difficult to ejaculate in a normal way and he wanted to have children.
So Hunter said, well you know why don't we just take your semen, he was making normal
semen and put it into your wife's cervix.
The first recorded case of artificial insemination that we know about and it worked.
He did some things on transplantation.
He was able to transplant the spur of a rooster's foot up into the rooster's comb.
He was able to transplant rooster testicles into the abdominal cavity of several animals
and how he did the following no one ever knows but this specimen was preserved with his materials
later the whole kitten caboodle went to the Royal College of Surgeons.
He transplanted a human tooth into a rooster's comb.
It did succeed, we have photographs of it and it was in that collection until the collection
was bombed during World War II in a raid on London by the Germans.
A lot of that collection still exists but a lot of it was destroyed.
When you go to the dentist and he uses words like bicuspid, molar, whatever it may be in
size or those words were invented by John Hunter because he studied the jaws, was fascinated
by that.
One of the most famous stories about John Hunter is the so called Irish giant tail.
There was a giant 8 feet 2 inches tall named Charles Byrne by the time he was 17 he was
that tall.
Of course nowadays if you're that tall you buy yourself a pair of sneakers, an athletic
supporter, you go to Madison Square Garden, you become a basketball player and you're
a millionaire.
In those days what did you do?
You showed yourself off in side shows.
So this fellow comes to London, he gets himself a manager and he's exhibited in side shows
but being that tall and quite skinny he's subject to diseases, he's subject to what
a lot of Irishmen coming down to London have always been subject to which is alcoholism.
So he's a drunk and he's got tuberculosis and he's dying at the age of 22 and Hunter
is determined to get his corpse and Hunter bribes the undertaker that he knows this
man has gone to.
Why has the man gone to the undertaker?
Because he knows Hunter wants his corpse so he's going to arrange everything before
he dies.
He's going to be put in a leaden coffin which will be carried up to the North Sea off the
coast of Ireland.
It's going to be taken out in the boat and dropped into the water so Hunter can't get
it.
Well Hunter bribes the funeral director and the funeral cortege takes off from London
when the man dies and at some point near nightfall they stop it and in, the coffin is put into
a barn.
Only the undertaker has the key so it will be safe and Hunter can't get in there and
steal it.
No one knows of course fellow's been bribed, Hunter's been following in a carriage with
a few associates so they get out, they unlock this barn, they take this huge corpse out,
they prop it up in the seat next to Hunter in the carriage, they fill the coffin with
some stones and tanners bark and who knows what and this poor fellow's body is soon being
boiled in Hunter's house so that the skeleton is made available for study and the coffin
is buried in the Irish Sea and nobody's the wiser until Hunter writes about it, of course.
So this is what he was doing and all this time his practice was growing and as I say
he hated practice but he did it to support his habit and it wasn't just his habit it
was his house because you have to have pretty big digs in order to keep all of these things.
In 1776 the year of our country's birth he was named surgeon extraordinary to the king
and in 1788 when Percival Pot had died he was acknowledged as the greatest surgeon in London
and finally at the age of 55 when he's been married seven years and he has a few children
he buys himself the ultimate house he had had a house in Earl's court with this museum
but now he designs his own house in Leicester Square where his neighbor across the square
incidentally is Sir Joshua Reynolds and how does he design this house he wants a museum
so he has a 52 by 28 foot museum with a huge glass skylight to keep these thousands and
thousands of specimens he has a lecture theater which is separate with shelves all along the
walls where he has specimens that he can use in the course of his lectures his wife is
what was called a blue stocking in those days a very literary woman and so he builds for
her a great salon 100 by 50 feet where she can have her various teas and meetings and
who knows what in the evenings and across the courtyard he's got another house because
in those days house pupils would often live with a professor and he and Joshua Reynolds
get to be great friends and one day Reynolds says I want to paint your portrait you know
you're the greatest surgeon in England and he doesn't want to sit still he's much much
too busy but he agrees you know he'll show up and he'll sit so what does he do he fidgets
and he fidgets and he fidgets and one day as Reynolds describes it some sublime no doubt
experimental thought came to him and he got lost in reverie and Reynolds immediately caught
that look and we have and it hangs in the Royal College of Surgeons and Lincoln's infields
in London this magnificent portrait of Hunter by Sir Joshua Reynolds in the background he's
got a table that he's sitting near and in the background you see the legs of the Irish
giant skeleton hanging down on the table is a graded series of comparative anatomy plates
from one of his notebooks and you see a preparation of the lung right nearby and its vessels are
injected it is the perfect portrait of this great man it may very well be the greatest
portrait ever done of a medical figure everywhere and every year there's a Hunterian lecture
at the Royal College of Surgeons they were started shortly after his death and they have
continued to this day and they take out the picture and they hang it just behind the lectern
it's quite a magnificent moment when this happens well in 1785 when he was about 57
he began to experience episodes of chest pain on exertion originally historians had thought
it was syphilitic disease of the aortic valve but it really wasn't it was classical coronary
artery disease he was having angina every time he got upset and he'd have an anginal
attack and turn pale and get scared he would rush to a mirror and then write notes about
what he looked like so we've got this great description of his angina and being a combative
fellow and being on the surgical staff of a hospital he had lots of time and lots of
opportunity to get into fights with people so one day he was at a board meeting in October
of 1793 trying to get a position for a couple of Scotsman on the surgical service there
was this big argument he developed a severe angina attack he ran out of the room actually
may be toward a mirror and he collapsed in the arms of someone who was passing by in
the corridor and he died well he was initially buried in the crypt in St. Martin's in the
fields but some 66 years later his body was transferred to Westminster Abbey and I'd like
to read you the tablet says the Royal College of Surgeons has placed this tablet on the
grave of Hunter to record admiration of his genius as a gifted interpreter of the divine
power and wisdom at work in the laws of organic life and his grateful veneration for his services
to mankind as the founder of scientific surgery William Quist who is one of his biographers
early biographers has written of him the following John Hunter worship nature with profound humility
he was not just a disciple of natural history he was its high priest
