Lecture 7, Lenic and the Invention of the Stethoscope
Having accepted the fact that every symptom should be traceable to some specific abnormality
in a specific part of the body, the next logical step obviously was to trace that part of the
body from which the symptom had arisen while the patient was still alive.
Of course, this required the development of the physical examination with its looking,
feeling, tapping, and listening.
In this development, the single most important moment, and it really did happen in one moment,
was the invention of the stethoscope in 1816.
Still Morgani, and then of course Hunter, most physicians were still blaming diseases
on these generalized vaguenesses, humoral imbalances, miasmas, which were strange, oh,
things up in the ether that put a gloom over a particular area and made people sick, or
lax morals, or that God had gotten angered about something one of us had done, but the
work of Morgani and clearly Hunter began to change all of that, not immediately, but
slowly and bit by bit, but now the search for the real seeds and causes could begin because
of Morgani's work, the great book, The Cetibus, The Seeds.
Looking was of course an ancient method.
Doctors had always looked at patients, but they'd never looked at patients in any systematic
way.
They had just made some general observations.
Feeling of course had been done too, but it was also not the least bit organized.
One might touch a patient here and there, if there was some protuberance, one might touch
it, but there was no particular way that one went about it and recorded observations.
But the first completely novel innovation, the thing that was brand new, was the new
technique that would become known as percussion, the tapping.
What can you learn by percussion?
Well, if a box, for example, is empty and you tap on it, it has a rather resonant note.
If you were to fill it with something tightly, let's say sand and you tapped on it, it would
have a dull note and it's the same thing with the chest.
The lungs are air filled.
If you tap on the chest, either just with your finger or the way doctors do it nowadays
with one finger on the other, you will hear this nice resonant note.
On the other hand, if a patient has pneumonia and the lung tissue becomes like a piece of
meat, which is really what it feels like, there's a dull area and you can actually tap out the
area of pneumonia.
If a patient has fluid in his chest, as he's likely to do with certain kinds of malignancy
or with tuberculosis, you can actually tell the level of the fluid by tapping.
There it's dull, dull, dull, and there it's resonant and you know that's where the fluid
is at its topmost layer.
Well, the way percussion was discovered has to do with precisely that because the man
who discovered it was the son of an innkeeper.
The innkeeper was always trying to find out how much beer was left in his kegs by tapping
on them.
This young man, Leopold Auenberger in Vienna, grew up with the realization that you could
find out this way what the chest was like and so he started examining patients, tuberculosis
was a common disease at this time in the 1750s or so and he had hundreds of observations
that he made and he finally wrote a small book about percussion.
The trouble is that the book came out.
In the early 1760s and it was just after Morganie had been published and most people
didn't yet really appreciate the importance of this kind of thing so the book was completely
forgotten.
Well some important things began to happen.
In the rest of Europe, Auenberger lived in Vienna.
He was a physician, in fact physician-in-chief to the Hospital of the Holy Trinity in Vienna
but going a little westward, the French Revolution occurred in 1789 and whatever else the French
Revolution did, it had a profound effect on medical education.
All the old medical schools were closed down.
The medical schools that were based on hierarchy, you got to be a professor, you didn't have
to know anything but you had to know someone so if you knew someone, you were a professor
and you weren't teaching very much of anything.
But after 1789 that all changed and becoming a professor at a great medical school depended
on what you had written, your ability as a clinician, how you had climbed the intellectual
and academic ladder, it was a system very much like our own.
And one of the great products of this system at that time, the greatest product of this
system was a man named Jean-Nicholas Covissar who was physician to the Charité Hospital
in Paris.
He was actually, eventually the founder of the French method of what would come to be
called physical examination with those four methods, the looking, the touching, the tapping
and the listening.
And the way it got started was actually that he found Alan Brueger's book in German, it
had never been translated, it wasn't important enough to translate, and he translated it
into French.
And he also did what Alan Brueger had done.
He examined many patients and as Alan Brueger had done but even more so, he followed every
single one of them to the autopsy room.
So he had a very good idea of how accurate he had been in tapping things out and he wrote
a very important book that established that way of examination so that from then on doctors
were commonly doing it but he established something else.
He established the uniquely French method of teaching in a way that had never been done
before.
Here he was at the Charité, one of the great French hospitals and he did his teaching this
way.
Very early in the morning, perhaps at about 7.30 or 8 o'clock, he would always be surrounded
not just by his students and his trainees but as the years went by increasingly by visitors
from other countries as the realization spread of the importance of the French School of
Medicine.
They would go from bed to bed, there might be 20, 30, 40 of them.
A student would examine a patient, then Corvissar would examine the patient and show how one
should feel, one should percuss.
He would then deliver a short lecture on the patient and when they were through with the
rounds which were called grand rounds and they were grand and this is where our current
term grand rounds comes from.
When they were through with all of this, they would go to the lecture room and he would
deliver a lecture on the entire series of patients and whatever their uniqueness were
and then came the supreme moment, they went to the autopsy room.
The hospitals of Paris were filled with relatively young people, of course the life expectancy
was the mid 30s perhaps, certain situations even less and people only went to hospitals
to die.
You wouldn't go to a hospital if you just had some sickness, if you thought you had
a mortal sickness, you went and the hospitals were packed with people.
In fact some of the big hospitals like the Hôtel Jure had four or five people in the
bed and you'd wake up in the morning and find there was a corpse lying next to you.
So there was plenty of material to dissect but because Corvissar had seen every patient
he could then two weeks later, three weeks later go to the autopsy room and dissect the
body of a patient that he and his students had carefully examined and made notes of.
And this became, this three part method became the French way of teaching medicine.
First the careful history and physical examination, then going to the autopsy room and then the
correlation.
You see it's the natural outgrowth obviously of what Morgania had done, it's the same thing
that he had outlined but now it was incorporated into teaching and the focus of teaching changed.
It went from the university to the hospital and it was focused now at least as much on
patients as it was on cadavers.
There was no other place in the world where you could learn medicine this way where the
doctors themselves, the clinical doctors were doing the autopsy.
So American medicine eventually became influenced by French because anybody who could afford
it including people of the Statue of Oliver Wendell Holmes and the leaders of early 19th
century American medicine would go off to Paris and they called it walking the wards,
you'd walk the wards with the great professors, Corvissar being the greatest of them.
The French said and they wrote this and talked about it and boasted about it that the reason
that they were able to develop physical examination was because of the unique national characteristic.
They said they were sensualist things of the senses appeal to them.
The listening, the touching, all of this and of course the tapping came perfectly naturally
to them as did this hearing when this death scope was invented because of all who advanced
science during what might be called the golden age of French medicine.
There was nobody who made a contribution as great as the one made by the diminutive,
here's another 5 foot 2 inch man, tubercular all of his life, intellectual giant, René,
Théophile, Hyacinth, Lénec.
So let me tell you a little bit about Lénec.
Lénec was born in Campe in Brittany.
In fact that name you recognize, you wouldn't think of it as a French name, it's a classical
Breton name.
His father was a minor civil servant, later in life he became a judge but they never had
too much money.
His mother died when he was young, he was 6 and he was sent off to live in the city
of Nantes with his uncle, Jean, who was a physician and at 14, Jean Lénec saw to it
that his young nephew René was enrolled at the University of Nantes to begin his medical
studies at that very early age and even then it was involving hospital work.
The revolution had occurred and this new method was beginning to take hold.
While he was there, Lénec found that hospital work didn't consume him all the time and so
he did a lot of other things.
He learned to play the flute, for example, he became an expert flute player, this little
fellow but unfortunately when he was about 17, still working in the hospital, he developed
the first symptoms of what he insisted was asthma, shortness of breath, fever, feelings
of just his whole body being wasted.
It went on for a period of time and it cleared up but periodically it would hit him again
as we'll see.
Finally, at the age of 18 in November of 1799, he convinced his father to give him some money,
separated his father from 600 francs which he stuck in his pocket and he put on the
best shoes he had and he walked to Paris which was 200 miles away, hit it in 10 days.
And when he went, he went for the specific purpose of studying with the great Corvissar,
the chief of medicine at the Charité Hospital, this great teaching hospital.
Well, opportunities for advancement were continuing to grow, advancement on the basis
of ability and the French were interested, not so much as previous doctors had been,
on reading, reading, reading to see what the great authorities had said but with this
new, fresh way of doing things which was to do things, to actually study the cadaver,
study the patients and forget about the books.
The great motto of the time was, polis beaux couvoirs, beaux couffers, read little, see
much, do much.
They wanted to see for themselves.
They wanted to do for themselves and it was a good idea because so much of what was in
those old books, and they were still using very old books in spite of the Cetibus and
some of Hunter's writings, what was in most of those books was essentially claptrap and
not worth knowing anyway.
Well, so he rushes, Lennec does, frenetically, one might say feverishly because he was feverish,
a lot of the time into his daily work, he's seeing patients all the time and he's making
observations and like Hunter and other great people, he's keeping accurate notes.
And someone who was watching his life and who wrote about him while he was a young man
had this to say, he was but a breath of air, he was a tiny, skinny little guy, he was but
a breath of air and thought himself a hercules.
He was indomitable, nothing was going to stop him.
By the time he was 21, in 1802, still a student, he published his first scientific paper.
It was on valvular disease of the heart.
Same year, he wrote another paper on venereal disease, clearly a common topic at that time.
In 1802, he wrote one on peritonitis, he's still a student, remember he hasn't graduated
yet.
Thanks to the work of another French scientist, Marie-François Bichat, it came to be realized
that not only organs could get sick, but tissues could get sick, peritonitis, for example,
is a disease one had to think about, and so he's interested in tissues, Leneck is,
he's interested in organs.
And he finds himself studying the liver, the old liver that had been thought to make the
blood and was the seed of so much of Hippocratic and Galeinic medicine, and studies a particular
disease which he names cirrhosis.
You've got a medical school today, you learn about Leneck cirrhosis, nobody remembers who
Leneck is, but he was the little man who first described cirrhosis of the liver in
alcoholics and others, and he is a medical student.
In 1803, he wins a medal in surgery and in medicine.
This medal was given in Paris for the medical student who is most accomplished in medicine
and in surgery.
In 1803, he's graduated now, just barely graduated, he's 22.
He begins studying a structure that he is finding in the lungs of people with a disease
that was then called consumption, the Greeks had called it thesis, which means consumption.
Diseases were named after symptoms at that time, and he looks at this little structure
which he gives the name tubercle, because it looks like a little seed, you can barely
see it, even with these tiny handheld lenses that they use, three, four times, two times
magnification, and he realizes that very often these seeds coalesce until they form something
you can actually see, and it'll sometimes become as big as a quarter or bigger than
that or bigger and bigger and bigger, until eventually the center of it dies and it cavitates.
Well, he's describing what we know of pulmonary tuberculosis, tuberculosis of the lungs, with
the way the cavities form, and of course he writes about this, and it begins this trend
where diseases come to be named after the pathological anatomical finding, rather than
after the main symptom, and that was when we began to talk about peritonitis and inflammation
of the peritoneum, or later appendicitis, infection or inflammation of the appendix.
So this already, at this young stage, is beginning to change certainly the classification of
diseases and other ways of understanding them.
Well the Napoleonic Wars were going on, and during much of those Napoleonic Wars he worked
at a huge hospital called the Sol Petrier, taking care of sick and wounded soldiers,
it was difficult and demanding, tedious work, and he just got sicker and sicker, but he
was also becoming more renowned.
He wanted to be physician to a hospital, again that word physician at that time with
a capital P meant you were the chief of medicine, the other people were assistant physicians
or they had no titles at all, and he was finally appointed to a small hospital of about a hundred
beds called the Necker Hospital, which was in a place which at that time was on the outskirts
of Paris.
So here's this little hospital, one of the major diseases of course was tuberculosis,
but there was a lot of rheumatic heart disease, there were lots of diseases of the chest,
it's increasingly becoming an interest of his especially since he's discovered the tubercle,
and in 1816, only a few weeks after he was appointed physician, he comes upon a difficult
situation.
Here he is, this tiny little, very shy man, been shy all of his life.
A shy flower, René Théophile Hyacinth Lénec, a shy little flower, so he's making rounds
with his retinue of students, and he comes upon a new patient who's been admitted, and
she is a pretty but buxom young woman who is said to have some kind of heart disease.
Now at that time, they were listening to the chest, they would put the ear directly on
the chest to listen to whether it was breath sounds or the sounds of murmurs that Corvissar
and others were beginning to describe, but this is the way you listen, you put your ear
on the chest.
Most of these patients were pretty dirty because if you had any money, you didn't go to a
hospital, you stayed at home, the French have never been renowned for bathing, and he was
reluctant because she was pretty, because she was obese, because she was dirty, he was
reluctant to put his ear on her chest, so he didn't, and when rounds were over, he starts
walking home, and he's walking through the courtyard of the Louvre, which at that time
was a palace and not a museum, and he sees a group of kids playing a game that he used
to play when he was a kid, and the game is as follows, they've got this long two by two
of wood, it's about six or eight feet long, and one kid is at one end with a pin, another
kid is at the other end with his ear to the end of it, and the kid with a pin is scratching
a pre-arranged signal on his end, and the kid on the other end is supposed to interpret
what it is, what number it is, what word it is, and little Lynneck is watching these
kids, he's barely taller than they are, and suddenly it hits them, and he says, Sacre
bleu, Sacre cur, whatever they said in those days, and he hails a passing cab, cabriolet
actually, and he rushes back to the hospital, and nobody's around, and he walks up to the
bed of this young woman, and he rolls up a notebook so that it's a cylinder, and he
puts it under her left breast, and he listens to the heart sounds, and he records them,
and he thinks, what a difference, these sounds are transmitted even better than they are
when I listen directly with my ear, so why don't I make one of these things?
Well, I talked about what he did in the spare time when he was a student in his teens, one
of the other things he did was he learned to carve wood, he had a home lathe, so he
makes himself this tubular piece of wood, and he's got to give it a name, so he reverts
to Greek, which is what people would do in those days, and he calls it a stethoscope,
for the Greek word stethos, meaning chest and scope, observe, of course scope usually
means to look, but it doesn't make any difference, he's going to observe with his ear, so he's
got this wooden tube, he, through his life, would eventually call it le cylindre, that
was its unofficial name, others called it le baton, le cornet, médical, some people
called it the pectoriliqui, but in any event, this was the thing he had invented, of course
you know later on it was modified so that there are tubes and all kinds of things, but
that's not the way it was, and because he was a musician and a good one at that, he
knew a lot about pitch, he knew a lot about timbre, and he started listening to chess
with his new stethoscope, and once again, like all of these great people we're talking
about, he kept careful notes, and he described many, many, many different sounds associated
with a tight bronchus, a tight breathing tube, pneumonia, tuberculosis, fluid, all kinds
of things, emphysema, which existed at that time, bronchiectasis, another disease, and
on August 15th, 1819, which was three years after he had invented this thing, he had enough
observations to publish a book in two volumes, he had so many observations he needed two
volumes, and the book was called in English, onmediate auscultation, immediate because
there's something between you and the patient, auscultation meaning to listen, onmediate
auscultation or a treatise on the diagnosis of diseases of lungs and heart based principally
on the new method of investigation, who is presenting a new book, a new instrument, a
new terminology, a new method of classification of heart and chest diseases, and a new philosophy
of diagnosis, another one of those bombshells, all done by the method that had been started
by Morgania, brought along by Corvus R, and now in the hands of the neck had reached perfection,
with this new instrument, you could buy the book for 13 francs, if you paid another three
francs, you got a stethoscope made by the neck himself, because as busy as he was, he would
turn these things out on his home lathe, and he turned out a lot of them in two parts,
so that you'd screw them together, and the reason they were in two parts was doctors
wore top hats, and you could put it in the lining band of your top hat, you could stick
it in your pockets, and then you could screw it together when you wanted to use it.
Well the comments were pretty astonishing, there were lots of comments, a lot of those
comments appeared in print, some said, well it's a good idea, but you know, it's really
too short, other people said, well it's too long, other people said, well it will be a
proud badge of authority, and other people said, well it's really a silly affectation,
some people said, well it will impress patients, and some people said, patients will be put
off by this thing, the first time anything's ever physically come between doctor and patient,
this is even a symbolic thing, and look what happened to it in later generations, some
doctors said, well I can't really hear everything he says, and some people would say, you know,
I hear too much, I can't figure out what this is all about, but everyone agreed about
the book, there was no question about what the book had done. Laneck had produced the
most complete treatment of diseases of the chest that had ever been written, and what
a triumph that was. But the exhausting flurry of writing had resulted, as you can imagine,
in a great worsening of his physical condition. So in October of 1819, here he is, he's 38
years old, he resigns his hospital post, because he knows it's a matter of life and death
now, and he goes back to Brittany, and he says, I will never come back, I will be a gentleman
farmer for the rest of my life. He's still unmarried, as far as we know, the man never
had a date in his life, he was obviously too busy being focused. But two years later, when
he was 40, he was offered a professorship at the Collège de France, which actually coordinated
the work of all of the Paris hospitals where these kinds of training methods were being
carried out. And he was able to do his clinical work at the Charité. And once he returned,
especially because of the book, but because of his reputation with cirrhosis, tuberculosis,
he really had people flocking to him from all over the world. Those grand rounds of
his were amazing, they were conducted very much like Corvissar had done, but with one
difference. He did all of it in Latin, except for the questioning of the patient, and the
reason he did that was so that the Russians who didn't speak French, and the Germans
who might not speak French, whoever didn't speak French, could understand everything
because every doctor who had been trained at that time in a university situation could
speak Latin. So he conducted this whole thing in Latin, and only do the questioning in
French. Well, if you look at the history of medicine in America, or the history of medicine
in Germany, or in some of the other countries, the development of clinical medicine, you
realize that it was marked by everybody going to Paris to walk the wards, everybody who
could. The most distinguished physicians in the early 19th century in America were almost
all Parisian graduates. And as Oliver Wendell Holmes, the senior Oliver Wendell Holmes said
at one point, how can anybody compete with us? We are the only people who really understand
the new methods. We are the only people who can really make a diagnosis. Of course, making
a diagnosis didn't help one bit because they still couldn't treat anybody. They were still
using these Hippocratic methods, even though the Hippocratic theory had been blasted, they
were still purging, and puking, and blistering, and bleeding. They're patients. That didn't
end until much later. The medicines available were opium derivatives, quinine, to knockoff
fever, mercury for the many things mercury was used for, including syphilis in those
days. And Digitalisleaf had been discovered in 1775 by withering, but no one knew how
much of it to use. So there are a lot of people who were getting toxicity from Digitalisleaf.
It was not very, very much. Well, he was getting sicker and sicker. And finally, when he was
41 years old, he had to be taken care of. He was living with his nephew, Marie d'Iac,
who that's another Breton name, who was a doctor too. And they invited a distant widowed
cousin to come and live with them. And she would be their housekeeper. But it wasn't
very long, maybe about a year, when this distant cousin was promoted from housekeeper to wife.
She became Mrs. Leneck. He didn't have to take her on dates. She was right there. So
they got married. And believe it or not, she actually became pregnant. Unfortunately, the
pregnancy was lost. And he was getting finally so sick, he couldn't function at all. And
in 1826, at the age of 45, he returned to Brittany, where he died of tuberculosis. He
left to his nephew, Marie d'Iac, all of his medical books and papers. And as he put it
in his will, quote, and above all, my stethoscope, which is the best part of my legacy.
