Lecture 10, Lister and the Germ Theory
It might be thought that with the invention of surgical anesthesia in 1846, 1847 in its
rapid acceptance, that surgery would just blast forward in a revolutionary kind of way,
that many new operations would be carried out, not so.
There was an increase in the number of the operations that had been done for dozens and
dozens of years, but not in the kinds of operations.
One still couldn't enter the abdomen, one still questioned whether any surgery should
be done because the infection rate remained extremely high.
So here we had anesthesia, but the frustrating thing was you couldn't explore into new areas
of operating because of the danger of infection.
And the danger of infection was not just infection, it was death.
There were several types of pus that were recognized by surgeons at the time.
If you did an amputation, for example, which you always left open, you never tried to sew
it together because infection was virtually inevitable.
So if you did an amputation, and about the third or fourth day, you began to notice that
leaking from the stump was a thick, whitish, non-odorous pus.
You liked to see that.
That was called laudable pus.
They lauded it because they thought this is a sure sign that healing and scarring will
gradually take place, and the stump will shrink down appropriately.
This kind of pus doesn't spread.
It turns out it's caused by the staphylococcus, not a germ notorious for spreading all over
the body.
On the other hand, if the stump turned red and the redness rapidly moved up the leg,
you recognize this is what was called erycephalus, or an erycephaloid infection, which was due,
we now know, to the staphylococcus, which was a cross-country kind of thing.
It burnt its way centrifugally, and it killed virtually every single time.
There was a third type of pus, very common, which was known as hospital gangrene, and
it stank.
The ward of every hospital in the country where the surgical patients were stank of
it, the operating room stank of it, and sometimes entire hospitals stank of it.
It was composed of a mix of microbes.
Some of them were what we call anaerobes, microbes that do not need oxygen in order
to thrive, so they can burrow deep down into the tissues.
It doesn't produce the usual form of pus.
It produces a kind of a thin liquid that they refer to as icarus, or watery pus.
So except for the laudable pus, the appearance of any of these other kinds of infection meant
certain death.
There was also, of course, the danger of tetanus, which was a never-present danger,
especially if the wound took place out in the open, or in a field.
James Simpson, a distinguished surgeon, really a gynecologist in Edinburgh, reported in 1867
studying all the hospitals in Britain that if a hospital had more than 300 beds of the
patients who had amputations, 41% died, and this included finger amputations, toe amputations.
The figures in Paris were worse, 60% of patients with amputations died, Zurich 46%, Glasgow
34%.
The American hospitals were a little better.
The Pennsylvania hospital was 24%, the Massachusetts general at that time was 26%.
So it might be said, as some people have said, that the discovery of antisepsis, the way
of stopping these infections, by Joseph Lister in the 1860s and 1870s, marks what you might
call the BC and the AD of surgery, because after that dividing point, surgery changed
completely.
Now Lister was born to a Quaker family, a devout Quaker family in Upton, which is a
country village near the eastern extremity of London, at least that's where it was at
that time. He went to Quaker schools where he learned to speak fluent French and German,
and French and German were actually spoken in the household.
His father was Joseph Jackson Lister, a bit of a scientist in his own right.
Joseph Jackson Lister was a wine merchant, but like Quakers have had a reputation for
doing, he had another hobby which tended toward the scientific. He studied optics.
Until the early 1830s, the major problem with microscopes was aberration of the image that
you saw through the lens. One of the forms was so-called chromatic aberration, where
the light would break up into its spectrum of red, orange, yellow, and so forth around
the edge of the lens, called again chromatic aberration. Working with lenses, Joseph Jackson
Lister discovered a law of optics called the law of a planatic foci, which enabled him
to build lenses that didn't have chromatic aberration. So from about 1832, 1833 on, modern
microscopes were available with all of their detail. The result was that here is young
Joseph Lister, the hero of our story, who grows up speaking French, speaking German,
the two major medical languages at the time, and being an expert at the microscope by the
time he's in his teen years. And that becomes eventually the key to everything that he does.
He goes to University College London. He's a Quaker, so he can't go to Oxford or Cambridge.
University College was the so-called Godless College. It was built for Quakers and on conformists
and the few Jews who went to college at that time. He enrolled in its medical school. He
graduated with honors in 1852. And he arrived in Edinburgh right after graduation, the year
after graduation, to study with the distinguished Scottish surgeon James Syme for a month. Lister
was a tall, handsome, self-effacing, modest, very appealing young man. And Syme took a
look at him and said, my gosh, I would love him eventually to succeed me. So he offered
him the post of house surgeon, like an intern or a resident. And he stayed for about a year,
and lo and behold, Syme said, I want you to be my assistant surgeon. That was the number
two position. What made the post appealing to Lister was that by this time he had fallen
deeply in love with the daughter of James Syme, Agnes Syme, whom he married. And the
two of them went off on a three-month European honeymoon. But what did they do on their
honeymoon? They went to all of the leading medical centers in France and in Germany.
In France it was mostly the hospitals of Paris, as you can imagine. But in Germany it was
not just the big universities, but there were very small ones in other places as well,
Wurzburg, Göttingen, of those we have mentioned. And one often might say, well, what did Agnes
think about this? Agnes loved it. Agnes had become enamored with the whole idea of medical
research. And when they went back to Edinburgh, these two created a lab in their own kitchen.
And he was the chief scientist, but she was his partner, and she worked with him in everything
he did. In fact, she worked with him in everything he did the rest of his life. So here he is
with his microscope, and he thinks this is a perfect tool to discover new things, because
England was behind Germany, was behind France. And no one knew how to use the microscope except
for very few. You go to medical school, they'd show it to you one day. It was certainly not
like the situation in Germany, where you'd be looking down that barrel every day of your
career. So he starts doing this. He studies the structure and function of muscle. He studies
blood clotting. He studies inflammation, John Hunter's old area of expertise. He's trying
to find out what starts inflammation, and he's trying to find out what starts blood coagulating
once an injury occurs, and the blood gets out into the tissues. Why does it clot? And
as he studies the clots microscopically, he comes to the conclusion that there's a foreign
body in it. Somehow some foreign material must get in, and that starts that chemical
process that causes the clot. As he's working on this, an opening comes up in Glasgow. He's
appointed professor of surgery there. He's 32 years old. He comes down to Glasgow because
of this marvelous personality and his genial behavior toward everybody. He is quickly
a very popular teacher, but he keeps thinking about the big problem of the time, which is
this gigantic infection and mortality rate in his patients and everybody's patients.
One day, he's walking through the courtyard of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary. He's discussing
the problem with a professor of chemistry, a fellow named Thomas Anderson, and Anderson
says, I have to tell you something. I'm catching up on my old medical journals. The year here
is 1866. I'm catching up on my old medical journals, and believe it or not, I finally
read one from 1856, a French journal, Comptes du Dikimi, and there's this young man, this
young chemist who, since then, has become quite famous, but he wasn't when he wrote
this article. He tells the story in the article about how he solved the problem of the fermentation
that was becoming putrified in wine and beer around the university where he works. The
real story, of course, was that Louis Pasteur, a new young professor at the University of
Lille, had been presented by the wine makers and beer makers in that area with the fact
that their wine and beer was putrifying, and they didn't know why. Since fermentation
at that time was thought to be a chemical process, they went to the professor of chemistry.
So what Pasteur did was, he looked at normal wine under his microscope. He was a crystal
chemist, incidentally, so he knew a lot about microscopes, and he looks at normal wine,
and he sees yeasts, which had not been noticed before, and then he looks at the smelly, putrified,
badly fermented wine, and he sees rod-shaped structures. Bacteria had been known for hundreds
of years, but nobody thought they did anything. They just thought to be adventitious structures
that get into, let's say, liquids. And he said, this is the answer. These rods, these
bacteria, bacilli, as they were later called, are the cause of this putrefaction, and I
know how to kill them. I will heat this wine just up to a certain level, not enough to
kill the yeast, just enough to kill the bacteria, invents pasteurization. He writes about it
ten years later. The chemistry professor tells Lister about it. Lister, obviously, speaks
perfect French. He reads the article, and he says, I'll bet you that's why the wounds
are getting infected. The most common theory for wound infection was that it was inevitable,
because you opened the body, and the air got at it right away, and it was thought that
the air oxygenated the tissues and destroyed them, and that's what the wound infection
started from. So he looks at some of the pus from one of his wound infections, and he sees
bacilli, just like pasteur did. And he said, oh my God, but I don't know how to kill them,
because obviously I can't heat my patients up to a level that will kill them. And he stops
to think, talk about chance favoring the prepared mind, which incidentally was the motto of
pasteur. Pasteur had said this in a speech he gave when he first came to the University
of Lyon. He remembers that in a local town named Carlyle, the city fathers had been disturbed
by the stench of the sewage, and not only that, but the local cows were being pastured
near the area where the sewage was collected, and they were all getting sick, and the city
fathers solved it by spraying the whole thing with carbolic acid. All they knew was the
carbolic acid had a horrible smell, a chemical smell, and it would get rid of the bad smell,
but it worked, and the cows weren't getting sick anymore. He said, gosh, that's it, carbolic
acid. What I'll do is I will spray my wounds with carbolic acid. So he's looking for a
good subject. And one day, August 12, 1865, the 38-year-old professor Lister is called
to see a boy of 11 whose name is James Greenlees, who's had an accident in a horse and carriage,
and he's got a fracture of his tibia. It's a compound fracture in the sense that the
skin is broken. You can see the cracked tibia. It's not cracked all the way through, and
he knows, based on all the experience he's had, Lister knows that this is going to get
infected, and the only cure for it is amputation, which has, again, about a 45 percent mortality.
So he soaks and bandages in a dilute solution of carbolic acid and puts it on the wound,
and every day he changes the dressing with new carbolic acid material. After about six
weeks of this, the entire thing is healed, and not only the leg of James Greenlees is
saved, but his life is saved. So that encourages Lister to start treating worse fractures, really
bad compound fractures, local infections with it, certain kinds of abscesses. There's a
kind of abscess called the psoas abscess. It's the abscess that that old man had in
Bologna with his ruptured appendix that lies on this large muscle that goes down the back
toward the leg. That was a very common form of abscess because of different infections
and perforations of the intestine, sometimes tuberculosis, and he drains one of these abscesses
actually several of them and puts carbolic acid soap dressings in there, and he's amazed
at how many people are recovering. Some are dying, but the figures are much, much better
than they would have been without the carbolic acid. So in 1867, which is only a couple of
years after he started these experiments, he publishes a series of five papers in the
Lancet essentially announcing the invention of what he calls antisepsis, which is getting
carbolic acid over everything, and he invents a technique. Patient is brought into the operating
room. The area to be operated is sprayed with carbolic acid with a special spraying machine
that he has invented. The sheets, the drapes are sprayed with carbolic acid. The bandages
are soaked in carbolic acid. The surgeon dips his hands in carbolic acid over and over again
during the operation. Of course, the instruments have also been dipped. So there's a complete
carbolic acid atmosphere. It smells horrible, and you end up with beefy red hands after
a day or two of this, but people are living, and finally he decides he will publish a series
of amputations. So he compares his series of amputations done this way with the series
before the carbolic acid. Before the carbolic acid, he had a group of 35 patients. The last
35 before he started using this method, 16 of them had died. One in two and a half had
died. Afterwards, he had this group of 40 patients. Only six had died, one in six and
two-thirds, and that did not even include patients like little Jimmy Greenleys because
so many of them had been spared amputations, or a streptococcal infection of an arm from
a knife wound had been cured by carbolic. So there were still lots and lots of people
whose lives had been saved who didn't even enter into these salubrious results. Well,
you'd think the world would have been waiting for this, but it was just the opposite. Surgeon
said, we know that there are germs and wounds. We expect that. Of course, they're just there.
Others said, no, they only get in there after the infection has started. It has nothing to
do with infection. Well, he is a man who can demonstrate with cultures. He had bacterial
cultures. He had built, he and Agnes in the lab had built all the equipment that was needed
for it. He could take you to his microscope and demonstrate the truth of what he was saying.
It didn't make any difference because in England, nobody knew about microscopy or cared again.
The microscope was something you saw in medical school for a day or so. It was not something
that had anything to do with the day-to-day practice of medicine, much less surgery. Surgeons
operated by the clock. They were rough and ready artisans. It was a smash and grab kind
of thing. You got in there fast even after anesthesia. You still work very fast, hoping
there'd be less oxidation coming in from the outside. They didn't know about science. They
didn't care about science because they had not yet been infected as it were by the wonderful
virus that was going on in Germany and France. He was determined to spread his doctrine.
He lectured on it twice a week with the spray being demonstrated, the dressings being demonstrated
and a couple of years after that 1867 paper and then immediately after the 1870 paper,
the Franco-Prussian War starts and the French and the Germans are going at it and really
killing each other in piles. They were already attuned to the idea that clinical medicine
must be backed up by scientific findings and when they look at the carnage at the end
of the war in 1871, they find out the following. In the French army, there had been 13,193 amputations
of which 10,006 men had died. The chief surgeon of the German army, of the Prussian army, General
George Strohmeyer, had attempted 36 amputations through the knee joint every one of them had
died of infection. They read Lister's work and before you knew it, this lecture hall
in Edinburgh was filled with French and German surgeons and physicians trying to learn the
techniques. The students that were the English or Scottish students were uninterested, didn't
show up. The faculty members in this place didn't show up. They had to change the no
smoking signs to French and German because there were so many of them there and these
people were taking the new information back and starting antiseptic surgery on the continent
yet there in Scotland and in Ireland and in England, no one would accept it and in America
it was even worse. Debates raged in America right up until the late 1880s or 1890s about
the validity of this and there were reasons for this non-embrace and very strong reasons.
His lectures, as I say, were on bacteriology and physiology and these boys couldn't have
cared less. They didn't understand science and they didn't think it was important for
the day-to-day practice of medicine. Again, they had no experience with the microscope
and then think about what they were being asked to do, how they were being asked to
change their technique. Ordinarily, the way surgery worked in British hospitals was that
a surgeon would stride in when he was ready to operate, he'd take off his frock coat,
he would pull off the wall, the old dirty puss in bloodstain frock coat he used to operate,
he'd put it on, he'd have the scalpel and whatever else tools he had handed to him,
he would literally sometimes drop the scalpel on the heel of his boot, he would begin operating,
amputate the leg in a minute and a half or two, and then he'd leave and then he'd wash
his hands, get some of the junk off. And these people were being asked to completely change
their clothes, to spray their hands with carbolic acid, to spray instruments with carbolic acid,
to keep stopping in the middle of the operation, which made the operation very slow, to spray
the wound. And then put on this complicated dressing that Lister thought had to be put
on in a special way and they just weren't going to do any of these things. It was just
too inconvenient and the worst thing about it was, you'd go to your club at night and
lift one with the boys and your hands would be like stakes, they would be beefy red. So
for all of these reasons, it was rejected in England until some of the events that I'll
describe to you. If you look at the most famous American painting of a doctor, The Gross Clinic
by Thomas Aitkins, 1875, five years after the second big paper, 1867 was the first big
paper, so it's eight years after that. Dr. Gross, America's leading surgeon, is operating
without an iota of antisepsis in sight. Well, but the French and Germans continued and in
1875, just when the Aitkins painting was being painted, Lister was invited for a triumphant
tour through France and through Germany. He was regarded as a god almost because he had
changed surgery and bit by bit at home, this missionary zeal was beginning to have a very
effect. Younger surgeons were starting to come in and watch, although the older surgeon
still didn't want to have anything to do with it. It reminds me of the children of Israel
who had to wander in the desert for 40 years till the slave mentality died out. It really
took a whole generation. Well, here he was up in Edinburgh. Edinburgh was probably, no
definitely the greatest of the British medical schools, but it was in Edinburgh. It wasn't
in London where all the doctors were. And he decided he had to have a bully pulpit, this
crusading evangelist. And an opening came up at King's College Hospital, which at that
time was sort of a second or third grade place, but it gave him the chance to go to England,
talk to a lot of people, get a big personal audience among his countrymen. So he does this
and everybody's excited, the great lister is coming. They all come to the first lecture.
Nobody came after that because the same thing. The dishes covered with specimens, the test
tubes, the microscopes, the spray, the bottles of carbolyic acid, but the Germans and the
French kept coming. They kept coming. And of course, because of that low condition of
science, even after John Hunter, this acceptance was so very, very, very slow, but in time
the new order of things did creep in. There was more and more meticulous surgery, more
and more recognition of what laboratory work could do, and also information began to come
in from France and Germany that was really important and really striking. There was Pester
who had started this whole thing and his experiments and his papers and his clinical work, he was
not a physician, but worked with physicians. That clinical work was providing evidence
that microbes are indeed the inciting agents in a number of diseases that were being treated
by doctors. And then in 1876, the German, Robert Koch, was the first to identify a specific
bacterium as the cause of a specific disease, anthrax. That was pretty powerful, pretty
powerful evidence to support lister, but the most powerful evidence came in the form of
a little book that Koch wrote in 1878 when these debates are still raging in England
and the United States. Do germs really cause disease? Well, along comes Koch writes this
little book in which he linked six different kinds of surgical infection to six specific
bacteria. So the foot dragging was dragging a little less and people started moving a
little more. Lister was now receiving international honors, Queen Victoria knighted him. But
near the end of this great crusade, as he was getting older and older, a great paradox
occurred. Antisepsis, after all, is essentially disinfection. Wouldn't it be better to kill
these bugs before they even get in the operating room? So the Germans began thinking in terms
of prophylaxis instead of disinfection and they invent, instead of antisepsis, asepsis,
no infection. Not against infection, but no infection. And what is asepsis? You scrub
your hands, you boil your instruments, the drapes are either boiled or steam heated before
you go into the operating room. Surgeons wear sterile gowns, sterile caps in 1889. An American
surgeon, and we'll hear about this in the next lecture, invents rubber gloves. So now
it's all, do it beforehand. In 1886, Ernst von Bergmann, a surgeon at the University
of Berlin, invents steam sterilization. And now we've got the instrumentation so that
everything can be sterile. And within a year or two of that, he outlines the steps that
must be taken for the ritual, as we call it, of surgical asepsis. The scrubbing, the particular
way you come into the operating room, the way the nurse puts on your gown and your gloves
and how you function in the OR. You can't lift your hands above a certain point or drop
them below another point. And what a break in sterile technique is, and from then on
in, surgery is carried out in this way. Well, Mr. is getting to be, of course, an old man,
heavy with honors, because finally at home, things like this are being accepted, but it's
more asepsis that is being carried out. Then in asepsis, it makes no difference to Lister.
He's just happy that people are not dying half the time when they have amputations. In
1907, his 80th birthday was celebrated all over the world, and I've read some of the
documentary statements that were made at dinners held in Baltimore, New York, Chicago, Paris,
in honor of the great Lister. He continued to try to do some work in his last year as
he was working on the notion of cat good and sterilizing it, and that was a good contribution
too, but bit by bit his life finally petered out quietly at home. A great contribution
public funeral was held in 1912 when he died at the age of 85. They wanted to bury him
in Westminster Abbey, but he refused. He is buried in the West Hamstead Cemetery alongside
his beloved Agnes, who had preceded him in death by 19 years.
Thank you.
