I'm not that smart. I've spent years of my life believing things that weren't true. I'm sure
I still do. I just don't know what they are yet. And I think the most important parts of my education
happened in those moments when I realized I was wrong about something. So this is a story about
my entire field of study being blown apart by a single question and how I learned to lie with
math. I make my living now writing for television, but in my previous life I went to business school
and got a master's in economics. And I actually worked for a short time as an economist at the
Department of Finance in Ottawa. Total normie job. I'd make small talk in the elevator. If it was Friday
we'd talk about how glad we were that it was Friday. And if it wasn't Friday we'd talk about
what day it was in relation to Friday and how glad we'd be when it was finally Friday. So while I
was living in Ottawa one night I went with one of my friends to go see a talk by David Suzuki.
He's this legendary Canadian science broadcaster and environmentalist. Like Bill Nye, the science
guy, but his last name is harder to rhyme with. I don't remember much about the talk, but something
he said must have hooked my interest because afterwards I went out and bought a book called
The David Suzuki Reader. And this book fundamentally changed the way I thought about the world.
And it did it with a single question that completely upended everything I learned about
economics to that point. It was basically this. If we cut down a tree why does the economy consider
that a revenue and not a cost? And something clicked and it was like yeah why does a tree
only have economic value after it's turned into a bunch of pottery barn cheeseboards?
And that made me question well if a tree isn't part of the economy then what's the economy?
Is the atmosphere part of the economy? According to traditional economics it's not.
So if your profitable business pollutes the atmosphere it's good for the economy. But is
that good? And that made me question economic growth which is sacrosanct in economics and
politics. Every leader no matter where they are on the political spectrum brags about how much
they're growing the economy. The fastest pace of economic growth in this country in nearly four
decades. We've seen the fastest economic growth in over a decade. The fastest economic growth
in more than 30 years. And 4% economic growth. Americans can be confident about our economic
growth. But if economic growth is destroying the biosphere and we need the biosphere to live
then economic growth isn't necessarily making us richer it could actually be making us poorer.
But instead of honestly grappling with the negative impacts of economic growth
traditional economics just ignores them and only measures the good stuff which is kind of like your
doctor only measuring your health by the deliciousness of the food you eat. So I see you're keeping up
with your cheesy fries chicken nuggies nice love it scurvy. No I never heard of it. And as I kept
digging into these assumptions I eventually hit the bedrock assumption of economics which is the
biggest absurdity of all. The ultimate goal of the global economy its mission is to just grow
without limits forever. There are no limits on this solitary rock floating in space
filled with a bunch of half evolved apes who can barely manage going to bed at a decent time
or democracy. That feels wrong. So I realized this social science I have a master's degree in
isn't a science at all. Economics is not a science. Economists don't do controlled experiments in a
lab. They don't uncover the natural laws of the universe. In fact most of them pretend the natural
laws of the universe don't exist. I don't care if there's a Nobel Prize for economics. It's a
pointless award. It's like a kids choice award for intellectuals. Economists are smart without
question. I worked with a lot of very bright lovely people but they weren't scientists.
Economists are basically lawyers for numbers. One of my economics professors in grad school
even said this explicitly. She said most of our jobs would be gathering data to prove a conclusion
that our boss had already decided on. There's nothing inherently bad about lawyers but we treat
what they say with the proper amount of skepticism. We understand that if a lawyer for Totinos argues
that Totinos shouldn't have to have nutrition labels because consumers get all the information
they need about Totinos from Totino's ads. They're delicious. Teens love them. Case closed.
We take that with a grain of salt but we don't do this for economists. Like take the term economists
say. We hear this phrase repeated in the media constantly. Economists say. Economists say. Economists
say. Economists say. Economists say. Economists say. Economists say. So many economists say. Economists
all say. Every economist in the country says it's often assumed that what follows economists say
is a bland statement of fact. Like they're meteorologists talking about the weather. But why
do we treat economists say with less skepticism than lawyers say? Here's my take on why this
happens and it's the main point that I made this video to make. I think we treat economists as these
impartial experts above the fray of politics because they're very good at hiding their opinions
and they hide them inside math because math looks scientific. But math is not a science.
Math is a language. Science is a method. And it's a method that economics doesn't use. Economists
just use math to cosplay as scientists. And expressing ideas in math doesn't just make them
look more scientific and authoritative. It also makes it more difficult to scrutinize and challenge
those ideas. Because most people don't speak math, including me. I had an economics professor who
would give entire lectures in math. He would just write equations for an hour. I'd be totally lost.
And afterwards I'd go to his office and try to get him to explain a concept to me in words.
And he couldn't. He would just write out more equations on his whiteboard. And I was like,
buddy, just tell me. Tell me with your mouth. That was frustrating. But it taught me that math
can create this sort of fortress around ideas. If you express something in words and it's stupid
or depraved, anyone can challenge you. But if you express it in math, it looks respectable,
even inarguable. And when you put that math in a graph, it looks sexy. It's hot. I won't have sex
with a graph. But this graph also proves that the minimum wage is inefficient because it results
in lower than optimal production and creates a deadweight loss. But instead of deadweight loss,
you could also label that triangle worker power or like dignity. This graph is an opinion. Math
is built on assumptions. And if your assumptions are false, so is your math. And the first time I
realized that I was like, Oh, so you can lie with math, because you can hide your false assumptions
inside formulas and make them look authoritative. That's harder to do with words. If you just say
to me, minimum wage is bad for the economy, I'm going to say, okay, but what do you mean by bad?
And what do you mean by economy? Those aren't just neutral words. Those are loaded with assumptions
with opinions. You dick. So a lot of what we call bad for the economy and good for the economy
are really just value judgments. Going to Dave and Buster's and drinking eight beers is technically
better for the economy than rescuing a stray kitten. But is that really better? Not all economists
hide behind math and some are doing good work. But I do think these criticisms apply to most
economists currently working for powerful institutions like governments and banks. These
are the people our political leaders listen to for advice, which means just about everyone in the
world is directly impacted by that advice. So we should probably stop treating economists as these
infinitely wise apolitical oracles and instead start treating them as who they are, math lawyers.
If you want to learn more about what I talked about here, you can read the David Suzuki reader,
as I mentioned, and Kate Rayworth's book Donut Economics outlines a really fantastic approach
for thinking about the economy in a way that grapples with physical reality instead of ignoring
it. And if you want to read the definitive work by a man who would probably dismiss everything I've
said here and who thought that we should all vote with our dollar so that the hardworking rich can
be rewarded with extra democracy, you can read Milton Friedman's Capitalism and Freedom. I've
read it, it sucks, but go for it. As for my Masters of Economics degree, I no longer need it or even
have it because I ended up ripping it up to protest my school's refusal to divest from fossil fuels,
which maybe didn't deserve that much attention since I wasn't really using it anyway.
If you like this video, please subscribe and add me to your notifications. I plan to release a
new one every two weeks. They won't all be this nerdy, but they'll be at least a little nerdy
because I will be in them. Thank you for watching. Thanks for watching. Thanks for watching. Thanks for
watching.
