Nuclear and coal-based thermal power plants together produce almost half of
the world's power. Steam turbines lie at the heart of these power plants. They
convert thermal energy in the steam to mechanical energy. This video will explain
the inner workings of the steam turbines and why they are constructed in the
manner they are in a step-by-step logical manner. To understand its basic
workings, let's first observe one of their blades.
You can see that the blade of a steam turbine has an airfoil shape. When the
high-energy fluid passes over it, this airfoil shape will create a pressure
difference. This will subsequently create lift force. The lift force will rotate the
turbine. In short, the energy in the fluid transfers to the mechanical energy of
the rotor. To further understand steam turbine operation, let's understand
fluid energy in greater depth. A fluid has three forms of energy, due to its
speed, pressure, and temperature. As the blades absorb energy from the fluid, all
three forms of energy come down.
The low-velocity jet is of no use to produce effective lift force. To increase
velocity, the fluid is passed through a stator section. The stator set a
stationary and attached to the turbine casing. You can see that flow area
decreases along the stator and the speed thus increases. In short, the stator acts
like a nozzle. As the speed of the jet increases in the stator, kinetic energy
increases. As there is no net energy transfer in the fluid in stator section,
the pressure and temperature of the jet should decrease to keep the total energy
constant. Now, the next row of rotors is added. The stator also makes sure that the
flow coming out of it will be at an optimum angle of attack to the next
rotor set. After that, another nozzle set is added. Many such sets are used in a
steam turbine. There is an important term while designing steam turbines, namely
degree of reaction. This term is calculated by dividing pressure and
temperature energy by the total energy change in the rotor. Pressure and
temperature energy together is called enthalpy. The degree of reaction decides
what type of steam turbine it is. As the pressure of the steam undergoes a
drastic reduction during steam turbine operation, its volume increases
proportionally. To accommodate such an expanded steam, we have to increase the
flow area. Otherwise, the flow speed will become too high. This is the reason why
the steam turbine blades are too long towards the outlet. You can see how long
the last stage turbine blades are compared to the first stage blades. The tips
of such long blades will have very high velocity compared to the root. A twist is
given to it so that all blade cross sections will remain at an optimum
angle of attack. This kind of large turbine uses two such symmetrical units. You
can see how the steam is equally divided between these units. High capacity
power plants use different stages of steam turbines, such as high pressure
turbine, intermediate pressure turbine, and low pressure turbines. All these
units are attached to a single rotating shaft. The shaft in turn is connected to
a generator. The reason for such different stages is quite interesting. With
greater steam temperature comes greater power plant efficiency. This is
according to the second law of thermodynamics. But we cannot have
temperature greater than 600 degrees Celsius since the turbine blade material
will not withstand temperature more than that. Temperature of the steam decreases
as it flows along the rows of the blade. Consequently, a great way to increase
power plant efficiency is to add more heat after the first stage. So after the
first stage, the steam is bypassed to the boiler and more heat is added. This is
known as reheating. This will increase the steam temperature again, leading to
higher power plant efficiency and output. One challenging problem in power plant
operation is to keep the speed of the steam turbine constant. This is important
since frequency of the electricity produced is directly proportional to the
generator speed. However, depending on the load or power demand, the steam turbine
speed will vary. To keep the steam turbine speed constant, a steam flow governing
mechanism is used. If the steam turbine rotates at a higher speed, the control
valve will automatically reduce the steam flow rate to the turbine until the
speed becomes normal. If the turbine rotates at a low speed, the inverse will
be done. In this way, the balance of power demand and power supply will be
perfectly synchronized. To learn more about degree of reaction and its
implications, please check the next video. Please help us at patreon.com so that we
can add one more member to the team and we will be able to release two
educational videos per month. Thank you!
