Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Miniasz Brotski, I'm Stephen Zuber, and I'm Chase
Barkley.
Welcome back, Chase.
Hi, Chase.
Hello.
Thank you.
So today we are going to talk about something that we have run across recently, what to
do when you are in an argument and people start getting emotional.
Recently, yes, in our entire lives.
What?
You said it happened recently, like, oh yeah, this just happened like last month.
Well, it's been happening the month before that, and yeah, constantly.
But I mean, in both sides, like both, if you're intro, intro, this is the word you really
like, interlocutor.
Interlocutor.
Interlocutor.
I don't know if I like, I use that word, I'm not particularly attached to it.
Okay.
I first heard you using it like, I've seen it in text before, but the first time I heard
it's come out of someone's mouth, it was you, and I was like, oh, that's neat.
I guess maybe the person you're in dialogue with.
Yeah.
Yeah, but that's so many syllables.
No, I know.
I like that word.
I just hadn't heard it used before in real life.
I'm lazy.
I like short words or like less syllables, I guess.
I feel like the answer to that question depends a lot on what your goal is.
Like what is your goal in talking to this person?
Because depending on who they are, the answer, the right answer might be just stop.
Yes.
That's usually the right answer.
If it's something you don't particularly care for.
That's what you care about.
Yeah.
I think we'd have to be more specific as in when it's like you're at your local rationality
meet up and you start getting into something and it gets heated, then what do you do?
So really quick, the specific prompt is how to handle emotionally charged arguments.
Yeah.
Okay.
So arguably you'll have to have.
You're in it.
Like you don't have to have the argument, but you don't want to just necessarily cut
off contact with this person and you probably might be in a room with them for a little
longer.
Right.
It's not random person on the street that can be like, whatever, chump, I'm out of
here.
You mentioned the rationality meet up.
Does this happen at the last meet up and I missed it?
I don't think at last meet up, but every now and then, you know, things can get a touching
and nerve.
Yeah.
Which is usually good.
Yeah.
It usually brings up stuff that doesn't otherwise get brought up.
That's not the kind of emotional challenge I have a problem with.
I think it's like, I mean, it's cool to be emotionally driven by your position.
If you had something that you care about, as long as you're doing it in a good way,
right?
You know, like we talked, one of our early episodes was with Jason, who had this position
that he thought it would be morally desirable to drive the earth into the sun if he could
and kill everybody.
And I thought that was a pretty horrible thing to believe.
And like just the idea that like, I don't know if he actually believed that.
I think it's just something like people say to be edgy.
I think I might have said that before, but to the sense that if I take him at his word,
he wants to kill me and people I care about, like that's a horrible thing.
Because I can have the conversation, right?
But I think he wants to kill you in the abstract sense.
That's my point.
It's like he doesn't really, he believes it, but only on paper.
Right.
Like he wouldn't murder you, but if he had the option to make all humans stop existing,
he would take it.
I don't know.
I guess I'm skeptical that he actually even believed it that much.
But somebody does.
Yeah.
So yeah.
All right.
There was a point where I would have agreed with that.
So it's certainly possible.
That's weird.
I mean, you know, even if I don't want to live, like I don't want to kill people that are
like nice that I care about.
It's the whole generalizing to, to everyone, like all of humanity is awful.
Life is pain.
Anyone who says otherwise is selling you something.
And so why would you want to continue pain?
It's already been going on for however many millennia.
Just keep the cycle of horror going.
No, stop it all right now.
Hmm.
All right.
I see where you're-
It's not been my reasoning back then.
I see what you're saying.
And I guess, yeah, if you're coming from a certain perspective, you know, I could see
how that line of reasoning would be seductive to some states of mind.
Not that I'm saying Jason actually thinks this.
Maybe he was just being a juror or whatever, but he kind of got the feeling he was at least
a little bit sincere.
Sure.
And yeah, I don't want to call him out and not believing what he said he believed.
I just, I'm sure I've met people who would endorse that, but not actually do anything
about it.
Right?
Like that, I don't know.
Anyway, that's sort of, I'm giving that as an example of a time where I was emotionally
charged in an argument, but I don't feel like it was a problem.
No.
It certainly was at the first exposure when you guys, when you pitched having him on to
talk about this, I was like, are you fucking kidding?
This guy wants to kill everybody.
So I did have an initial knee jerk reaction, but then we had a couple of days to prep for
the episode and I was able to abstract myself from my feelings on it, which is I think what
you're supposed to do if it's something that you feel like your emotions are getting in
the way of your position.
Like I actually, this is one technique I've been wanting to bring up forever on the show
and in life because, and I haven't actually had the chance to do this in real life other
than like in my head.
But like, if we're talking about something, man, it'd be fun to do a mock example that
if we disagreed on anything that we could argue about, then we could, man, is that worth
doing?
If you think there's something that we disagree about strongly, then sure.
Hmm.
I mean, depending on how much we want to pause the recording, luckily, we have an amazing
senator, Kyle, who will be happy to cut all this shit.
Okay.
Depending on how much you want to pause that, I mean, just, just give me something I can
probably argue at a reasonable level.
Let me grab.
Julie Galef has an open questions project.
Oh, yeah.
There's only 13 of them and none of them are very emotionally charged.
Basically the kind of things like, I saw a lot more than that in their Facebook thread.
Oh, that was a different thing.
At least, I mean, maybe she's going to add those to this list.
This is just on her website.
Basically, she was looking for important open questions that like well informed, sensible
people disagree about, which is kind of a fun thing to do.
And I think typically, so I was going to grab one of these as an example, but none of them
are very interesting, or at least interesting in the sense that I can imagine anyone caring
enough to like emotionally care about the answer right now.
Well, I mean, we could bring up something that I saw people get heated over once.
How do we feel about Jamie and Cersei?
All the hearts.
I'm making the little heart hand sign right now for people who can't see.
I don't know who that is.
Yeah.
So you don't watch Game of Thrones?
Oh, good.
You can be, you can be exposed to this idea.
Didn't I answer this like a half hour ago?
I have not.
I have not watched it.
I thought you just weren't current.
No.
Zero.
Oh, okay.
All right.
So.
Yeah, it looks good.
We can try this out.
Jamie and Cersei have an awesome relationship on the show, and they're also brother and
sister.
Except for the time that like he raped her and she sort of forced herself on him.
They have a weird dynamic later on, but.
You know, it's awesome for story time.
So here's the 10 second version.
They are, it's like whatever, middle-aged technology, fantasy standard set up.
They are a rich noble family, and they are brother and sister, and they fuck all the
time and have kids together.
So given that like three or four of them turn out to have lots of problems, that sort
of endorses.
I actually only one of the three.
Well.
Which you still don't want 33% of your population being fucked up, but.
There.
Yeah.
So no, this was a bad idea on a genetic level.
I'm not trying to defend that at all.
My math is wrong.
You're right.
I forgot that.
I thought there were more kids, and I thought that the other ones had problems.
But other than being like a pushover, which probably isn't a problem, it's just on a
good king.
Yeah.
They did fine, and that girl just died.
Spoiler alert.
Everybody dies in the game of thrones.
She died last year.
That's past the statute of limitations.
It is.
Okay.
So I would never in real life condone that sort of relationship.
But the question came up if two consenting adults wanted to have relations and were sterile,
and they were brother and sister.
Is that still morally repugnant?
Should they be prevented?
Should they be prevented from doing that?
Or are they grown ass adults that can make whatever decisions they want as long as they
don't bring children at the world?
This is purely hypothetical in the real world because there's not like sterility police
we have.
Right.
Hypothetically, they are sterilized for purposes of this thought experiment.
Of the question.
Yeah.
So this was actually the first time I encountered this was when I was in my teens listening
to philosophy lectures on CD back when I was hipster and had CDs.
I remember this was brought up as an example of like the yuck reaction where people disagree
with things because it's yucky, which turns out to like underlie most opposition to things
like gay marriage or I guess not even like, well, the marriage is part of it, but they
disagree with that only because it involves gay sex.
And that's what's icky to people.
So they disagree with it for that reason.
So I liked it as an inoculation for getting you primed on things to like realize that
ickiness isn't a good enough reason to disregard an argument.
So I was surprised that we had somebody at the meetup who was vehemently against it.
And tell me if I'm straw manning his position, but it was like, there's a power imbalance.
And I'm not sure where the power balance took place in this relationship.
Well, he was taken back to childhood.
If you're having sex with your sibling.
Yes, that in family structures, there's always power imbalances and generally the older sibling
having a lot more power than the younger one and can coerce them into things.
Weren't Jamie and Cersei twins?
Yes, they were.
So would that invalidate his position completely?
No, not necessarily.
We weren't talking about Jamie and Cersei specifically.
I don't think one could still have more power than the other, especially in the medieval society.
The males usually have more favor from the father.
So that was actually my main counterpoint to his argument, which I thought was weird,
was that there's a power imbalance in every relationship.
His argument he admitted extends to like dating your boss or like your senior co-worker,
because they have higher status than you at work, which is interesting.
So actually, I kind of want to stop because we are necessarily doing the incest argument right
now, right? We were just bringing it up as an example of something that gets people emotionally
charged.
I am, but I want to just point out why I felt his argument was stupid.
Oh.
Because there's a power imbalance in literally every relationship,
unless you have like the same physical feats and strength.
If you chose the same feats when you leveled up?
Well, I mean, like, I mean, we could maybe...
I know what you meant, yes.
Yeah, exactly.
If it was a character sheaths in the same way.
The specific word choice was amusing to me.
Yeah, I mean, like, unless me and my girlfriend can bench press the same and have like the same
degree of fighting ability, there's a power imbalance, right?
And like, so he sounds like he's against basically every relationship where you're not
measuring very carefully, like your body weight and things like that.
And I don't think he's making that argument, but it sounds like he is.
No, I don't think he was making that specifically.
I think that there, and I kind of see his point on this,
that there is a very specific type of power imbalance that comes in family relationships
that is, and can also with like boss, boss and underling relationships.
Is that the right term?
Underling.
Yes.
Minion.
Worker.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
So it's specifically social power, not physical power?
Yeah.
And, and more so the things that go on in families.
Okay.
Yeah.
So I guess for anybody who's feeling like grossly offended at like the idea of incest,
I'm not, I'm not super pro incest, but I, for the sake of making an argument, the, the
comeback is like, people will say, well, no, their kids will turn up messed up.
And then you reply, well, no, they're both sterile.
They, they checked.
They literally can't have kids.
Okay.
Well, you know, what if the families are good upset about it?
Like their families are dead.
There's no one to get upset about this.
Like once you knock down all their oppositions,
you find that their true reason is that they think it's gross.
And that is the way to get, I think into a place where you can talk about it and kind
of be free of emotion or at least know what you're talking about.
And that's really the, the, the technique is to try and figure out what you're actually
disagreeing about.
Of course.
And well, it sounds obvious, but it's not.
I mean, it's very hard to do.
It's hard to do, but it's also hard to like, even sometimes realize that's what you're,
like that you're not arguing what you think you care about or what you actually think you're
talking about.
So like the, the Trump border wall for between the US and Mexico that they want to put up,
that's not really about keeping immigrants out.
They'll say it is and they'll fight that.
But then if you point out, like, you know, a lot of them come over by boats and walls are
not like impossible to get around.
They'll say, well, it's still worth it or something, right?
They're not going to say, oh, I never thought of the idea that they could stick boats.
It's probably not worth $24 billion.
So they're, they don't really care about, well, they, they on paper seem to care about
keeping immigrant, illegal immigrants out of the country, but they're real cool and putting
the wall up.
I guess it's just like as a gesture saying we're not it for it, you know,
what do you think a sign would do fine or whatever, but,
But do you think that if you are like emotionally, getting emotionally involved in something and
you feel yourself getting upset, the hard part is even feeling yourself getting upset,
but do you think you would be able to, at that point, get into those sorts of what is our core
disagreement?
So the way that I would do that, A is, yeah, you have to have some level of mindfulness to
know when you're being, when you're feeling upset.
You know, if you're paying attention to how you're thinking and what you're thinking,
then that should be kind of become apparent.
Like, man, I'm getting in the way of this.
Okay, hold on.
Let me take a breath.
All right.
Here's what I want to do.
And then you grab a piece of paper and you write down the border wall will keep out immigrants
and you put that on the table between you and the person you're talking with.
And then you're talking about the, the, the proposition on the paper.
You're not talking about a belief you have in your head.
So it feels less like a personal attack.
And I feel like that, so I've done that like in my head, I haven't actually written out
the belief yet, but it'd be fun to do that in a real, in a real argument.
That was Julia Galeff.
That's why I kept, that's why she came up earlier when I was looking up her, her open
questions project.
Julia Galeff is the bomb.
She's awesome.
So I don't know if that originated with her or not, but that's where I first heard it.
But yeah, then that way you have a distance between you and the belief, because then it's
not your belief.
It's, it's just right there on the table.
That's what you're talking about.
And whether that rises or falls doesn't like when people are defending their beliefs,
they feel like they're defending themselves.
This kind of gets rid of that.
So I think it's an awesome way to go about it.
And I don't know if it would work.
Like, I think a lot, many times it is very hard to tell when you are getting, well, it
can be hard to tell if you are getting emotionally involved in something.
And for that, it really is useful to have a friend that can point that out to you.
Be like, I do, you're, you're kind of getting charged up about this.
But the worst problem is lots of times when I'm getting charged up about something,
I don't care that I'm charged up.
I'm like, yes, I am.
And for good reason, sir, allow me to continue with the fisticuffs.
And I think by proxy, even that, that paper method helps solve just a little bit of that
because it allows you to by proxy measure how far off the original topic you've gotten,
which maybe Italy sometimes is a good measurement of how emotionally involved you've gotten.
Like I think it's a decent proxy measurement because a lot of the time it gets wildly off
topic.
It really does.
And so that's what I like about it too, is then you have it concrete.
And then when they say, well, look, I just want to stop the drug flow coming in from Mexico.
It's like, ah, but that's a different thing than what we're talking about here.
Do you want us to do a new piece of paper?
We're talking about specifically whether this will keep people out,
not whether or not it'll stop the drug traffic.
So it helps keep the conversation grounded.
It helps you keep your eye on the ball.
But yeah, having somebody be able to point out if you're getting charged is good.
And then being the kind of person that can take that proactively is good.
And if you're the kind of person, if someone pointed out,
hey, you're being charged in this argument and they're like, fuck off,
then that's not the kind of person that you're going to have a good emotional argument with,
right?
I, yeah, I may not have been the best person to have good emotional arguments with in the past.
Personally, I think one of the best things you can possibly do is just walk away for a while.
Because when you're in the moment, you just want to hit right back with something.
And it not necessarily even think it through very well,
which can get you in trouble as well.
Especially while recording.
Especially, yes.
But I think there needs to start because right now there's a social norm that if you got up
and walked away, it's because you got all huffy and you have lost.
And oh man, look at the guy that just lost control.
He couldn't even stay at the table.
And I think what really, really would be good to start having it changed to be like,
oh, look at how much self-control he has.
He knows now is a good time to step away,
take five minutes to walk around and regain composure and think through things.
Because more than anything else, there are many times I wish I would have just been like,
you know what, I'm going to step away from the keyboard for two hours
and then come back after I've had some time to think about this.
Yeah, I think that endorsing that sort of social convention would be super desirable.
Because yeah, if you felt like you're going to lose face and thus forfeit the argument,
if you get up from the table or whatever, then you have an incentive not to.
And then you just keep things, keep spiraling.
But again, that requires an honest interlocutor or person you're discussing this with.
And also can be hard if you're into it.
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I don't know.
Because I also kind of enjoy that sort of thing.
I've called it, I mean, internet fisticuffs or like a lot of times debate,
the point of debate isn't to get to a answer.
The point of debate is to beat the other guy.
It's verbal boxing.
And I really enjoy watching verbal boxing.
I would listen to the Intelligent Squared Debates all the time.
Just all sorts of shit.
But that is not trying to find truth.
And there's been, there's awesome ways to try to collaborate with someone to get to truth.
But debate is not one of those ways.
Right. Debate is for show.
Yes. And it's fun.
Well, it's fun.
Like I've seen some Intelligent Squared Debates and it's fun watching your side
get in a really good jab at the other side.
And I use boxing terminology on purpose, right?
So I don't know if you're up with it.
That's not productive.
And that's kind of not what we're talking about.
So like a discussion is different.
I mean,
But you can get sucked into that.
I was going to say, hold on.
You're going to have to just, just for me, explain that just a little bit.
Like I don't know if I'm not sure I could point out the difference between someone debating
and someone having a discussion, assuming they're both relatively civil
and both relatively, you know, reasonable.
At the risk of sounding pedantic, I'll say one is in front of an audience and one's not.
So like when you're watching Peter Singer debate Dinesh D'Souza on The Problem of Evil,
they're not doing this over coffee.
They're doing this in front of an audience, right?
So that's sort of what I meant.
Okay.
Because I was going to say, like for me, debate as a way to settle disagreements,
find disagreements and work on them is the best way I know.
But maybe I shouldn't be calling that debate.
I'm not a big fan of like deciding what labels you can use for words or not.
But it's true.
But if that label is ambiguous, like argue is a good word,
but that has a negative connotation.
So discuss.
I've heard it called a dialectic before, which is weird.
There's another term, collaborative.
It's collaborative something where you've
collaborative disagreement, maybe.
Maybe, but where you work together with people who have the opposite point of view as you,
but you are working on the project together and you will present your results eventually
to someone else together and you will both say, this is what we can both get behind.
And so you both work on it together.
Whereas debate is always, yeah, it is in front of an audience.
If you're talking about something on social media,
it is debate.
It is not trying to find truth.
If you're talking private message, could be possibly,
but certainly not if anyone else can see what you're saying.
Yeah.
If it's on the wall, it's in front of an audience.
And I'm not saying like it's impossible to have a good discussion in front of an audience.
Like for example, Sam Harris and Dan Dennett disagree about free will.
And they did a podcast episode together.
And in fact, they did, they attempted to do an exchange of essays,
which is fun because they're both super cordial and super nice people.
This debate read like, I mean, it read like smart high school kids like shitting at each other,
right?
So what it was was apparently, so Sam Harris put out this book on free will on his position,
which is like just strong determinism.
And then Dennett's been endorsing some flavor of compatibilism for a few decades.
And Sam had asked Dan to review his book and he's like, sorry, I'm busy.
And before he published it, and then instead of reviewing it beforehand,
he just wrote this scathing review.
It was like, oh, I'm so glad that Sam Harris wrote this because it illustrates all the wrong
points people have.
And so Harris wrote back and he's like, that was a pretty dick move.
Like to say like it's only value is how bad it was and demonstrated bad arguments.
That's kind of an underhanded dick move.
And I feel like your Rapaport rules failed you, Dan.
Like the fuck.
Anyway, so they had a very cordial debate on the podcast in which they'd kind of just like
both expressed what they're coming from and tried to articulate exactly where they disagreed,
which when he listened to it turns out, I don't, I think they're just playing word games.
Like, I don't think they have any difference of anticipated experience,
which is one way to tell if they actually disagree.
And they just seemed like they, on every hypothetical, they could build up.
They kind of came to the exact same conclusion.
Right.
So it's like, where do we, where is this problem that we're having?
I, it's not wasn't super clear.
Explain to me your difference of anticipated experience.
If, uh, like what that means in general.
Yeah.
How are you using it here?
So there's this concept of like making your beliefs pay rent in anticipated experience.
So like,
Oh, your personal, huh?
Like as in your personal anticipated experience, like ways you can,
or like things or things would expect to happen, right?
Does the question of free will ever fall into that?
Well, it depends, right?
So I guess you can't rewind the clock literally and check and see if they could do something else.
But, uh, for example, a determinist might predict that, you know,
an accurate enough science instrument could read someone's mind before they did.
Of course.
And turns out that, that happens.
So that is a way that that belief pays rent and anticipated experience.
They, they can actually make a prediction and test it.
You don't mean it's not just in daily life.
It's in just more like,
Yeah, it could be in both.
I think it's a broad thing.
I mean, like if I thought the speed of gravity was nine meters per second,
you thought it was 9.8, we could just go run outside and throw something off the roof and check.
Yeah.
And if we had, you know, good enough clocks.
Okay.
I just hadn't heard that exact terminology that way.
Yay.
Vocabulary, uh, that's part of the drag with like the community setup is that you get this jargon
that's like a convenient shorthand, which is nice for brief communication, but then you lose stuff.
And then you have podcasts to explain it.
Podcasts.
What was I saying about, uh, oh, so you can have debates in front of people,
but I think it has to be under like two people who really understand that's what they're doing.
I remember bringing up the Dinesh D'Souza versus Peter Singer argument because I was on an email
chat list that had mostly skeptics who liked Peter Singer's version.
And then like, you know, your token Christian who was like, I thought Dinesh did a really good job.
And his whole thing was like, he wouldn't respond.
Like when I watched the debate, I saw Dinesh never respond to the one point Singer kept making,
kept making ad hominem attacks.
So Singer was like, all right, let's grant everything on your side of the table.
But I'm curious why God killed all the animals when we flooded the earth.
What did they do?
And Dinesh never touched the point.
He said, well, Peter Singer's utilitarian ethics lead him to think that like infanticide's okay.
And so, all right, well, we're talking about, you know, specifically the problem of evil,
you know, the rest of my utilitarianism aside, that shouldn't weigh in on this.
So like, I liked watching Singer keep us cool and just point out like you're dodging the point,
bro, but someone else watched it and liked Dinesh's position.
Apparently they thought he swept the floor with him.
So I think it does depend on where you're coming from, but, and I'm probably biased here.
But I feel like that was not, I don't think any reasonable person could walk away feeling
like Dinesh did a good job in that argument.
It's like 10 years old is on YouTube.
What was I going to say?
Oh, you mentioned like that when you get heated on arguments, you know, sometimes you get,
you enjoy it.
And I remember feeling like that.
I used to live with my older mate is, I don't know, 10 years ago, it was more midline Republican,
but, or it was more, you know, the spectrum shifted a bit.
He's now fairly centrist.
But, you know, he and I agreed like a most things, but on a couple of things to disagree.
And we had really good arguments, but they were, they were to the point where like,
we never got mad at each other.
We always enjoyed it.
We'd like have a drink and chat, but we'd, you know, have two hours and we'd both be,
you know, into it.
And I find that engaging.
I find a good discussion engaging, you know, like my heart gets up, I feel excited.
But I don't know, maybe it's my general thing of like, not caring about stuff.
But I haven't, I, I've been charged in arguments, you know, like the one with Jason, there was
one that I can't gloss.
I can't like just say it didn't happen.
I got charged in an argument about a topic I didn't actually know that much about.
It was about minimum wage, which maybe we'll, maybe I'll do some homework on and we'll get
an expert to talk about.
I was less charged like about my, I was less attached to my position on it, which I didn't
really have one.
I had like this light thing that like, it makes sense to me that like paying poor people
more money, you know, so that they can buy all the food they need to feed their families
is a good thing.
And the person that I was talking with is, I don't know if this is the way to put it,
the richest person I know, like once complains to me, it's a bummer not having a job because
I have to pay for my, I have to pay my rent out of my trust fund.
And I'm like, oh, that's a problem that most of us have killed to have.
Like you're born with a retirement fund and you're going to tell me that like, you know,
in my position or my, my light, you know, feeling of like, you know, poor people should
be, should be making less.
Like that seems like a weird thing for you to say.
What, what a self-serving argument.
So it was less like, and that was the kind of thing that I was wrong about.
I shouldn't have been charged that way.
It is possible.
It's completely conceivable that like it's that hominem for like me to say that person's
wrong just because of their status and they absolutely should.
And it was more just me.
I was just like flabbergasted and that sort of just like cascaded for like the hour that
we had this conversation, but it's not like the kind of thing where like, I would be mad
if my belief turned out to be wrong.
It was interesting because I was, I was there for the conversation and you like didn't normally
when I think of people getting heated, they like start raising their voice and getting
animated and stuff.
And you didn't.
So I didn't realize that you were as emotionally charged as you were.
Like I've, with the incest thing, the person on the, on the, that was getting heated like
started speaking much louder and faster and gesticulating.
And I was like, wow, that is, that is someone who's really into their position.
It's also sort of his default talking too.
Maybe it's hard to say.
Well, yeah, that's true.
And I guess it's, I got emotionally invested in the sense that I had an emotional investment,
not that I got over the top.
Like I didn't yell, I didn't say, you're a fucking idiot.
Like I don't, I mean, it was in the fact that I registered an emotional response,
but I, again, part of, I guess, maybe being a good arguers, having some mindfulness and
being aware like, Hey, you're being upset right now.
What's going on?
So how did you handle it when you were all emotional about it?
I didn't do well.
I, I think, I mean, part of it, this sort of cascades into, I think the hard part of this
problem, which I feel like if you have two reasonable people, it's, it's challenging,
but super rewarding and super doable to have an emotionally charged conversation.
But you have to have somebody who's like willing to engage honestly who won't, Mr.
President, your views, we've talked about rapper pours rules before.
Basically, the prime thing is like being able to restate your opponent's position so well
that they, this is overly ambitious, but the, uh, there's four rules of, of discourse that
Denden is a big fan of.
That's what I mentioned that Sam Shaddon or pointed out that he didn't, didn't follow
is you should be able to restate your opponent's position so well that they, that they say to
you, thanks.
I never thought of putting it that way.
If you can't do that, you don't really know where they're coming from.
Not that you have to do that with everything they say.
The goal is to like keep in mind that you should be at least able to articulate what
your, uh, what your opponent's position is.
Right.
Otherwise you're just making noise.
You have to be arguing against something.
Well, most times people are just making noise, right?
So most times, a lot of times when, uh, I see these sort of argument happening out in the
wider world, it's, uh, you are an evil bad person.
Of course.
Yeah.
Which is not obviously what, where the position that the person has.
Let's just be, let's, I'm willing to put this out there.
There are not that many evil people out there that like literally everybody you
disagree with is an evil person.
Right.
You can say they are, but I guess maybe your definition of evil is just anybody disagrees
with me.
But if you're going to, so like, you know, if you're going to say emotionless psychopath,
that's a pretty rare problem for humanity, right?
Like, I mean, it, it happens, but it's, it's like.
I see a lot of people just saying, Oh, well, you are, you know, you're a libtard or you're
a racist or you know, you're just, you are that category of evil and that is, that is
all the justification you need for your position is your evil philosophy.
So I think that's the thing.
As far as how I responded in that, in that instance, I didn't, I guess my thing was,
and I think I kept trying to say this, do you have to keep me, my memory is sort of
bad, but I feel like I tried to say like, I don't really have a strong opinion here.
I'm just amazed that that's your opinion.
And I don't think it went like the worst.
I didn't like, again, it didn't resort to name calling, but it kind of walked out of
there. It was like, all right, well, that was super annoying.
So I don't know, how did you observe my interaction there?
I thought it was fine.
Like it, so it's been a while and I don't remember as much as I would have liked to remember,
but it seemed that, you know, there was, there was some talking past each other, but
you guys were both making an effort.
Yeah, I think I didn't do the things that I mentioned that are awesome to do,
which is like abstract yourself from the belief.
And I would have liked to have been able to like just to ground myself and say, okay,
wait, what is your actual position?
Okay, why is that your position?
And I don't think I asked those questions, right?
Or if I did, I got distracted and bogged down, like,
there was some analogy involved that I, not worth going into that I didn't like.
And so I kind of got hung up on that, like that's a really bad analogy.
And why are you making your arguments with analogy instead of like with,
like evidence or arguments?
And so that, that sort of, you know, was something I registered.
But do you have any techniques for emotional charged arguments?
I don't think I have anything specific to add on.
But I'd be curious to see if this is just me or if there's anyone else.
For me, it seems like I'd almost be, I'd be interested in pursuing an argument like that.
Like they're so rare for me to find one that I,
that either matters enough or is directly actionable enough to be worth that type of argument.
Like, I'd like to look through Gaeliff's list, but and see if there are any.
But the more of those I can find, like that, to me, that'd be cool.
Like I feel like I can't find enough of those.
You can probably find someone out there who thinks that copyright and patent law is the
best thing right now.
And we should.
Yeah, right.
But who will sit down and like discuss it?
Like that's the key.
You can skim this.
If there's anything that's upsetting, you'll be able to jump on that.
So I want to, before we do that, also take it the other way.
What do you do if you are in an argument which you are not terribly invested in,
you're just sort of interested in it.
But you can tell that the person you're talking to is really getting emotional about this.
Oh, sure.
I can think of an example of that.
That's actually a good reminder.
Somebody I'm very close to that I spend a lot of time with, I was talking with them about,
and this is something that I'm not willing to like die on this hill,
but I still feel like there's an argument to be made for like profiling at the airport
in the sense that I look more like a terrorist than Betty White.
And patting down Al Gore at the airport is a waste of resources and stuff.
There's something to argue about.
Well, but like, I don't know if I am ready to, you know, again.
I think Al Gore himself probably gets a pass.
He didn't.
He got pat down.
Wait, what?
Like this happened, I don't know, 10, 12 years ago.
Are you kidding?
No.
The actual former vice president.
Let me, let me verify this before we put it on the air, but I'm 99% sure this happened.
Oh my God.
That's not.
That surprised me.
The TSA is.
So, so that to me seems like a complete waste, right?
Right.
Like we, we can be pretty sure that Al Qaeda didn't put him over.
No, no, no.
See, I'd argue on that.
That Al Qaeda would recruit a former VP.
That's not what I'm, that's not what I'm arguing.
But.
Oh, just for fairness.
That the show of fairness is worth the waste of resources.
It's not the show of fairness.
I can get into my full, my whole point here.
Sure.
I mean, in the broadest of summaries and the broadest of like government 101 high school level,
the reason it has to be on everybody is because we target it to a tiny minority.
They will never be a voting majority and you're infringing the rights on a bunch of people who
can never correct it by implying it to everybody in a democratic state.
It's basically the only way you can do something like that.
It's the only fair way to do it.
Not because it's a smart way to do it, but because we live in a democracy.
And we all know the TSA is entirely useless.
It's doing nothing but wasting time and money.
But if it was only targeted at a tiny piece, there wouldn't be any push to get rid of it.
And now there is a push to get rid of it because it bothers enough people.
And that's the whole point.
I basically agree with you.
And I also think that, that, that if we were to target only certain minorities, profiles,
whatever, the terrorists or whoever would just start recruiting outside of those.
They would find the old grandma that has a grudge against the US and make her.
Do you think that's at all conceivable?
Yeah, totally.
So you think that, that my great grandmother could be a pro maybe not mine because she was
awesome, but like someone's grandmother could be approached by people who want to,
you know, blow up a, a playing full of innocent people and be convinced to be like,
you should do this too.
Yeah.
We're, we're, I think we might be slightly slipping, which is not necessarily how
much terrorism TSA is stopping.
We can call that null to negligible.
Like it doesn't matter.
The more to the point is,
But I do think that certain people who you're 100% certain won't,
like when we say, when we say, when we say, when we say would be a good thing,
are we talking on effectiveness, stopping terrorism?
Are we talking on waste of money?
Are we talking on infringement of rights?
Where are we on those?
Are we talking about all three?
Like, I see what you're saying.
The TSA fails in every single category.
Oh yeah.
But which one are we arguing because there are different arguments for different things.
You're right.
So I was making more of the position that it would be faster for say,
disabled kids in wheelchairs to be allowed through faster and not be looked at out of
the wheelchairs and patted down and have the wheelchairs analyzed, which happens all the time.
And in fact, Sam Harris wrote a fun article where he was like,
he watched this happen or something similar.
And then he showed a video of another incident like this happening.
And he was like, meanwhile, I didn't realize I'd use the same handbag that I was taking on the plane
to, to once take to the firing range.
And I brought bullets on the plane.
So like, here's, you know, Sam Harris looks way more like a, like a threat than, you know,
someone who's so disabled, they can't talk in a chair.
And they're giving that kid extra scrutiny, right?
So I think, you know, this is again, not really the argument that I'm,
don't write in and like, have me defend this.
This is not my argument.
I think it's a good example of an argument we can disagree just for the sake of showing the terms.
Yeah.
I'm just, I'm telling the, I rarely don't see your point too, that people are more against war
when the draft can take anyone at all.
And once you're in all volunteer army, then they're like, well, they signed up for it anyway.
So whatever.
Yeah.
And that's a, that's a good point.
And that's also different from like how efficient is the TSA.
Right.
That would save money.
It might be more effective at stopping terrorists, but there are like externalities here.
Yeah.
And that's, that wasn't on the radar of the argument I was defending.
Yeah.
So then we're not disagreeing.
Yeah.
That's kind of,
We're just talking about two different things.
Well, some people would disagree with saying that's wrong or, oh, okay.
Well, I'm still saying it's wrong.
I'm just admitting that it's, it might, it might save money and it might find more terrorists.
You had a very good argument.
I feel like I kind of ran it over.
No, actually you ran over in a way that kind of crushed it.
I hadn't even considered.
So first of all, my, I'm not pro-profiling at the airport, but you,
getting back, we've gotten kind of far afield.
That came out as a prompt from what do you do if the person you're talking with is
emotionally, they're getting emotional and it's not something you particularly care about.
So, uh,
Well, even if you do care about it a bit, like I was,
Do I want to mention the crazy thing that happened in the last few days?
Does it matter if you care about it?
Like either way, if you, if you're trying to convince someone of a point,
I'm not sure your argument style should change,
depending particularly on how much you're invested.
No, but your endurance might.
And if I don't care about, if you're just gonna walk away.
Yeah.
Cause it's also like, what happened in this case, I was talking to somebody,
but I wanted to say, as far as rolling over my argument, you really did.
And that wasn't a dimension to the position that I considered that as long as it affects the society
as a whole, society can unite against this unjust thing as opposed to like just like
fought 1% of people if it's just bugging 1%, right?
That's always been the argument.
I've definitely, I'll give that some thought.
Again, I'm not pro, I'm pro thinking about things that challenge me.
So like this is something that I'll have to mull over and see if it stands up to this.
And I'm, I'm interested.
I wanted to say what I did with the situation where I was talking to somebody
who was getting emotional about this, because they were the position that like,
it's just unjust.
Like that's fucked up.
You can't just pick on one group of people.
And I was like, it's not even one.
And I fit more in this group than you do kind of thing.
Right.
But they were clearly having an emotional reaction.
And I was like, you know what, this really isn't worth it to me to like get you on board.
This like, to be like, all I was trying to do is like, doesn't this position have merit?
Isn't that interesting?
Cause I found it like challenging me because I felt kind of where, where this person was,
but I, I moved away from that.
But then it occurred to me, it wasn't really important enough to me to like make them upset
to get them to like, you're right, Stephen.
That wasn't an interesting argument.
Like that's, that was not worth it to me.
So that, that was how I handled that particular situation.
I had something very similar where I had a sharp disagreement with something,
about something that I do actually care about quite a bit that happened in the news recently.
Like, but not on a deep emotional level.
It's just, I think this is an injustice.
And there's a lot of complicating circumstances that make it difficult to talk about.
And the person that I was talking to had a very strong emotional reaction to it.
And I actually didn't realize this at first because it was done online.
And so, you know, harder to tell what the expressions and all that.
But afterwards, I, I regretted getting that involved in this because
I now know that there is some things that I can't talk with this person about.
And, you know, that's, that's a little sad, although there are certain subjects that I
know I can't talk about either because I get too emotional about them.
And I agree.
I think the thing to do in that situation is, you know,
unless it's really important to you that they be on your side on whatever this issue is,
sometimes it's an underlying thing.
Like they might think, no, this whole line of inquiry is wrong.
And you might think, or excuse me, this whole line of inquiry is immoral.
And maybe your position isn't even so much about that line of inquiry.
It's that no position, no lines of inquiry should be immoral or off topic or off limits.
That's sort of my position.
So the second sentence is you can't talk about that.
Then I'm like, then, then my whole, my whole emotional response comes not from the fact
that they disagree with me on the specific point, but it's like, wait,
why are some things off the table?
Why do you, why do you get to decide what we censor?
That's someone being illogical about this being way more than someone being wrong.
Yeah, that was my problem as well is that the fact that I was judged as immoral for daring
to speak about, to contemplate this sort of thing.
And I was like,
And see, I disagree.
You're right or wrong.
You're not immoral.
You'd be immoral if you're being a dick about it,
but I get the impression you probably weren't.
I didn't think I was.
I mean, I'm willing to bet that I probably wouldn't think you were either if I was able
to read the full exchange, but I might be biased.
But I mean, I doubt that you resorted to ad hominem attacks that you ever said,
fuck you, that you used all caps to lots of exclamation points.
Yeah, I doubt you even rephrased an argument uncharitably.
Trying to get to what our root differences were.
Yeah, and I'm saying all that because you argued like I do.
And I would try to, I would aspire to all those things, right?
Although that's actually, that brings me to a question I'd just like to ask you really quickly.
A lot of the time when I'm disagreeing with someone,
one of the first things I'll do is, as you said, I'll restate the argument.
And a lot of the time, because I fundamentally misunderstand their argument,
and that's why we're arguing, a lot of the time that will come off as a very
negative view of their position.
How can I do that without annoying them that I'm restating their argument in a really dumb way?
No, that's a really good question.
And I'm not an expert, but what I would say is that, so it'd be two things.
One, unfortunately, it seems like this just keeps kind of cropping up that like a prerequisite of
having a good discussion or argument or debate, whatever you want to call it,
is talking with somebody who also wants to do that, right?
If they just want to call you an idiot or prove you wrong, then they're not this person.
But if assuming they are, and you get to the point where you're restating their argument,
you do so in a way that you misunderstood, so it makes it sound like you're sitting on their
position, the way I get around that is saying, let me see if I understand this correctly.
Are you saying this?
And if they say, no, I'm saying this, like, oh, I'm sorry, I was confused.
That still sounds kind of dickish, though, because I could restate someone's-
Especially if it's in a public forum, especially someone's listening.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but are you saying we should murder children?
So I would caveat it with, I'm just trying to understand where you're coming from.
So this is how I understand your position.
Please correct me where I'm wrong.
And maybe with that caveat, it helps.
Or ask clarifying questions for your restate their position.
Because that's probably the safe way.
Yeah, so that would be what I'd try first, is to get as much information as you can,
so you're reasonably confident in your model and say, look, I'm sorry, I'm still not getting it.
Can you rephrase your position slightly just using different words?
It's not clicking for some reason.
But like, if I said, hey, I am against making guns hard to get for law-abiding citizens,
and Inyash said, what, you're for children having access to guns and shooting their friends at school?
Like, that's not even playing by the rules, right?
If you said, oh, Steven's against gun control, that might be misinterpreting what I said,
but that's a reasonable misinterpretation, right?
And actually, this is something that you guys might disagree on.
I am in favor of law-abiding citizens having access to firearms.
Maybe.
It's just kind of an assist city the way our country runs.
I don't think it's like, if I had a chance to reset, run it the way Japan does,
I don't think it'd be fundamentally worse.
I totally agree.
But in this country, I think, yeah, you have to.
Yeah, that's where I'm at, is that in our current climate, the cat's already out of the bag.
There are more guns than there are adults in the United States,
and I think more guns than there are people.
There are more registered guns than there are adults.
There's probably lots of unregistered guns.
Given that that's the world, and by making the average citizen have to wait a month
to get a gun or something, you're not going to keep guns on the hands of criminals.
There was something.
I took a concealed carry class last year, and it was sponsored by the NRA,
and everybody's super pro guns in this thing.
And the instructors were like, yeah, and it turns out,
magazines not only have 15 rounds in them because of whatever regulation
that was passed a couple of years ago in Colorado,
which made me think, the fact that they were offended at that made me think
that the real reason for having guns wasn't self-defense.
If you can't do it in 15 shots, you can't do it in 17, presumably.
I'm sure it's happened somewhere where somebody hit the assailant on the 17th shot.
Well, it depends what sort of situation you're in.
If you're just doing home defense, I don't know, maybe it's enough,
but I've heard that in real firefights, you put a lot of rounds downrange really fast.
Sure, absolutely.
But this isn't in a situation where somebody is going for a gun in their car
and you're trying to get them before they can point a gun at you.
I'm assuming. I guess it does depend, but...
I mean, maybe someone sees you coming down the stairs.
You miss with the first two shots.
They take off through your house.
Now, some of you are chasing them through your house firing rounds off.
You should not be shooting at someone or fleeing anyway,
that's actually just the loss.
Well, depending on where you are, I think in Colorado it certainly is.
Some places, if they're still in your house, they're fair game, right?
I'm assuming.
Yeah, I don't know.
I think I brought that up because this is one of those things where
I think there's a good case you made for it,
but the people that are making that case don't really believe.
Like, that's not really their position.
They like guns because of reasons I don't think are very good.
Like, they're fun and it's our second amendment right,
which that doesn't make any difference to me.
Like, I don't feel like I don't really care what's in the Constitution as far as gun control.
Oh, that's my point.
That's some mean...
But that's a stupid position to have,
because if that's the case, they're defending single-shot muskets, right?
So, I mean, if you read between the lines,
are they talking about full assault weapons?
Are they talking about literally like anything that can take down a tank?
That brings me to something I've...
I mean, that's a question for the Supreme Court.
Well, a question I've always had based on that argument is,
I was here as a counter to, you know, the hyper militarization of police and how it's,
you know, this defense against the state.
But how does that work?
Like, I've never heard a super fantastic argument for how that helps us prevent
that sounds like a different episode.
So totally, completely off topic.
Well, it's actually, it's not.
I mean, in one line, the response is,
it keeps them from being able to walk all over us without a ton of effort.
So, like, if the police have guns and we have guns,
well, they can't just say, well, we have guns, we have to do what we say,
because if the citizens really wanted to, they could say, well, no, we don't,
because we can shoot you back.
Shouldn't most people who are super pro-second amendment also be against this hyper militarization
of police, which I see a lot of the, I don't see that opinion very often.
I don't know where the overlap is there.
I imagine some of them are.
Most I've met are pro-both.
Huh.
I don't know.
Then I would say they're being inconsistent unless they have made a good case for it.
I'm not sure what it is.
I don't, I know almost nothing about the subject.
I was just curious if you guys knew anything.
I don't, but I think I brought this up in the first place because I was thinking about cases where
uh, people's real motivations for defending a position aren't what they say they are.
Oh, okay.
So like they'll put forward a very reasonable sounding argument that I think on its own does
have merit, but they're just putting it forward because it's the most palatable version and even
if that turned out to be completely false.
So like for example, my position on guns is like, I don't actually own one, but if I,
I'm still on the fence about getting one for the house, but like I have my,
I have my authorization to get my concealed carry permit should I decide to do so.
Because I do sort of think that, you know, if I'm in a movie theater and someone starts
shooting people, well, it'd be kind of cool.
Like the, what gives that guy the advantage that he can put pieces of metal across the room
really fast.
He doesn't have to be near people to kill them.
Like if I could return that magic power back at them, that'd put me in a hugely better position,
right?
People do worry that like, oh, then you have two untrained people shooting into a crowd.
And A, the goal is not to be an untrained idiot firing blindly into a crowd and like,
if I'm going to risk hitting somebody, I'm probably, you know, I'm, if there's someone
between me and the gunman, then I don't need to worry about being shot because I'm going to shoot
that person probably.
I think people greatly underestimate the chaos of an actual firefight situation.
Probably, but I will also say that I think people also radically underestimate like what
training some people do.
Like it's not, I'm not an expert, but I've fired a few hundred rounds maybe.
Like it's not hard to shoot even like if you're, like if you're in a panic situation and you're
moving and stuff, yeah, it's going to be a way more difficult situation.
But if you're moving, you probably don't need to be stopping to take a shot, right?
So like rule one of surviving violence is try and get away from it.
Like that's just, it doesn't matter if you're an MMA fighter and a steel team six style gunman.
Like if you, if you want to maximize your chances of getting out of a violent situation safely,
you just try to get out of it safely.
You don't, you don't try and take the person down unless you have no other choice.
And that's, I mean, that to me, that's why I like the idea of having guns for home safety.
And I'm bringing this up as an example of something that people get charged about, right?
Well, speaking of having to take down other people, what do you do when the person you're
talking to gets really emotional about something?
Oh, you should do them for talking about this conversation.
So, but I was going to say that really quick and how I know this isn't the true reason for
a lot of people from defense is if there was like a non, non-lethal alternative to a gun,
like a super taser that would go through clothing and fire just fast as a bullet and you didn't
have to spend, you know, a bunch of time reloading per shot.
Phasers set on stun.
Perfect. I would have that in a heartbeat.
And I've talked to the people, two people that I know who carry gun or who have and carry guns,
who would, who, you know, I asked them, like, do you have a from defense and this sort of thing?
I kind of dazed and changed them along and set them up for this question.
And so, okay, cool. If I had a non-lethal alternative that was like a phaser, you know,
I don't know if I used the word phaser, but something like that.
I think I used the word super taser.
They'd said no, because it doesn't go bang, basically.
Like they, they like it because it's fun and it's powerful and it is.
It's kind of like a guilty pleasure.
If you've never shot a gun, I recommend going with a professional and trying at some time.
It's, I mean, if it's your thing, if you're terrified, don't, don't do anything uncomfortable.
You also shouldn't be terrified of it.
I do think that everyone should fire a gun at some point in their life,
just to get a feeling for what it actually is.
I mean, I don't like driving, but I would feel pretty unprepared if I didn't know how to drive.
As it is, I don't have to drive that much, but I mean,
if I literally couldn't get a car going, what if something happened?
What if, you know, my primary ride or whatever was having a heart attack,
I can, I couldn't get them to the hospital.
That sounds super irresponsible of me.
So I know that that's not an analogous thing,
but the level of preparedness for things that you're uncomfortable with is the general point I'm making.
So you are talking with someone about an issue that is important to you,
but you see them getting highly emotional to the point where you,
you're worried about, you know, how, how the friendship will continue if this keeps going on.
For sure.
Or are you even worried about that sort of thing?
Are you just like, stop being so emotional?
I mean, I gave you an example of something that, you know,
like the profile in case I was raising it as like,
isn't this an interesting counter example?
You know, when you think about it this way, isn't that sort of,
you know, thought provoking?
This person just didn't enjoy that argument.
And I was like, okay, you're not, you don't get off on a good,
you know, challenging argument like I do.
That's totally fine.
It was something that I really cared about.
I mean, so like, I'm trying to think of an example.
For the most part, I'm not around people that I have,
I guess I don't have that many super off-putting positions to people that I'm around a lot.
The gun thing might be close,
but even then I don't know anybody who would say,
I can't have this conversation with you.
They might say, I disagree with you, but whatever.
If it was something that I really cared about,
and I'm trying to think of something like a core value
that someone could reasonably challenge.
Well, just someone said that you can't challenge them on this thing
because to try to challenge a factual question would make you a racist.
Oh, sure.
Okay.
So like, not so much about a specific proposition then,
but about a general approach to inquiry.
So like, for example, I feel like it's a scientific question,
whether or not some demographics of humans are smarter than others.
And if someone started going off new and saying,
if you even raise that question, you're a racist.
And I wouldn't even necessarily say like it's racist,
like it doesn't have to be racial based.
It could be that, I don't know,
there could be some correlate between height and intelligence.
That's exactly what I was going to say, right?
Like there definitely are correlates between like genetics and height.
Yeah, but not about intelligence.
And all the science that, any science that purports to show that
is junk science that's supported by racists.
And you wouldn't be bringing this up if you weren't a racist.
And not saying.
And not, well, not since you started racist by definitions, right?
So in that case, like,
since I'd not super attached to any beliefs like that,
because I don't know if there's like,
there was some super crazy evidence that came up
that was just overwhelmingly compelling.
And people were shutting that down.
That would be sort of disconcerting
because it's like, that'd be like denying global warming, right?
It's like, no, look, this is a problem
that we need to like work on how to fix.
Just pretending it's not there isn't going to help.
I can't think of a, maybe intelligence is like-
Are you like, is the global warming thing important to you?
It's important enough, like the lines of thinking
that let me come to the conclusion
that global warming is real and a problem.
I'm not close with anybody voluntarily that doesn't believe,
that doesn't have,
that couldn't follow the same steps that I did.
So like I am friends, like, or I'm not,
oh yeah, I'm friends and close with people who are like,
you know, enthusiastic Trump voters.
And so like we have some fairly different core values,
but you know, there's other kind of people
that like I spend a lot of time with on voluntarily.
And when we do, we're cordial,
we don't talk about that stuff for the most part.
Like if I had a friend who was, I mean, I don't know, like-
You're tight with your brother, right?
Okay, what if your brother said that all the science
showing that global warming is happening is junk science
and it really isn't happening.
You don't got to worry about it.
And if you were trying to try to bring up any sort of studies
or research that showed it was happening,
he would say, you know what,
those were all studies done by homophobic assholes
and I can't believe you're even bringing this up.
So-
Do you hate the gaze, Stephen?
Right, that's a good intuition pump
because I'm already feeling,
I'm already registering an emotional response,
just imagining that vividly.
It would mean that I couldn't be friends
with my brother anymore.
Not because we disagree about global warming,
but because we disagree about the rules of thought
that let me think that global warming is a thing.
Because you could change that out
for any other proposition, right?
And it could even be something that I mean,
even if it was something that I agreed with,
I can't think of a way to phrase that in a way
that would be the reverse of that,
but he happened to be right.
But let's say it was, or yeah,
I mean like, you know, so a gun safe,
or you know, citizens having access to guns.
It feels like, yeah,
because we need to be able to shoot all those,
you know, I can't even,
I got to remove my brother from this
because it's too like emotionally charged
to use that as hypothetical.
But say somebody was like,
I agree with you, Stephen,
we should be allowed to shoot down
all of those insert bad people here
because they're like secretly a Nazi or something, right?
All the Muslims.
Yeah, so like, if there's some asshole
and like, that's their reason for it.
So we agree that people should have access to guns,
but for very different reasons.
And I think that that's pretty much,
that's probably worse than them just being,
I mean, it's just, it's on the same spectrum
of like them disagreeing for insane reasons.
But like, this is almost bad.
Just like, oh, damn, I'm on this guy's side,
but he's on my side for like all the wrong reasons.
Like, I believe that I should be allowed
to be factually wrong about something
without that having an implication
on my moral character.
Like, if there really isn't global warming,
I can be wrong about the research I've read
and come to the wrong conclusions
without that implying that I hate gay people.
Right, I totally agree.
I should hope anyway.
Yeah, I mean, so that's my whole thing about like,
there's two points to make there.
One is that, yes, there's this virtue
of like being able to admit like,
not being attached to the belief,
just being attached to the truth.
And that's actually ties really closely
to the other thing that, you know,
if someone's going to deny all the evidence
that disagrees with their thinking,
they're not attached to the truth,
they're attached to their belief or their ideology.
I think the most harmful thing about that
is because I would want to know if I was wrong.
Like, if I am wrong about global research,
I would like to have a conversation with someone
where I can find that out
as opposed to being shut down with,
you can't have that conversation
because having it is homophobic.
And what am I supposed to do with that?
Maybe that's the best litmus test
for like whether or not someone's
wanting to have a good conversation
is you could just say,
if you were wrong about this, would you want to know?
And if the answer is no,
or it doesn't matter because I'm not wrong,
then they're not going to be good
to have a conversation with, right?
But that's such a teeny tiny subset.
And you still want to communicate your idea
to a lot of people who wouldn't necessarily
answer that question with, yes,
who would want to be,
who would want us,
who would say they would like to know
if they were wrong.
There still might be people
you want to communicate your idea to
without infuriating.
I kind of feel like when it comes to people like that,
you need someone who is either professionally trained
or highly gifted at communicating
with people that are hostile.
Or like, you could even...
Or not necessarily hostile.
Like there are a lot of people I could think
who wouldn't say,
Oh, yes, I'd love to be proven wrong.
Most, I'd be willing to,
most people wouldn't.
But I feel you could probably convince
most people given time and civility.
I don't mean all,
but more than half that global warming is real.
There's a ground of people who are still
in the range of having a civil discussion
who might not be immediately like,
Oh, I love being proved wrong.
Like there's a middle ground.
Yeah, I mean, and the middle ground
that's much more, I think,
commonly occupied is not that I love being proved wrong.
I do get a rush learning that I've been wrong
about something, but I might be weird.
But what I'm saying is that there's somebody who be like,
at least is like not axiomatically opposed to being wrong,
which is different than just not loving it.
So framing it that way is a very small subset
of the population.
But as long as they're like,
okay, being wrong is what I'm at.
Just that specific question is hard to ask,
I guess is what I'm saying.
I'm really worried that is the thing that amateurs
are just not good at and shouldn't attempt.
Like I...
I think being able to convince people
who you disagree with on a lot of things,
being able to come to the sort out
what you're really disagreeing on,
narrow it down, work it out,
and find that core point is super useful to do,
even with people who aren't really good at it.
But I feel like the people who are willing
to put in that kind of work
are the kind of people who are open to revision, right?
Maybe I'm wrong.
Maybe I'm only picturing the wrong kind of argument.
I think you're probably right most of the time,
but it can happen where you can still have that discussion
with someone who you totally disagree with.
I'm not totally disagree with them.
You guys could...
We could disagree axiomatically,
but the point is that at the end of this,
one of us should change our mind
if we're both...
If we both bring forward evidence, right?
Or at the very least...
Optimally.
Yeah.
So there's a difference like we can disagree.
I'm not just all around for circle jerking
and agreeing with everybody all the time,
but if they're going into the argument saying,
there's no way they're going to change our mind,
that's like, why am I going to waste my time?
I mean, I think a lot of people go into that
and a lot of people get their minds changed.
Like a lot of the time, like I have heard many times,
oh, there's no way.
Like there's no way you could change my mind.
And there's a non-zero number of times
where I've walked away and they're like,
oh, wait, I guess that makes sense.
It's like...
That's actually a good point.
So maybe they're not well-calibrating
how vulnerable they are to revision.
Who are these people?
Yeah, who are these secret scientists
that you know or these secret rationalists?
That's my point.
Is there not?
Like I think in general,
most people, if approached gently and slowly enough
in the right way, you can convince,
even if it's not a perfectly rational train discussion,
you can still get people on the right line to further.
I mean, some people are hopeless.
The moment you bring it up, they explode.
But there are, I'd say, a majority of people
you can bring to see a logical viewpoint
as long as you have the patience
and things that appeal to them that back up your argument.
So I have a family member who was,
I think I mentioned, a Trump voter and supporter.
And what I can do with this person is we can talk
and he can say, I see where you're coming from.
But I've never heard him say, you know what?
You're right.
Well, let me rephrase that.
Or at least let me consider that.
I've never actually heard those words.
I've heard him say, I've never thought about it that way.
But never conceded anything.
I mean, I'm trying to go through my entire history
of conversation with this person.
Probably minor points, but I don't think I've ever been
witnessed any major revisions.
But that doesn't mean that the time is wasted
because it can also be fun,
like a sparring match instead of a real fight.
But that also doesn't mean that it's not valuable
because then at least, even if they don't change their mind,
they walk away with an understanding
of where they're coming from.
But that's actually different than the sort of hostile...
Now you've got me all hung up on using the word interlocutor.
It's a good word.
So that's different than having a fully hostile interlocutor
where they're just not willing to engage.
And so those people might just be unapproachable.
And I think, but what I'm saying is I think
that that's a relative minority.
I don't think that I think that's far less than half of most people.
I'm sure it's less than half.
But that doesn't, I mean, in relative minority,
yeah, I mean, if we're talking less than half,
then technically sure.
But I can probably list off the top of my head five people.
And I only know like 30 people.
So that's a fairly large number of people
who are like that with some topics at least, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, with some topics.
So you have a question and I'm making a note that this is at 131
in case we want to come back and cut this out after.
So do you think you're familiar
with the whole Google Memo thing, right?
Only vaguely, actually.
Oh, okay.
But if you give me, I will trust your opinion
if you give me the facts and solidify my opinion from that.
I was just curious, I was hoping you'd read it.
I was curious whether you thought the majority of people
are hostile to that opinion put forth in the memo
or if the memo was particularly bad at putting forth its opinion.
Oh, so I would have actually happened to read it.
Yeah.
Because I mean, certainly one of those two is the case.
And I can see some arguments for how the memo really
had issues with what it was presenting.
But on the other hand, I don't know.
And then I saw an interview with the kid.
He's like 22, fresh out of college or something.
Yeah, right.
He's idealistic and sweet.
I'm like, oh man, I'm so sorry that you got thrust into this role
because you were obviously not the right person to do this.
And I don't know.
It seems like, did I hear correctly that the memo was not,
it was originally just intended as a response to their request for feedback?
That's what I've heard.
I didn't actually read the thing either.
And I can actually phrase this in a way that I think
you don't have to have read the memo to answer.
In your opinion, maybe you've seen some dialogue on Facebook
or on Reddit or something.
Are people arguing against the poor quality of effort
and scientific rigor and argument brought forward in the arguments?
Or are they upset in arguing at the fact
that this guy made those arguments at all?
Yeah, I think it's definitely the latter.
It's kind of Enya's point, which is,
the people almost upset that it's being discussed.
So that makes it sound like those people aren't even open
to talk about the content of it.
The fact that this point was raised.
And the point was roughly that there's some
underpinning difference in men and women.
I didn't read the thing.
That made men more suited to work in places like Google.
Yes, but it also kind of meandered and rambled a bit.
And I mean, looking back on it,
this is why I say that when it comes to touchy things,
it really should be handled to left to professional persuaders
or whatever, because it's such a touchy topic.
An amateur should not have expected to be able to touch that
and keep his job.
Well, maybe in his defense,
he wasn't trying to make a public position with this,
and they just asked him.
I think that's also kind of sad,
because I like being able to talk about the empirical side of things,
but it is a very touchy topic in our culture.
Yeah.
And to be clear, my only exposure to this was reading,
not even the post, but Julia Gailiff linked to it on her Facebook,
but I read her the first two paragraphs
of her several paragraph thing on it.
I'm not on Facebook that much.
It does something along the lines of his central claim
seems to be something along the lines of there are,
there's some genetic predisposition
or something that was not socially a factor,
but a non-social factor that made men on average,
maybe more likely or more likely to succeed at places like Google.
I'm more interested in the field.
And so Julia Gailiff, and I totally agree with her,
said that that sounds to me like at least plausible enough to look into.
It's not like so outlandish that, you know,
oh, it looks like women can't do math.
Like if it was that, then like, all right, look,
that dude's just wrong.
And he's not even making a point worth looking,
worth looking anymore into,
because we've kind of settled that question.
Whether or not women prefer people-oriented positions
or like, what was the alternative people-oriented?
People versus things.
Yeah, people-oriented positions
or thing-oriented positions.
That sounds like an investigatable question.
And, you know, then you can look at social factors
and see how much one plays into it or something.
But I'm not saying that that's true.
Don't take me out of context.
I'm saying is that sounds like an investigatable question.
But if anyone is like having this, you know,
kick reaction, like, I can't believe you would even say
that's worth looking into,
you fucking misogynistic sexist shit-lord pig,
that's the kind of like,
unapproachable arguer
that I'm referring to when I say like,
some people just can't be met even halfway
because they're not willing to get,
they're not willing to meet you an inch.
So, like, if some people just have ideas
that are off the table, you know,
another popular one is that, like, there could be,
and this touched on in the episode that we had
about transhumanism,
where we're talking about like,
whether or not your coherent,
acceptably volition would be, you know,
similar enough across all of humanity.
And so when Shelley said that, you know,
it's possible that there's been some enough
distance between different groups of humans
that their CEVs are different,
you know, how do we map that onto
whether or not humans' CEVs as a whole?
And I was like,
so you're saying that there's a genetic difference
between different groups of humans
that have led them to have,
like, that are vast enough for our,
like, core values to be that different?
And that goes against the,
like, the strong leftist position,
and this is not me being a dick.
I'm not sure that was your position, though.
No, she was raising the question.
I'm just saying that that line of questioning.
Well, I mean, I don't even think it has to necessarily
be genetic because if a strong AI comes into
its full power in the next year or something
and starts taking the CEV of everyone alive,
it doesn't, the genetics certainly plays a part into that,
but culture and socialization plays a lot into it as well.
Totally.
I thought-
The CEV is determined by who we are at the moment,
which includes all our lives up to this point.
Right.
I got the impression that she was making a genetic argument.
Maybe I misinterpreted, but somebody could.
I don't think you could find the CEV of any race
just by looking at their genetics or any species, rather,
just by looking at their genetics.
Well, we couldn't because we're not super intelligent,
but I'm, I can see that too.
But I, someone might be able to argue, no, no, no,
it just turns out that, you know,
whatever tall people have this different core value
than short people or something.
How people have a core value of padding short people on the head.
And having high doorways, that's my core value.
So-
The doorways aren't that big of an issue.
High shower heads.
That's the problem.
Yeah.
Even I've been in showers are too short,
and I'm five eight.
So yeah, my, well, I was raising that because there's,
there's as far as like other examples of sacred cows,
sounds majority of, and it kind of is,
but not if you're of the mindset that like,
it's good to learn about these things,
or learning like what your, what your sacred cows are.
You could call them like your untouchable beliefs
or your unquestionable beliefs.
I feel like the goal of this by being rationalist
does not have anything like that.
I disagree.
I have some sacred cows.
All right.
Well, I want to get to that in a second.
What I was going to get at though is that,
correct me if this is something that,
you know, maybe some feedback on,
but like the idea that there can't be a genetic component
to anything that we care about,
or that they're, in fact, isn't, we don't have to look.
That sounds like a sacred cow.
Yeah, that's a problem.
So, and I should say so, right?
It feels to me like, if you're saying that sexism is bad
because all people are equal, and that therefore implies that
if anyone is not identical, then sexism is justified,
which I know what is wrong with your philosophy.
Sexism is unjustified even if people are radically different.
Yeah, I totally agree.
I mean,
even if there's genetically huge differences
between men and women, and I'm not saying there are,
but if there were, sexism is still bad.
I like tall people and short people
because it's a fairly non-inflammatory way
to make the hypothetical, but that's a fair point.
And that's the thing that people say,
like, no, no, it's wrong because they're the same.
It's like, well, if they weren't, then it would be okay.
Right.
That seems to be what that line of thinking leads to.
And that's not what anyone wants.
That's not even probably what they want,
but that's the extension of the argument that they're making.
So what is some of your sacred cows?
I'd be interested in poking at one.
Well, I think the biggest one is that all people
are deserving of respect and have moral weight
and should not be killed.
Like, just by virtue of being human,
there is a core human dignity and respect that you are afforded
unless you do something really horrific to, you know, void that.
So either that's a sacred cow of mine
or I'm just looking at this and that doesn't sound
like this kind of category of thing that's a sacred cow.
Well, that's not a thing that you can prove empirically
or fight against either, right?
That is just a thing you believe.
So that might be, that might be what separates it,
that it's not an empirical belief, it's a moral one.
And so like, you can't, I can't bring you,
I can't go out, do a cool study and bring you this paper
and prove you wrong on that, right?
No, it turns out that if you're over six, eight,
I don't know, whatever, right?
Your moral worth drops off exponentially.
So like that, I think maybe the,
and maybe sacred cow wasn't carefully defined,
maybe it has to be an empirical,
an at least in potential empirical belief.
Does that sound, I mean, do you have any that are empirical?
Like, you know what, I don't want to open that box
because if it has the wrong thing, I'll be sad.
But there's a lot, there's tons of sacred cows,
like literally a sacred cow that is not empirical in any way.
I think sacred cows have to have an aspect of the moral
because people don't really care all that much about
the empirical side of things.
I was going for the faith side of things.
Okay.
Like the, that's the opposite of empirical,
but some, I'd still classify those as sacred cows.
I guess maybe, maybe there should be a different word for it
because I'm thinking that there's,
there's something special about the category of things
that this is my untouchable belief,
but it's anchored on a true or false reality claim.
Oh, I guess there could be,
for people who believe in the supernatural,
that a God or a loving being exists
might be a sacred cow of theirs.
That's, yeah, that's kind of what I was saying.
Because that is potentially something
that could be proven or disproven.
And depending on the person that you're talking to.
Right, depending on their definition of God and such.
But that would be something
that some people might not be willing to investigate.
The way that I'm thinking about it,
a sacred cow isn't something like
good people go to heaven and bad people go to hell.
It's like, good people go to heaven
and bad people go to hell.
And I'm not going to look in this book
that shows me who's in heaven and who's in hell
because I don't want to be proven wrong or right.
So it's the difference between not being
willing to accept empirical evidence
and not even being willing to discuss it?
Or that discussing or looking at the empirical evidence
is immoral or something.
Yeah, that kind of falls under not being willing to discuss it.
Yeah, but I think even, yeah, it's,
it's, that's why I think it wouldn't discuss it.
Because they, like, because they're afraid
that if the answer proved them wrong,
it would challenge their core belief.
Whatever this belief is.
And they, they aren't willing to risk that.
So then instead of saying, instead of just saying that,
they're saying it's immoral to look, to look in that book
and see if I'm right or wrong.
I don't know.
Are you willing to entertain the idea
that some humans might not have moral weight
and aren't deserving of respect?
Just for whatever skin color or intelligence or whatever?
Or we can say height because it's nice and safe.
Or height, sure.
Like, again, I don't know if that's,
I'm trying to separate that kind of thing
from the kind of thing that has a true or false answer,
in reality, that we could in principle find out.
And you can't just like hold a cool meter up to somebody
and be like, oh, you have 7.8 units of worth.
And be like, oh, it looks like tall people
have like less than short people or vice versa.
Are you willing to entertain a discussion
with someone who does say that this group of people,
whatever they are, gingers are not worthy
of being considered human
and having the same respect and rights as the others do.
Like, are you willing to have a conversation
of that sort with somebody?
We've had conversations of that sort.
Gallant wrote in with all those arguments about minorities.
We talked about that for like a whole episode once.
That's the kind of argument.
Again, I do want to the point that I am separating that from the-
But it's not something that I would ever budge on, I guess.
I mean, yeah.
I think I even said, like, I'm not anticipating
that you could even bring forward evidence
that would change our mind.
But man, if I can't remember any of a specific claim,
something about how like poor people are more inclined to,
whatever it was, I don't know.
But if any of those were testable, I wouldn't like-
And if he said, look, I don't know, someone that's not a-
What's the professional word for it?
A crank.
Someone who's not a crank wrote this paper.
It's pretty short.
You could read it in 20 minutes.
He provides a very compelling evidence.
I wouldn't not read it because I feel like it'd be immoral
to learn that information.
I feel like that's the sign of a sacred cow.
Even if poor people turn out to have
terrible impulse control or whatever
and not as much prefrontal cortex,
what is it that override called?
The ability to override your impulses.
I know.
I just heard it being a human.
I just heard it as well, not too long ago.
But even if it turns out that poor people do have that,
in a lesser ability to do that, and it is genetic,
it still wouldn't change my mind
that all people are equally deserving of respect.
I agree.
And so I think-
And the fact that-
So I didn't-
But that doesn't mean that-
So yeah, your moral position on how much people matter
isn't the kind of thing that you're not willing to examine
because you would look at the evidence for that
and you're like, oh, wow, there is something here.
We need to adjust society to make things better for this.
You wouldn't say, we can't look at that
because if that's true, that's horrible, right?
So that's that to me-
Right, because it doesn't matter to me if that's true or not.
It's not going to change how we treat people.
Well, it might actually matter.
Oh, look, and it turns out that we could actually fix this
by giving all four-year-olds in the first world
the marshmallow experiment, right?
All right.
I mean, yeah, we could maybe-
But so the only way we could determine
a way to fix any sort of problem that was like this
would be to investigate it as scientifically as we could.
To say that that sort of investigation is immoral,
that's the sacred cow part.
To say that asking that question is immoral
and you're a bad person for asking it,
that's the sacred cow part.
And that's where the person's being uncharitable
and incapable of having a good discussion.
Does that get us too far?
No, I'm curious now what kind of listener feedback,
if any, that we'll have on this particular thing.
Keep in mind, like all these are hypotheticals.
I don't believe anything about that, you know,
with the, if someone wants to challenge on, like,
that guns actually aren't good for home safety because this
in your argument, something along the lines of like,
look how people accidentally shoot themselves or something,
or on purpose shoot themselves, I'm aware of that.
That doesn't really weigh into like my in principle argument,
but as far as like the, if anyone writes in and be like,
oh, you guys think poor people this or tall people that,
that's obviously, we're making hypotheticals.
I don't know, that is, I spent,
this is actually one of the few episodes where I had like,
heads up about what we were talking about.
Sometimes we'll just decide like when we get here,
or I didn't understand what we were supposed to be looking
into and looked into something else.
So I was thinking about this all week,
and I couldn't think of like,
where I reliably get upset about a certain topic.
I did have that incident, like I said,
about the minimum wage thing,
but that was less about the topic and more about the circumstances.
And so I just spent the whole time trying to think of like,
all right, well, where do my emotional arguments come from?
And it's less about the position
and more about the person I'm talking with.
If they are being uncharitable,
if they're name calling right away,
if they're poorly rephrasing your position,
you know, like so if, if Chase was poor gun or was anti gun,
and I said, I think guns are an okay thing for sane adults to have.
And you're like, oh, so you're okay with kids getting shot.
Like I might get annoyed because like that's not what I said.
And that's not what I'm defending.
And for you to like,
go around telling people that Steven's okay,
the people with kids getting shot,
that's not a fair interpretation of what I'm saying.
Not saying that you would, but you're in the wrong.
And I think, I think I'm on the same way,
which is as far as I know,
though someone I'm sure could confront me
and probably prove me wrong,
I don't have too many things that I wouldn't be willing to argue about.
But someone being willfully ignorant
or just being willfully antagonistic
or just completely logical,
that'll get me much more riled up than any,
I think any opinion they could hold would,
if that makes any sense.
Absolutely. No, I think that's exactly how I feel,
that it's less about my attachment to any belief
because my attachment is more to the truth,
what's actually happening.
So if I'm wrong, as a matter of fact,
I actually want to know that
because even if it's something that I'd be uncomfortable learning.
If I learned that, I don't know, something personal,
like if I learned that white people
were just had like way more racist tendencies
or misogynistic tendencies than other races or something,
I'd be like, oh, that sucks.
I guess I need to work extra hard at mitigating that.
But it wouldn't be like, you know,
oh, don't look into that box
because that box might have a bad scary thing in it.
That's, that to me is more the sacred cow thing
and more the, I'm not getting hung up on that,
but I've been thinking about that topic too
because I don't know if I have any of those.
I do have moral beliefs that are pretty hard to shake,
but I think that rests on an empirical question
that I'm refusing to look at.
Yeah, if you ever found any of those,
I'd probably have fun debating over it.
I think it'd be fun.
And I mean, you know me sort of okay,
do I have anything like that
that you can think of that Steven's pretty touchy
on this thing and like he,
because there's a good chance like,
I mean, I'm not doing it on purpose.
I'm not lying when I say I'm unaware of it.
There's literally nothing that comes to mind.
Maybe if I really thought about it, but...
This could be a fun episode to dive into.
If any, if you guys can think of anything,
I would love to like sacrifice one of my sacred cows
or be shown to be a hypocrite.
If that works too, then, you know...
Or you can just practice your stepping away
and calming down techniques for an episode,
which takes us seven hours to record
because you have to keep leaving.
Right. Yeah, that'd be fun.
I mean, I'm like, maybe it's just the flexibility,
but I'm not that attached to any like,
you know, non-moral belief.
Man, now I'm trying to dig around in my head
and think of one of them.
And I can't, I mean, obviously I don't have a bucket in my head
labeled sacred cows.
So I can't pull one out and think of one right away,
but there are things I care a lot about,
but nothing that I refuse to investigate.
Nothing that I would say,
I know I will not hear your evidence.
There are things that like,
I won't waste my time looking at your evidence.
Be like, look, turns out women are really stupid at something.
And I'm like, you know what?
That's been looked at, you're stupid.
If it turned out where like,
a lot of uncomfortable social science was coming out,
that was like, oh man, look at this,
turns out people who are under six feet tall have this thing.
I don't know, whatever it is, right?
Like, I mean, I would be willing,
I'd be more willing to look into something
if there was reputable engagement on it,
but not if it's just cranks.
All right, so we wrap up.
I mean, I wish if we get like immediate feedback,
just someone could ask a question.
Yeah.
You know, Steven, you didn't really cover that very well,
or you didn't make any sense.
We took a break part way through to go look
at the International Space Station.
So I got kind of derailed,
but all right, yeah, we can dive into feedback.
Unless Chase, did anything to add?
I felt like.
No, no.
I think I already mentioned it.
The one thing we did argue about,
I said a perfectly bad example
by like immediately steamrolling over your responses, but.
The profiling thing?
Yeah.
Well, no, I mean.
I think we agreed because we already did,
but I did the thing I just did where I cut you off.
That's fine.
If we hadn't agreed, it would have been infuriating.
Well, you're arguing in good faith.
I mean, I can understand enthusiastically talking
over somebody if you're wanting to get something out.
If you consistently did it,
or if I asked you not to and you persisted,
then that would get annoying.
But I didn't find that the least obtrusive or unsettling.
If anything, I found it interesting
that you opened up a different avenue to that
that I'd never considered.
Because you're much more like large scale
socially minded than I am.
I mean, you talk about like, you know, like the EFF.
The, is that your jacket?
Oh, awesome.
Fantastic.
So like, I mean, large scale social issues
are not the kind of thing that I'm great at thinking about.
Like I just have like, oh, wouldn't it be interesting
if like this was a little different?
And you're like, actually, if you think about that society
would fall apart.
Like those aren't things that,
that next step isn't things that come to my mind readily.
Yeah, I was just saying that it was a really bad example
of how to have this discussion
with someone who's not already on your side.
Which is not what I was trying to do.
I was setting up the example of a bad way to do it.
Which is to be brief, to talk over someone's response
and to not fully listen.
Like that's exactly the opposite of what you want to do.
Okay, I finally, I think see where you're coming from.
You're saying that if we were coming from different positions
and we were coming, I got a new issue.
I'd like to think I wouldn't talk over you as much.
But I'm not confident in that.
Nice, well we'll try it sometime.
Okay, no, I got you.
And sorry that if everyone else got that the first time
it took me three tries, that was on me, okay.
I'm ready for feedback.
Alrighty, well, the one thing that I did want to bring up,
which I am glad that Chase is here for,
although by the time this episode goes live,
it's probably going to be like three months
since this became a news item.
The lawsuit for the printer cartridges,
the people that refilled, was it Lexmar?
I don't know.
Okay, so there was a, this is going all the way back
to the digital rights episode that we were doing.
There was a lawsuit brought by a printer company
who I think was Lexmar or something along those lines
against a smaller company who was taking their old ink
cartridges, refilling them with ink,
and giving them back to consumers for a small fee,
much less than a new print cartridge that Lexmar
charges for sold.
Yes, the, go on.
They had this, this came to conclusion.
Yes, yes.
Or I don't know if it's going to go up to an Evert
hire court, but I think it was at the Supreme Court
at this point, wasn't it?
Yeah, okay.
The problem was that Lexmar had a bit on their ink cartridge
that got flipped from one to zero, I believe,
when the ink cartridge ran out of ink.
And at that point, whenever you put into the printer,
the printer would say, sorry,
you've already used all the ink on this cartridge
and I will not use this cartridge for anything.
So even if you refilled it with ink,
you couldn't use it anymore.
Your printer would not recognize it.
So in addition to refilling with the ink,
they flipped that bit from zero back to one.
And got hit with the DMCA claim, of course.
Exactly.
And they said that changing one bit is okay.
And yeah, they're able to continue doing that.
It's interesting because the, so for some background,
I was reading Corey Doctro on this who was head of VFF for a while,
actually head of VFF Europe or head of VFF in general.
I have no idea.
Okay.
But Corey Doctro was working for the EFF for a while.
I'm not sure if he still is or not.
Also a sci-fi author, writes some good stuff,
who is very against DRM like this.
There used to be way back in the day,
publishers wanted to make it so that you could not resell a book
once it had been sold to you because they had copyright on it.
And not only could you not resell it,
this means you couldn't loan it,
you couldn't pass it on to your children.
They sold it to you specifically for your use only.
And the court said, no, there is a doctrine of exhaustion.
Once you have sold something to someone,
you have exhausted your rights to it
and they can do what they want with it.
And software is covered by copyright
due to a series of core rulings from the 70s, won't get into.
But by definition, anything with software in it
has copyrighted work inside of it because of this software.
So, which makes it basically everything nowadays.
There's almost nothing that doesn't have software in it.
Lamps, I mean, watches, I mean, the alarm clocks, I mean.
Yeah. And so anything that you want to,
you can just add a thin skim of DRM to it.
And now that we have passed the DMCA, DRM is sacrosanct.
Right.
It has the same rights that those people wanted in the past
that you cannot touch it, you cannot resell it,
you cannot do anything with it.
So you can add a thin skim of DRM to anything that has software
and all of a sudden you don't really own it anymore.
Exactly.
It is still owned by the corporation
and they get to decide what happens with it.
And it can stop you doing all sorts of stuff
under the guise of copyright law?
Exactly.
Like, and that's not what copyright law is for.
That doesn't help anyone that's not helping artists,
it's madness.
What was DRM?
Digital rights management.
I see.
A perfect example is that Philips has,
see with the ink cartridges, they made a mistake
in that it's only one bit that flips.
But Philips has more complex software on their lamps
and to change it, you would need to break their DRM.
Yep.
And that is illegal.
So they now have it that if you want to get light
out of your Philips lamp, you have to buy a Philips light bulb
because the software on the lamp will check
if there's the matching software in the light bulb.
Oh, for safety, I'm sure.
Of course, for safety.
So you can only get around that by hacking through their DRM
which is completely illegal.
So there's high level felony.
So yeah, you basically don't own your lamp anymore.
Philips gets to decide what you can do with your lamp.
And Corey's assertion is that we are basically being returned
to a feudal state.
That in feudalism, property was exclusively in the realm
of the nobility, the privileged few,
and everyone else was simply tenants on that property.
And that they're trying to do the same thing
because it is profitable as hell to be able to continue
to own a thing after you have sold someone.
And it sounds cute on a lamp, but when it's your car
and when it's your livelihood and when it's something important,
it gets a lot scarier.
When it's something that you depend on for something.
Yeah.
And so this was one of the things that filled me with hope
when the Supreme Court upheld that you could flip the bit
on the printer cartridge, which is not the same
as the DRM on something, but it's a step.
We're getting there and it looks like the fight is not hopeless.
It hasn't been lost yet anyway.
The idea of, I think when they pitched the Xbox One
several years ago, we're talking about how when you bought a game,
it would basically be remembered on your system
and then subsequently be useless to any other system.
And then PlayStation came out and was like,
we're not doing that shit.
That's insane.
And then Xbox is like, oh, well, fuck.
We're not doing that either.
Just kidding.
Thank God.
And so, well, yeah.
But then, I mean, it's hard.
When you raise the book example, the idea that someone
would ever try and push that would be against the law
for me to lend a book to a friend.
But it's the exact same thing that it sounds,
maybe just because I'm inculcated with the idea
that software is somehow magic, but certainly I shouldn't
be allowed to make money off of it.
I shouldn't be allowed to maybe turn a profit
because that sounds, well.
You shouldn't be able to make thousands of copies
of the game that just dropped and send it out to everyone.
Right.
But I mean, did I do that?
Like I couldn't make money.
That's just like the market.
Like if I bought 60 copies, didn't put any in the console
or whatever and like just, you know,
bought all the copies at Best Buy.
Like people buy it with new consoles dropped.
They'll buy as many as they can and sell them online
for four times markup.
It's hard for me.
Like that doesn't even violate any DRM nonsense.
But that's just, you know, that's different.
That's a side.
Four commercial use is usually pretty fairly defined
in most copyright cases.
Like there's a pretty sharp line where it is
for commercial and for personal use.
Sure.
I just thought it was interesting.
I guess the, what I'm going to get is the book thing
raising interesting intuition.
Like imagine, I don't know, some weird e-book that,
you know, you had to unlock your Kindle with your thumb print
and you could only read the book once.
Like so you couldn't even like, like I said, give it to your kids.
I mean, they tried that.
Well, what I'm liking about this too
is that there is a market pushback
when it gets severe enough.
Yeah.
Right.
So like nobody would have bought an Xbox One
if that was going to be the thing, right?
Oh, no, they would have still bought the Xbox One.
Well, they would have raised that.
Fewer people would have.
I wouldn't have bought one.
So they'd have lost at least one customer.
We're just not there yet.
I'll be willing to buy an extra generation console
that'll be standard.
Yeah.
And no one will notice because there won't be competition.
It'll just be the way it is.
Hmm.
It's been slowly slipping that way forever.
You want everything through Steam now, right?
Well, Steam can just go nope at any time, right?
You don't own those games.
You don't even, you don't even own them as much
as when the original publisher owned them.
You own less of them now.
And it's everything just slides that way.
It's the most profitable way to do it.
So maybe the Supreme Court decision here
will help protect us a little bit.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's.
And at least, and as heinous as those are,
you can only play your game once and you can only
play it during the right time and you can only
play it while Drinking Mountain Dew.
That's at least, I can almost buy that as
something that deserves to be under copyright, right?
Right?
It's a war, it's a, it's a work of art.
It's a, it's something that needs to be,
that is easily replicatable,
but still has to profit the original artist.
At least I can, as bad as it is, I can buy it.
Not so much about my light bulbs and my changing my oil
and, you know, all the other, you know,
refilling my printer ink.
That's where it's just madness.
We're on microphones right now.
We couldn't make the podcast without them.
And what if they want to turn off our microphones?
Your 30 day trial period for the use of this microphone
has expired.
To eliminate this message, please go online
to register for your monthly subscription
to unlock all product features.
If they want to turn off our microphones or say,
what if they had a month licensing fee for your
recording software, which if there wasn't an open source
project, you probably would be paid.
I don't want to have to pay a licensing fee for the cable
that connects the fucking microphone to the goddamn mixer.
Oh, I bring this thing when like, you know,
complex society destroying things,
crop up.
Then it's just like, yep, that sucks.
Super AI comes around before then.
Cause like, you know, on the list of like problems,
this is like number 18.
Well, now it is.
Yeah.
But it could quickly crop, could quickly climb, right?
Like I'm a super big fan and big advocate of this type of
stuff, and I'd still probably rank it barely in the top
five issues we have right now.
Top five is pretty important.
And it might be barely top five.
I mean, I think laying the groundwork for feudalism,
where we are just the, the things that run, you know,
mega corporations as these non-human entities that sort of
grow and take over the globe is, is a worrisome thing.
Oh yeah.
And that's like AI could be put in the service of these new
entities, which are not humans, and that we just kind of work
as the cellular automata that make them up.
And that's outside the scope of copyright law.
That gets into, I mean, we talked about it last time,
but just all of Facebook, Google, monster social networks,
which massively adjust what you see and what other people see
you say, like that's as bad as it gets so far.
And, and all this kind of goes in.
Yeah.
So anyways, that was the only listener feedback,
which was from me, I guess.
Because update feedback.
Yeah, update feedback.
Yeah, because we have recorded this episode just one
week after the last one.
So we haven't gotten new feedback yet.
Before we go, we would like to thank our Patreon
supporter Pavel Paltsev,
who has helped made this episode possible and brought it
to all of you.
Thank you so much.
That's awesome.
Thank you.
Yeah.
It's, it is the kind of thing that, you know,
makes this possible.
I don't, I don't know how to reiterate it.
I want, I want to enthusiastically agree
without just repeating what you said,
but I can't do that.
So thank you.
Awesome.
If you want to leave any feedback,
you can email us at Bayesian Conspiracy Podcast at gmail.com
or leave comments at our website, vbayseanconspiracy.com
or at the subreddit slash r slash the Bayesian Conspiracy.
Chase, did you want to say anything or plug anything
before you go?
Nope.
You can also leave a like or review on iTunes,
force your friends to listen to it in the car
or, you know, quietly since he doesn't have
a website or anything.
Just be thankful that Kyle Moore makes
our episodes sound bearable.
So thank you, Kyle.
Oh, Kyle's the best.
All right.
See you all in two weeks.
Bye.
Bye.
