Hello, you found the portal. I'm your host Eric Weinstein and I think that
today's must be the most unusual episode yet of a podcast that has been
marked by almost regular unusual episodes. Now this is the first podcast that
I'm recording at home. I don't really have a home recording studio so we're
really doing this from chicken wire and masking tape. But I am sheltering in
place because of the worldwide COVID pandemic and what we've been asked by
the state of California and by the federal government is to shelter in
place for an upcoming month because today is April 1st. Now during a pandemic I
can assure you that no one is interested in April Fool's jokes. So the question is
what to do with the April Fool's tradition in a situation in which nobody
wants a prank. I thought that this was probably the best time to launch an idea
that I've been playing with for years and that idea is that it is dangerous to
have a world in which we are afraid to talk about what we think is true. When I
think about what happened during the beginning of the COVID pandemic I find
that we were in general intimidated from sharing our fears about the virus. We
were told that if we wore masks that we were acting in a peculiar fashion. If we
refused to shake hands that we were behaving in a strange and unpleasant
social way. We did not want to be alarmist. We did not want to be seen as
chicken little and in fact it was extremely important that we not be seen
as xenophobic given that the outbreak was originating in Wuhan China. In fact
perhaps the most dangerous idea was that this outbreak might have been
connected to some research being done in a lab perhaps a bio weapons lab. We
really don't know where this epidemic began. What is the etiology of something
that is causing the entire world economy to effectively shut down? What I
believe is that that silence has been deadly. We have many people who have now
lost their lives because we did not feel free to exchange ideas to think and to
talk and in fact many of the people who warned us first were the freest members
of society having been previously cancelled by standard mainstream
institutions and their associated media. So what I thought would be important
for in April Fool's Day that no one wants to actually participate in was to deal
with an idea that maybe one day a year we should all be free to share crazy
ideas that are going around between our ears and in our head. We're having
conversations with ourselves wondering is anyone else seeing the same thing that
I'm seeing. But we are too afraid because the social stigma for actually
believing in things that maybe things are possible or perhaps there's a
conspiracy somewhere. Perhaps we are ill-prepared. For example, I believe that
our current pandemic is exacerbated because our government and our readiness
is ours failed to stock adequate supplies and that these supplies were
called for in the academic literature for years. There was absolutely no excuse
not to have personal protective equipment stocked for doctors and
nurses and hospitals to say nothing of all of the people who were in the front
lines of treating patients sick with COVID. Now currently I don't believe that
you can trust the World Health Organization. Absolutely not. I don't think
you can trust the Surgeon General of the United States and I absolutely don't
think you can trust the CDC because they are all covering for our inadequacy. This
was a problem that we always knew was coming and we at one point had stocks
which apparently were depleted under a previous administration and not restocked
under this administration. In fact, our fear of dealing with a pervasive
institutional incompetence has blinded us to the degradation in our society
across all major institutions. As I've discussed before on the program, I believe
that this has a singular etiology. That is, that because of embedded growth
obligations coming from the previous era of unsustainable post-war growth from
about 1945 to 1971-73 something like that, we built in expectations to our
system that cannot currently be met. We will not have technology that follows
the same breakneck pace of innovation. As a result, we have a system whereby the
heads of our organizations are forced to cover for their inadequacies because
growth is built into the system that cannot be sustained. Therefore, there is
not the funding, the manpower, there is not the wherewithal to continue many of
our programs because we do not actually have the ability to continue to simply
grow our way out, at least so far. So what's today's program about? Well, I
thought that what I would do is to let go of something that I've been keeping
pretty close for, I think, about 37 years. When I was around 19, I started, it's hard
to talk about, when I was around 18 or 19, I was at the University of Pennsylvania
and I thought I saw a glimmer of hope. I thought I saw that some new equations
that were being played with might actually provide a solution to some of the
problems that had bedeviled Einstein and others for years in the quest for a
unified field theory. Now, it's an embarrassing thing to say that one is a
unified field theorist. It is effectively equivalent to saying I'm interested in
perpetual motion machines or that I have a private cure for cancer that I'm
trying on rabbits in my backyard. However, I actually think that it's
important to fess up because that's exactly what this is. Now, in my situation,
I have an extremely unusual history and I really don't want to get bogged down in
all of the things that happened while I was a student trying to develop this
theory because it is not a particularly happy story. I believe that this theory
is an incredibly joyous one. Now, in this situation, I want to talk about what it
means to have a theory of everything. We've never seen one and in fact, not
only have we never seen a theory of everything, we've never even seen, I
believe, a candidate for a theory of everything. And because a theory of
everything would have to have different characteristics than I believe every
theory that has gone before, we don't think enough about what the difference is
between what we would normally call in physics an effective theory and a
fundamental one. Now, if you're familiar with the M.C. Escher drawing called
Drawing Hands, it is a lithograph of two hands apparently drawing each other
into existence on some kind of a canvas or piece of paper. That is sometimes
referred to as a strange loop. But it, in fact, is an attempt to answer the
question, what is the fire that lights itself? This is the problem that
bedevils us when we search for a unified theory that doesn't bedevil us, in my
opinion, in any previous effective theory. Now, why is that? Well, many people
confuse a theory of everything as if they imagine that it's a theory in which
you can compute every eventuality. And it is absolutely not that because the
computational power is very different than the question of whether or not the
rules are effectively given. I've analogized it to a game of chess and
knowing all of the rules is equivalent to a theory of everything. Knowing how to
play chess well is an entirely different question. But in the case of a theory of
everything, or a unified field theory, if you will, many people also take it to
be an answer to the question, why is there something rather than nothing? And I
don't think that this is, in fact, what a theory of everything is meant to be
either. Now, why is that? Well, because I believe at some level it is impossible for
most of us to imagine an airtight argument, mathematically speaking, which
coaxes out of an absolute void a something. However, there's a different
question which I think might actually animate us and which is the right
question to ask of a potential candidate. And that is, how does one get
everything from almost nothing? In the MC Escher drawing or lithograph, hands
drawing hands or drawing hands, what we see is that the paper is presupposed.
That is, if you could imagine a theory of everything, it would be like saying, if I
posit the paper, can the paper will the ink into being such that the ink gives
rise to the pens and the pens draw the hands, which in fact, manipulate the
pens to use the ink. That kind of a problem is one which is of a very
different character than everything that has gone before. It is also, in my
opinion, an explanation of why the physics community has been stalled for
nearly 50 years since around 1973, when the standard model was intellectually
in place. Now, consider this. We have never had in modern times a drought where no
person working in pure fundamental theory has taken a trip to Stockholm just as a
rough indicator for contributing to the standard model. No one, in my opinion,
since let's see, Frank Wilczek, who was born in 1951, no one born after that
time has in fact contributed to the standard model in a clear and profound
way. That is not to say that no work has been done, but for the most part, the
current generation of physicists has for more than 40 years and almost 50 years
remain stagnant within the standard paradigm of physics, which is positing
theories that are then verified by experiment. Now, my belief, which is
relatively radical, is that there is no way to get to our final destination
using the tools that have gotten us to where we are now. In other words, what
got you here cannot get you there. And in particular, one of the biggest
problems we have is the political economy of science. We have effectively
starved our scientific enterprise for resources, creating a dire and cutthroat
competition, which has completely deranged the scientific tradition. And so one
of the things that's going to happen in this lecture is that I'm simply going
to announce that I have broken and have broken for many years with just about
every expectation of standard science. That is not to say that the equations or
the style of presentation is going to be foreign, quite the contrary. I have every
intention of writing up some results in standard terminology wherever possible
using popular mathematical type setting programs, but it goes far deeper than
this. My belief is that what we've created is a career structure, a journal
structure, an employment structure, an access structure that cannot possibly
complete the job. And why is that? Well, what if in the last leg, in fact, we had
a situation by which an attempt at the fundamental theory would result almost
certainly in career suicide? Now, if you think of that as an explanation, you would
realize that it has the power to synchronize failure across many seemingly
independent experiments. And I believe that that's exactly what's been going on
through the so-called string theory revolutions one, two, and perhaps three.
Now, in that case, what happened was a theory became fixed in the minds of really
the baby boom generation of physicists because it allowed for infinite
elaboration within a mathematical or, more particularly, a geometric context.
And those supposed physicists spent their time submitting papers to what's called
the high energy section of the so-called preprint archive. But in fact, most of
these papers have nothing to do with high energy physics whatsoever. And if you're
looking for the designation, it's HEPTH, high energy physics-theory. Now, if you
look through those papers, they don't seem to have much to do with particles.
They don't seem to have to do with forces and spacetime. They seem to have to do
with very strange and obscure mathematical issues. And in the years since the
string theory program got particularly reanimated, I guess that would be around
1984 with the anomaly cancellation of Green and Schwartz, what you'll find is
that physics became very active and simultaneously ground to a halt. It
failed to remain a physical subject. It became something like a medieval quest
for the number of angels to dance on the head of a pit. Now, in this circumstance,
I think it's very important to realize that this is not a paper, and we are not
submitting to the archive. In fact, the archive requires people who are not
employed at universities to get permission from some member of the
community, which is called an endorsement, which I find absolutely
insulting, and I refuse to go along with. Furthermore, we are expected to cite
papers, sometimes which are behind paywalls. And I think that it's absolutely
immoral to ask people to pay outside the system to read the papers to cite
other people's work. I could go on about the number of things that are currently
wrong with the system, but instead what I would like to do is to simply joyously
I have every intention of simply sharing this with you and jealously guarding my
right to shepherd this through. Now, what does that mean? In two previous episodes,
we've had interactions with academicians, which I think are interesting and bear
scrutiny. In the first case, in an interview with the economist Tyler Cowan,
I talked to Tyler about the fact that the Boschian Commission was in fact
committing economic malpractice. Now, why was that? It was because they decided
that they needed to transfer a trillion dollars over 10 years and that they had
found a devious way of doing it, which is to adjust the CPI. By backing out the
amount of adjustment needed to get a trillion dollars, they decided that a
1.1% overstatement in the CPI would cause a reduction in entitlements, that is
Medicare and Medicaid payments together with Social Security, as well as an
increase in taxes because tax brackets are also indexed. Now, to my mind, it is
absolutely unconscionable to say that you have a right to transfer wealth
cryptically by adjusting a fundamental barometer. That would be like saying, in
order to meet our global warming targets, we have to recalibrate all the
thermometers to show that, in fact, things have cooled. One simply can't do
that in science, but Tyler's response I found was very interesting. His
perspective was that this was, in fact, not a terrible thing because it was
quote, directionally correct. And in general, he believed that because the CPI
should be considered overstated that this was not the world's most terrible
thing to do as an economist. I respect Tyler a great deal and I enjoy his
company, but I have to say that I am absolutely of a different opinion. My
belief is that one has no rights and no ability as a scientist to fudge the data
to meet social goals in this fashion. Another interesting interaction was the
interaction with Professor Agnes Collard of the University of Chicago. Now, when
she listened to episode 19 about Brett Weinstein, she found that it was a very
compelling episode. But strangely, even though the point of the episode was to
surface Brett's long forgotten theory, because Brett had not been acknowledged
as having predicted that laboratory mice would in particular have radically
elongated telomeres, where it was thought that all mice had radically elongated
telomeres, which has incredible potential implications for drug testing and all of
the work that is done on laboratory rodents as model organisms. This is an
episode you should definitely listen to if you haven't already. But Agnes's
perspective was very different than mine. Her feeling was that because we were in
a situation in which the work actually surfaced, that the system worked even if
it was the case that Brett's name was erased from the history of the
development and that his theory was put in a situation in which it was not
able to carry the day because, in fact, there was no record of the fact that a
prediction had been made. Now, I disagreed with Agnes on that program
vociferously. But what I found was that it was very telling. In general, our
academic population has given up on the previous and quaint idea of decency,
proprietary, truth, fairness, because there simply isn't the resource for
everyone. Now, I believe that current science is not necessarily unsalvageable,
but it will be unsalvageable if we don't get the very people that I rail against
far more money. And I know that's very confusing. But my belief is that the
inadequate resources that we have put aside are very similar to the inadequate
masks that we have put aside for our doctors. We have asked some of the
world's most gifted and smartest people to devote their lives to the study of
science and technology. And we have inadequately prepared them. We've put
their lives and their families' lives under incredible pressures. And what I
wish to do is to, in fact, point to the very people who I have been most angry
at for years and say that part of the problem is that we need to take a hard
look at how we've invested in science and technology and give the very people
that I'm most angry at more money. I will explain more about this later, but I
do want to give you an introduction to this episode. What I will be doing is
to screen a very unusual and somewhat awkward lecture at the University of
Oxford. Now, why is it so awkward? Well, first of all, I had left standard
research perhaps 20 years earlier, almost. Further, I'm not a physicist. And I
have only taken one or two courses in the physics major sequence. I think I've
taken one semester of mechanics. And perhaps I took an advanced general
relativity course in college. But in general, no one goes into a theoretical
physics department and attempts to lecture physics physicists on physics.
And why is that? Well, because physics is incredibly demanding. And this is
almost certainly the world's most interesting and most accomplished
intellectual community. These are guys who don't miss a trick. There are so
many things to know and it is such a difficult field that it is effectively
almost impossible to contribute from outside. Chemists don't do it and once
in a blue moon, mathematicians will attempt to talk about actual real
physics. So one thing that you're seeing is a very unusual circumstance where
somebody is trying to figure out how to give their first lecture in a physics
department. And it concerns the possibility of a theory which attempts to
solve the problem of how does a fire light itself. Another thing that you'll
see is that it's relatively difficult to read my handwriting. I'm not going to
make any bones about it. I've been very vocal about having learning differences,
dysgraphia, dyslexia, all sorts of different issues. Symbols come extremely
difficult to me. I don't want to spend this time making excuses. What I do want
to say is the following. I will be attempting to record a short PowerPoint
presentation for after the lecture to say at least some of what some of the
constructions are more clearly. This is not meant to be the actual presentation
of the theory. What this is is an introduction, a down payment and above
all a historical account of what happened seven years ago at the University
of Oxford when I tried to present these ideas. I've talked before about the
twin nuclei problem and our need to get off of this planet. And if we have a
hope of getting off of this planet, it really comes from fundamental physics.
You see 100 years ago or perhaps 105 when Albert Einstein gave us general
relativity. He effectively consigned us for life to the solar system. Why is
that? Well, his model, his geometric model of space and time, effectively
creates a speed limit known as C or the speed of light. Now, there are three
rocks that are at least interesting for habitation by humans, although two of
them are marginal, the moon and Mars. One of them, of course, is unbelievable,
the earth. But I doubt that we're going to be able to steward the earth through
our new godlike powers, which I've called the twin nuclei problem of
cell and atom. We've unlocked the power of both. And I don't think we have the
wisdom to stay all in one place. So the question that I had was, if there is
any ability to escape to the cosmos that we can see in the night sky, where
would it come from? We are almost positive that Albert Einstein's theory of
relativity is in some weird way incomplete. The Schwarzschild singularities
which give us black holes and the initial singularities of the Robertson
Walker Friedman universe, which are associated with the Big Bang, are some
clue that there is some subtle flaw in Einstein's theory. So how to go beyond
Einstein? I mean, what Einstein did to Newton was to recover Newton as a
special case of a more general theory that is more flexible. And in fact, this
is the same problem that we have. Because Albert Einstein's theory is so
fundamental, we effectively begin every theoretical physics seminar with a
statement about spacetime. In other words, Albert Einstein is locked in at the
ground floor. So if we can't get below the ground floor to the foundations, it's
very difficult to make progress. This is one of the things that is making it
almost impossible for us to go beyond the initial revolutions of the 20th
century. Do I know that this new theory, if it works, will allow us to escape? I do
not. There's no one who can say that. And I don't think I have the skills to
develop the physical consequences of the theory, even if the theory turns out to
be mostly right. What I will say is that I think that the theory is the first of
its kind that I've seen. I believe that in part what you will see is that at a
minimum, it is like fool's gold. It appears to explain why we think we see
three generations. But it also says that perhaps they aren't really three
generations of matter. Perhaps there are only two, even though physicists tell us
that there are at least three or perhaps more. I believe that physics tells us
that the universe is chiral, that is left-right asymmetric. But the theory is
itself not chiral. Instead, it chooses to present a different idea, which is that
perhaps chirality is emergent, much the way our hands are individually left-right
asymmetric, as our pinky is not a reflection of our thumb. But the thumb on
each hand is a pairing to the other one, as is the pinky. Now, what does that
mean? It means that if perhaps there is matter and there is force that is
decoupled from our ordinary world, that that matter might restore the parity or
the chirality, rather would break the chirality, and restore parity between
these two halves, the matter we see and the matter that is missing. There are a
good number of other things that happen in the theory. It replaces space-time with
what I've termed an observer's. Now, an observer's is an unusual gadget in that
it's thought of as two separate places where physics takes place, connected by
a map. That means effectively that we are in something like a stadium where there
are stands and there is a pitch, and the playing field that we think we see may
not, in fact, be where most of the action is taking place. In fact, not all of the
fields live on the same space. So when we see waves and particles dancing around,
they may have separate origins in each of the two components of the
observer's. What I hope to do after this is to gracefully and gradually develop
the theory under my leadership. Now, why do I say that? There is a belief in
physics and in most fields that the field should behave in a communal fashion,
and that people should put forward their ideas and other people should joyously
build upon them, and that the community should be allowed to name the various
accomplishments for whoever they say accomplished those things. There's not
a way in hell that I'm letting that happen. My experience with this community
is that it simply can't be trusted to behave equitably given the fact that it
is so resource-starved and constrained. People simply do not have the freedom to
be generous, kind, and accurate as to who did what. Furthermore, there is an
incredible premium on cherry topping. That is, who finished something off is
considered bizarrely much more important than who found something to begin with.
Imagine you located an island and you named the island after the first person
who could plant the flag on the top of the highest peak. This is patently offensive
and ridiculous. There's a story years ago about how Hilbert almost scooped
Einstein by giving the Hilbert action from which Einstein's equations could be
recovered. Really? Not a chance. So, if Hilbert came up with the Hilbert action
and recovered Einstein's equations, so what? I mean, the real theory actually
takes place in Einstein and Grossman before Albert Einstein even works out a
lot of the flaws in the original theory. It's about the ideas. It's not about the
formulas and it's not about racing to the final form. Now, I know that the
community won't agree with that but think about this. What I'm doing is taking an
incredible risk. I'm addressing you here on April Fool's Day and I'm saying that
if there is a fool, it is certainly me because I have sat on this theory for
almost 40 years. Now, I've never known. Is it true? Is it false? It's impossible to
tell when you're only talking to yourself. But in this situation, what I've done
is I've taken a tremendous amount of risk and now I'm trying to share it with
you. Hopefully, I know that, well, Newton did his greatest work when he was
sheltering from a great plague in England and I would like to
think that perhaps, whether or not this is correct, simply the act of somebody
trying earnestly to share hope and some path forward would be uplifting. Now,
under the worst circumstances, if this doesn't work, what do I think? This is a
question I'm asked frequently. And there are two things that I'll say. Many years
ago, around 1987, I put forward some equations that I thought might become my
thesis at the Harvard Department of Mathematics and they were disallowed for
a variety of reasons. Those equations were later discovered in, I believe, 1994
and I sat in a lecture in which I saw these equations go up on a board at the
very end at MIT. And I looked at those equations and I said, huh, those are the
exact equations I was told could never work. Why is the leading physicist in the
world placing them on the board and saying that these are the equations from
which all of something called Donaldson theory can be derived? What I'm giving you,
at least at a minimum, had the ability years earlier to provide those equations
from a different source. There's something called cyber-witten theory, which I
have no claim on. But the actual equations that are called the cyber-witten
equations came originally as an outgrowth from investigations of this
theory. So at a bare minimum, the cyber-witten revolution should have happened
at Harvard rather than Princeton and it should have been recognized that this
theory was capable of at least at a minimum giving birth to that as a side
project. The other thing that I think is incredibly important is that we've
never seen how a universe that looks like ours could possibly emerge from almost
no assumptions whatsoever. And I believe that even if this theory were to turn out
to be wrong, which I don't think is likely, I believe that it would give us
something to go on. We would at least have a first candidate of how a hopeful
theory of everything would look and how it would go wrong. So under any
circumstance, I think that I'm going to be fine if the theory doesn't work out.
I will have at least taken my shot on goal. And I think that that's probably
more than almost anyone can ask from a life to attempt to make contact with the
deepest question that we've ever had, which is what is this place and what
brought it into being? Lastly, I want to just talk about a personal aspect of
this, which is what does it mean to come to an end? Whether or not this theory in
fact does what I claim, I think it does. I don't know. But I do know that sooner or
later in the era of intercontinental land exploration, someone found the last
land mass. And that must have been a very strange moment when there was nothing
left to do. I think whether or not this theory in fact accomplishes that is one
question. But we all have to plan for what it is that we think will happen when
man at last learns his own source code. In fact, this was the last edge question
that I answered for John Brockman, which is, does something unprecedented happen
when man at last learns his own source code? I don't know the answer to this,
but I want to return to the same spirit that I started this one. I was 18 or 19,
which is that of joyous investigation of brave, open-hearted
undertakings. And I also want to bring back a different style of scientific
investigation. There's been far too much communalism. In fact, there is a belief
that there are no lone researchers and that everything is produced by a
community. And pardon my French, but this is absolute horseshit. I have been so
long alone with these principles, equations and ideas that I don't even
know what my adult life will look like once I discord them. And I begin to talk
about them with the community at large. I've talked to many theoretical
physicists who've taken some interest in them, but I've never put out enough to
absolutely ensure that people are seeing what it is that I'm seeing. So whether
or not the April Fool's joke is on me, I cannot tell you, but I can promise you
that I'm not trying to play one on you. What I hope to show you is a lecture
that was the first of three versions of this lecture that were delivered in
Oxford over the course of a week. And one of the things that has held me back
is that I have a great number of people who I have to thank for effectively
being my underground railroad when my career got into serious trouble to make
sure, who made sure that I always had an opportunity to fight another day. And
some of the most important of those people, one of whom occurs on this
video, is Marcus DeSotois. And Marcus, I just wanted to say thank you for your
bravery, your courage, your friendship, and your encouragement. I know I've been
absolutely impossible to you. I've made you wait for this and I just want to say
how much I love you. I also want to thank Isidore Singer for effectively saving
me from not getting a PhD by, I think, putting pressure on the Harvard
Department. And for coming to my assistance, making sure that I got a
postdoc at MIT, despite not having any publications at all. I'd like to thank
Raoul Bot, who's no longer with us, who I should have invited to my wedding. I was
very angry at him, but I didn't realize that he was saving me in a very
difficult situation against a department that probably just wanted to see me gone.
I'd like to thank Peter Thiel, one of my closest friends, who's like a brother to
me, for allowing me these seven years since this lecture to lick my wounds, to
get strong, to have a 401k, to buy a house, and to begin coming back to regular
society after a very difficult and strained career. I'd like to thank Adil
Abdullali and Michael Grossberg, the two greatest best friends from college that
I could have. I'd like to thank my grandfather, Harry Rubin, who believed
in things that couldn't possibly be true and made some of them happen. I'd like
to thank my parents, Karen and Les Weinstein, for all the good things that
they did. I'd like to thank my brother Bret Weinstein and his family, Heather
and the kids, for sticking by me. And I'd like to thank my in-laws in Bombay,
India. I hope you guys are well. And lastly, I would very much like to thank my
wife and my two kids for putting up with a lot of lost weekends, a lot of lost
vacations, and believing that just maybe there was something to this and
sticking by me all these years. So I hope everybody really enjoys this. It may
not be comprehensible. And after this video finishes, I'll do a short
presentation of some of the constructions that took place. Not all of the
equations and things, which I think some of them were sort of botched on the
board because I became disoriented the night before and rearranged things in a
way that probably wasn't optimal. But I'll attempt to clarify these things
going forward and to begin to present the theory as I see whether or not I can
bring myself to once again work on it somewhat close to full-time as a 54-
year-old father of two. So sit back, relax, and coming up next is the first of my
three lectures at Oxford University on Geometric Unity. Be well.
Well, welcome to this special Simone lecture. My name is Mark Stasotoy. I'm a
professor of mathematics here and the Simone Professor for the Public
Understanding of Science. And Charles Simone prepared a manifesto when he
endowed this chair to guide the holder of the professorship in their mission.
And I'd like to read one part of that manifesto to you. It said,
scientific speculation when so labelled and when the concept of speculation and
its place in the scientific method has been made clear to the audience can be
very exciting. It is a very effective communication tool and it is by no
means discouraged. And it is in the spirit of this part of my mission as a
Simone Professor that I would like to introduce today's Simone special
lecture. I first met Eric Weinstein when we were both postdocs at the Hebrew
University just over 20 years ago. And I had the feeling then that he was
working on something big. But it wasn't until two years ago that Eric met me in
a bar in New York and we began he began to explain the mathematics that he'd
been working on in private for the last 20 years. As he took me through the
equations he had been formulating, I began to see emerging before my eyes
potential answers to many of the major problems in physics. It was an
extremely exciting, daring proposal and also mathematically so natural that it
started to work its magic on me. Over the last two years I have had the
privilege of being taken through the twists and turns of Eric's ideas.
After our postdocs in Israel, while I went the academic route getting my
professorship here in Oxford, Eric went a more independent route working in
economics, government and finance. So he comes here today as something of an
insider and an outsider. A difficult place from which to propose bold ideas.
But having spent time seeing how powerful these ideas appear to be, I felt
that it was time that Eric shared his ideas more widely. As I believe his
perspective could give the scientific community a new story to explain some of
the big questions on the scientific books. I'm therefore very happy to provide
a platform here in Oxford for Eric to share his ideas on a new theory he
calls geometric unity. The lecture will be approximately 70 minutes after which
we will have a period to ask questions. Eric.
So it's a great pleasure to be here in Oxford. For those of you who are not
aware, it is possible that no other university in the world has kept so
tightly and kept the faith for so long with Einstein's great vision of a final
theory for physics as a theory of pure geometry. A sort of elegance and
simplicity of the highest order. And the names that are associated with Oxford
that weigh heavy on me are Atia, Penrose, Siegel, Woodhouse, Hitchin. It's a very
long list of people who, even when fashion did not hold those ideas in
favor, always kept the faith that there was much to be learned from the
geometric perspective on physics. Of course, unified field theory in some
sense acquired a stigma with Einstein's failure to find it. And the sense that
even someone like Einstein being tempted by the siren song of geometry
might lose their footing and go astray. And in the years since, we've had a
replacement theory which is that what is really calling our generations is the
quest to quantize general relativity and gravity. And I'd like to go back to
the sort of earlier perspective that there is no evidence to date, in my
mind, that we are being called to quantize general relativity directly. In
fact, there's been more effort spent on that quest without very tangible
results than Einstein spent as one man searching for years for unified field
theory. So we have to, in some sense, begin to undo some of what we think we
know in order to truly reconsider and allow me to put some of these ideas
before you today. Marcus asked me to begin presenting these ideas here. And
hopefully this is a first opportunity, but if the ideas are not good, then
lighting on the aisles will lead you to safety and your exits may be behind you.
But in the event of a good flight, hopefully this will begin a conversation
rather than end one. I feel in some sense that I'm presenting the works of
another man, a younger man, someone who came of age right in the middle of the
great string theory boom with the anomaly cancellation in 1984. And I
look at this work and I see a young person struggling with the idea, why
can't I see that string theory is going to answer all of these questions over
the next 10 years, as we were told at the time. And making a very dangerous
decision, which was, I think I'm not going to follow that particular path and
I'm going to follow another. And it's not clear where this path is going to
lead us, but we're going to explore it today and see as best we can. So in some
sense, I've been able to polish some of that young man's work, but I'm also
struggling to reconstruct it because as someone spending full time on that
theory, he knew a lot of things that I no longer know. So with that as a
beginning, I'm just going to say one disclaimer, which is that this is not a
usual talk. And whatever contract a speaker usually has with the audience,
right now we're going to break that contract. This is a talk about ideas.
Some of these ideas are bold, some of them may offend some people because
there's a sense that you don't have a right to be considering those ideas. But
I go back to the admonition of Jim Watson that said, if you're going to try to
make progress, big progress, you are by definition unqualified to be doing
whatever it is that you're doing. So in that spirit, let us begin. What is
physics to physicists today? How do they see it different from the way in which
we might imagine the layperson sees physics? Ed Whitten was asked this
question in a talk he gave on physics and geometry many years ago, and he
pointed us to three fundamental insights, which were his big three
insights in physics. And they correspond to the three great equations. So the
first one is that somehow physics takes place in an arena. And that arena is a
manifold X together with some kind of semi-Romanian metric structure. Something
that allows us to take length and angle so that we can perform measurements at
every point in this spacetime or higher dimensional structure, leaving us a
little bit of headroom. The equation most associated with this is the Einstein
field equation. And, of course, I've run into the margin. So it says,
that a piece of the Riemann curvature tensor, the Ricci tensor, minus an even
smaller piece, the scalar curvature multiplied by the metric, is equal, or
plus the cosmological constant, is equal to some amount of matter and energy, the
stress energy tensor. So it's intrinsically a curvature equation. The
second fundamental insight, I'm going to begin to start drawing pictures here as
well. So if this is the spacetime manifold, the arena, the second one concerns
symmetry groups, which cannot necessarily be deduced from any structure inside of
the arena. They are additional data that come to us out of the blue without
explanation. And these symmetries form a non-Abelian group, which is currently
SU3 color cross SU2 weak isospin cross U1 weak hypercharge, which breaks down to
SU3 cross U1, where the broken U1 is the electromagnetic symmetry. This equation
is also a curvature equation, the corresponding equation, and it says that
this time the curvature of an auxiliary structure known as a gauge potential, when
differentiated in a particular way, is equal, again, to the amount of stuff in
the system that is not directly involved in the left-hand side of the equation. So
it has many similarities to the above equation. Both involve curvature, one
involves a projection or a series of projections, the other involves a
differential operator. The third point surrounds the matter in the system. And
here we have a Dirac equation, again coupled to a connection. But one of the
great insights is that the reason for the lightness of matter in the natural mass
scale of physics has to do with the fact that this psi really should have two
components, and the differential operator should map to one component on the
other side of the equation, but the mass operator should map to another. And so if
one of the components is missing, if the equation is intrinsically lopsided,
chiral, asymmetric, then the mass term and the differential term have
difficulty interacting, which is sort of overcompensating for the mass scale of
the universe, so you get to a point where you actually have to define a
massless equation, but then just like overshooting a putt, it's easier to knock
it back by putting in a Higgs field in order to generate an as-if fundamental
mass through the Yukawa couplings.
So matter is asymmetric, and therefore light.
And then interestingly, he went on to say one more thing. He said, of course, these
three central observations must be supplemented with the idea that this all
takes place, treated in quantum mechanical fashion or quantum field
theoretic. So it's a bit of an aftermarket modification rather than, in his
opinion at the time, one of the core insights. I actually think that that's in
some sense about right. Now, one of my differences with the community in
some sense is that I question whether the quantum isn't in good enough shape,
that we don't know whether we have a serious quantum mechanical problem or not.
We know that we have a quantum mechanical problem, a quantum field
theoretic problem, relative to the current formulations of these theories, but we
know that in some other cases, the quantum becomes incredibly natural,
sometimes sort of almost magically natural. And we don't know whether the
true theories that we will need to be generalizing, in some sense, have
beautiful quantum mechanical treatments, whereas the effective theories that we're
dealing with now may not survive the quantization. So what I want to do is I
want to imagine a different sort of incompatibility. So let's take our great
three theories and just visually treat them as the vertices of a triangle. So I'm
going to put general relativity in Einstein's formulation, and I'm going to
put the, I probably won't write this again, Yang-Mills, Maxwell, Anderson-Higgs
theory over here, and I'm going to write the Dirac theory. What I want to explore is
the incompatibility is not at the quantum level, but the geometric input. All three
of these are geometric theories. And the question is, what are the
incompatibilities or incompatibilities at the level of geometry before the
theory is treated quantum mechanically? Well, in the case of Einstein's general
relativity, we can rewrite the Einstein theory by saying that there's a projection
map due to Einstein of a curvature tensor, where I'm going to write that
curvature tensor as I would in the Yang-Mills theory. That should be an LC for
Levy-Chavita. So the Einstein projection of the curvature tensor of the Levy-Chavita
connection of the metric on this side, and on this side, I'm going to write down
this differential operator, the adjoint of the exterior derivative coupled to a
connection. And you begin to see that we're missing an opportunity potentially.
What if the FAs were the same in both contexts? Then you're applying two
separate operators, one zero-eth order and destructive in the sense that it
doesn't see the entire curvature tensor. The other inclusive, but a first order.
And so the question is, is there any opportunity to do anything that combines
these two? But the problem is, is that the hallmark of the Yang-Mills theory is
the freedom to choose the data, the internal quantum numbers that give all
the particles their personalities beyond the mass and the spin.
In addition to all of that freedom is some means of taking away some of the
redundancy that comes with that freedom, which is the action of the gauge group.
Now we can allow the gauge group of symmetries to act on both sides of the
equation. But the key problem is that if I act on connections on the right and then
take the Einstein projection, this is not equal to first taking the projection
and then conjugating with the gauge action. So the problem is, is that the projection
is based on the fact that you have a relationship between the intrinsic
geometry, if this is an ad-valued two-form, the two-form portion of this, and the
adjoint portion of this are both associated to the structure group of the
tangent bundle. But the gauge rotation is only acting on one of the two factors,
yet the projection is making use of both of them. So there is a fundamental
incompatibility in the claim that Einstein's theory is a gauge theory
relies more on analogy than on an exact mapping between the two theories. What
about the incompatibilities between the Einstein theory of general relativity and
the Dirac theory of matter? I was very struck that if we're going to try to
quantize gravity and we associate gravity with the spin-to-field g mu nu,
we actually have a pretty serious problem, which is if you think about spinors,
electrons, quarks, as being waves in a medium, and you think about photons as
being waves in a different medium, photons medium does not depend on the
existence of a metric. One forms are defined whether or not a metric is
present. It's spinors or not. So if we are going to take the spin-to g mu nu
field to be quantum mechanical, if it blinks out and does whatever the quantum
does between observations, in the case of the photon, it's saying that the waves
may blink out, but the ocean need not blink out. In the case of the Dirac
theory, it is the ocean, the medium in which the waves live that becomes
uncertain itself. So even if you're comfortable with the quantum, to me,
this becomes a bridge too far. So the question is, how do we liberate the
definition? How do we get the metric out from its responsibilities? It's been
assigned far too many responsibilities. It's responsible for a volume form, for
differential operators, it's responsible for measurement, it's responsible for
being a dynamical field, part of the field content of the system. Lastly, we
have the compatibilities between Yang-Mills and the Dirac theory. These
may be the most mild of the various incompatibilities, but it is an
incompatibility of naturality. Where the Dirac field, Einstein's field, and the
connection fields are all geometrically well motivated, we push a lot of the
artificiality that we do not understand into the potential for the scalar field
that gives everything its mass. So we tend to treat it as something of a
mysterious fudge factor. So the question is, if we have a Higgs field, why is it
here, and why is it geometric? It has long been the most artificial sector of
our models. The proposal that I want to put to you today is that one of the
reasons that we may be having trouble with unification is, is that the duty, our
duty, may be to generalize all three vertices before we can make progress.
That's daunting because in each case it would appear that we can make an
argument that this, that, and the other vertex are the simplest possible theories
that could live at that vertex. We know, for example, the Dirac operator is the
most fundamental of all the elliptic operators in Euclidean signature
generating all of the Tia-Singer theory. We know that Einstein's theory is in
some sense a unique spin to massless field capable of communicating gravity
which can be arrived at from field theoretic rather than geometric
considerations. In the Yang-Mills case it can be argued that the Yang-Mills theory
is the simplest theory that can possibly result. Where we're taking the simplest
Lagrangian in the Einstein case looking only at the scalar curvature, in the
Yang-Mills case we have no substructure, and so we're doing the most simple-minded
thing we can do by taking the norm square of the curvature and saying
whatever the field strength is let's measure that size. So if each one of
these is simplest possible doesn't Occam's razor tell us that if we wish to
remain in geometric field theory that we've already reached bottom and what
we're being asked to do is to abandon this as merely an effective theory? That's
possible and I would say that that in some sense represents a lot of
conventional wisdom. But there are other possibilities. There are other possibilities
that while each of these may be simplest in its category they are not
simplest in their interaction. For example we know that Dirac famously took the
square root of the Klein-Gordon equation to achieve the Dirac equation. He
actually took two square roots one of the differential operator and another of
the algebra on which it acts. But could not could we not do the same thing by
reinterpreting what we saw in Donaldson theory, in Chern-Simon's theory, and
finding that there are first-order equations that imply second-order
equations that are nonlinear and in the curvature? So let's imagine the
following. We replace the standard model with a true second-order theory. We
imagine that general relativity is replaced by a true first-order theory
and then we find that the true second-order theory admits of a square
root and can be linked with the true first-order theory. This would be a
program for some kind of unification of Dirac's type but in the force sector. The
question is does this really make any sense? Are there any possibilities to do
any such thing? So what I'd like to do is I'd like to talk a little bit about
what the geometric unity proposal is. So we have a division into intrinsic theories
and auxiliary theories between physics and mathematics, more specifically
geometry. An intrinsic physical theory would be general relativity. An auxiliary
physical theory would be the Yang-Mills theory with the freedom to choose
internal quantum numbers. At the mathematical level an intrinsic theory
would be, let's be a little fastidious, the older semi-Romanian geometry, a study
of manifolds with length and angle. But auxiliary geometry is really what's
taken off of late since the revolution partially begun at Oxford when
his singer brought insights from Stony Brook to the UK. And so we're going to
call this fiber bundle theory or modern gauge theory. Geometric unity is the
search for some way to break down the walls between these four boxes. What's
natural to one theory is unnatural to another. Semi-Romanian geometry is
dominated by these projection operators as well as the ability to use the
Levy-Chavita connection. Now some aspects of this are less explored. Torsion
tensors are definable in semi-Romanian geometry but they are not used to the
extent that you might imagine. In the case of fiber bundle theory the discovery
of physicists that the gauge group was fantastically important came as
something of a shock to the mathematicians who had missed that structure
and have since exploited it to great effect. So what we'd like to do is we'd
like to come up with some theory that is intrinsic but allows us to play some of
the games that exist in other boxes. How can we try to have our cake
eat it and use all the full suite of techniques that are available to us. So
our perspective is that it is the quantum that may be the comparatively
easy part and that the unification of the geometry which is not occurred may be
what we're being asked to do. So let's try to figure out what would a final
theory even look like. When I was a bit younger I remember reading this question
of Einstein which he said I'm not really interested in some of the details of
physics what really concerns me is whether the creator had any choice in
how the world was constructed. And some people may have read that as a
philosophical statement but I took that as an actual call for a research
program. So I'd like to describe that research program and try to unpack what
I think he was saying. We talk a lot about unification but we hardly ever
actually imagine if we had a unified theory what would it look like. Let us
imagine that we cannot figure out the puzzle of why is there something rather
than nothing. But if we do have a something that that something has as
little structure as possible but still invites us to work mathematically. So to
me the two great theories that we have mathematically and in physics are
calculus and linear algebra. If we have calculus and linear algebra I'm gonna
imagine that we have some manifold at least one of dimension four but it's
not a space time it doesn't have a metric it's not broken down into two
different kinds of coordinates which then have some bleed into each other but
still maintains a distinction it's just some sort of flabby proto space time.
And in the end it's got to fill up with stuff and give us some kind of an
equation. So let me write an equation.
So I have in mind differential operators parameterized by some fields omega which
when composed are not of second order if these are first-order operators but of
zero-width order and some sort of further differential operator saying that
whatever those two operators are in composition is in some sense harmonic. Is
such a program even possible. So if the universe is in fact capable of being the
fire that lights itself is it capable of managing its own flame as well and
closing up. What I'd like to do is to set ourselves an almost impossible task
which is to begin with this little data in a sandbox to use the computer science
concept. So if here's physical reality standard physics is over here we're
going to start with a sandbox and all we're going to put in it is x4 and we're
going to set ourselves a straight-jacketed task of seeing how close we can
come to dragging out a model that looks like the natural world that follows this
trajectory. While it may appear that that is not a particularly smart thing to do I
would like to think that we could agree that it is quite possible that if that
were to be the case we might say that this is what Einstein meant by a creator
which was his anthropomorphic concept for necessity and elegance and design
having no choice in the making of the world. So with that let us begin to think
about what we mean today by geometric unity. GU comes in four flavors but I'm
only getting one shot to do this so I'm going to do the most exciting of them to
me. There's a completely exogenous flavor and what I'm going to do is I'm going to
take the concept of observation and I'm going to break the world into two pieces.
A place where we do our observation and a place where most of the activity takes
place and I'm going to try to do this without loss of generality. So in this
case we have x4 and it can map into some other space and we're going to call this
an Observerse. The idea of an Observerse is a bit like a stadium you have a
playing field and you have stands. They aren't distinct entities they're coupled
and so fundamentally we're going to replace one space with two. Exogenous
model simply means that you is unrestricted although larger than x4 so
any manifold of four dimension higher that is capable of admitting x4 as an
immersion. The next model we have is the bundle
theoretic in which case u sits over x as a fiber bundle. The most exciting which is
the one we'll deal with today is the endogenous model. Where x4 actually
grows the space u where the activity takes place. So we talk about extra
dimensions but these are in some sense not extra dimensions they're implicit
dimensions within x4 and last to proceed without loss of generality we have the
tautological model. In that case x4 equals u and the immersion is the
identity and without loss of generality we simply play our games on one space.
Now we need rules. The rules are no choice of fundamental metric so we
imagine that Einstein was presented with a fork in the road and it's always
disturbing not to follow Einstein's path but we're in fact going to turn
Einstein's game on its head and see if we can get anywhere with that right. It's
also a possibility that because Einstein's theory is so perfect that if
there's anything wrong with it it's very hard to unthink it because
everything is built on top of it. So let's make no choice of fundamental metric
and in fact let's go more ambitious and let's say we're going to reverse the
logic of Einstein. Einstein the metric is fundamental but the Levy-Chavita
connection from which we deduce the curvature is emergent. So the
fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry is that every metric causes
a connection to emerge and then the curvature is built on the connection.
We turn this around we imagine we're looking for a connection and we wish it
to build a metric because connections are amenable to quantization in a way
that metrics are not. The next point is that we always want to have a plan to
return to finite dimensions without losing sight of the quantum and lastly
we want to liberate matter from its dependence on the metric for its very
existence. So we now need to build fermions onto our four-dimensional
manifold in some way without ever choosing a metric if we're even to have
any hope of playing a game involving matter starting from this perspective of
no information other than the most bare information. Let's get started. We take
x4. We need metrics we have none. We're not allowed to choose one so we do the
standard trick is we choose them all. So we allow u14 to equal the space of
metrics on x4 point-wise. Therefore if we propagate on top of this, let me call
this the projection operator, if we propagate on u14 we are in some sense
following a Feynman-like idea of propagating over the space of all
metrics but not at a field level at a point-wise, tensorial level. Is there a
metric on u14? Well we both want one and don't want one. If we had a metric from
the space of all metrics we could define fermions but we would also lock out any
ability to do dynamics. We want some choice over what this metric is but we
don't want full choice because we want enough to be able to define the matter
fields to begin with. It turns out that if this is x4 and this is this
particular endogenous choice of u14, we have a ten-dimensional metric along the
fibers. So we have a g10 mu nu. Further for every point in the fibers we get a
metric downstairs on the base space. So if we pull back the cotangent bundle, we
get a metric g4 mu nu on pi star of the cotangent bundle of x. We now define the
chimeric bundle. And the chimeric bundle is the direct sum of the vertical
tangent bundle along the fibers with the pullback, which we're going to call the
horizontal bundle, from the base space. So the chimeric bundle is going to be the
vertical tangent space of ten dimensions to u, direct sum, the four-dimensional
cotangent space, which we're going to call horizontal to u. And the great thing
about the chimeric bundle is that it has an a priori metric. It's got a metrics on
the four, a metric on the ten, and we can always decide that the two of them are
naturally perpendicular to each other. Furthermore, it is almost canonically
isomorphic to the tangent bundle or the cotangent bundle because we either have
four out of fourteen or ten out of fourteen dimensions on the nose. So the
question is, what are we missing? And the answer is that we're missing exactly the
data of a connection. So this bundle, chimeric, c, we have c is equal to the
tangent bundle of u up to a choice of a connection theta. And this is exactly what
we wanted. We have a situation where we have some field on the manifold x in the
form of a connection, which is amenable, more friendly to quantization, which is
now determining a metric, turning around the Levy-Chivita game. And the only
problem is, is that we've had to buy ourselves into a different space than the
one we thought we wanted to work on. But now, as theta changes, the fermions are
defined on the chimeric bundle, and it's the isomorphism from the chimeric bundle
to the tangent bundle of the space u, which is varying, which means that the
fermions no longer depend on the metric, they no longer depend on the theta
connection. They are there if things go quantum mechanical. And we've achieved our
objective of putting the matter fields and the spin one fields on something of the
same footing. But, and I want to emphasize this, one thing most of us, we think a lot
about final theories and about unification. But until you actually start
daring to try to do it, you don't realize what the process of it feels like. Now,
try to imagine conducting your life where you have no children, let's say, and no
philanthropic urges. What you want to do is you want to use all of your money for
yourself and die penniless, right, like a perfect finish. Assuming that that's what
you wanted to do, it would be pretty nerve-wracking at the end, right? How many
days left do I have? How many dollars left do I have? This is the process of
unification in physics. You start giving away all of your most valuable
possessions. And you don't know whether you've given them away too early, whether
you've husband them too long. And so in this process, what we've just done is
we've started to paint ourselves into a corner. We got something we wanted, but
we've given away freedom. We're now dealing with a 14-dimensional world.
So let me just sum this up by saying, between fundamental and emergent, standard
model and GR. Let's do GR. Fundamental is the metric. Emergent is the
connection. Here in GU, it is the connection that's fundamental and the
metric that's emergent. In the next unit of GU, so this is sort of the first
unit of GU. Are there any quick questions happening to do with confusion or may I
proceed to the next unit? Okay. The next unit of GU is the unified field content.
What does it mean for our fields to become unified? There are, in fact, only at
this moment two fields that know about X. Theta, which is the connection that we've
just talked about, and a section, sigma, that takes us back so that we can
communicate back and forth between U and X. We now need field content that only
knows about U, which now has a metric depending on theta. A particular member
of the audience is a hedge fund manager who taught me that there is something of
a universal trade, and a universal trade has four components. You have to have a
view, you have to have a trade expression, you have to be able to calculate your
cost of carry, and you need a catalyst. Our view is going to be that somebody
doesn't understand what trade is possible, and we're going to make a trade that
looks like one of the worst trades of all time, and hopefully, if we have enough
conviction, we're going to have a catalyst to show that we actually got the
better part of the deal. What is that trade? What is it that we think has been
blocking progress? In GR, the Ramanian geometry, as we've said, we have the
projection operators, and we also have the Levy-Chavita connection. In the
auxiliary theory, we have freedom to choose our field content, and we have the
ability to get rid of much excess through the symmetries of the gauge group. We
are going to take particle theory, and we're going to make a bad trade, or what
appears to be a bad trade, which is that we are going to give away the freedom to
choose our field content, which is already extremely, as I think I said in the
abstract, baroque, with all of the different particle properties, and we're
going to lose the ability to use the gauge group because we're going to trade it
all. You have the family cow, and you have some magic beans. So it's now time to
trade the family cow for the magic beans and bring them home and see whether or
not we got the better of the deal. Okay. What is it that we get for the Levy-Chavita
connection? Well, not much. One thing we get is that normally the space of
connections is an affine space, not a vector space, but an affine space, almost a
vector space, a vector space up to a choice of origin. But with the Levy-Chavita
connection, rather than having an infinite plane with an ability to take
differences, but no real ability to have a group structure, you pick out one point
which then becomes the origin. That means that any connection A has a torsion
tensor A, which is equal to the connection minus the Levy-Chavita connection. So we
get a tensor that we don't usually have. Gauge potentials are not usually well
defined, they're only defined up to a choice of gauge. So that's one of the
things we get for our Levy-Chavita connection, but because the gauge group is
going to go missing, this has terrible properties with respect to the gauge
group. It almost looks like a representation, but in fact, if we let the
gauge group act, there's going to be an affine shift. Furthermore, as we've said
before, the ability to use projection operators together with the gauge group
is frustrated by virtue of the fact that these two things do not commute with
each other. So now the question is, how are we going to prove that we're
actually making a good trade? Okay. First thing we need to do is that we still
have the right to choose intrinsic field content. We have an intrinsic field
theory. So if you consider the structure bundle of the spinners, we built the
chimeric bundle, so we can define Dirac spinners on the chimeric bundle. If we're
in Euclidean signature, a 14-dimensional manifold has Dirac spinners of dimension
2 to the dimension of the space divided by 2. So 2 to the 14 over 2, 2 to the
7th is 128. So we have a map into a structure group of U128. At least in
Euclidean signature, we can get to mixed signatures later. From that, we can form
the associated bundle and sections of this bundle are either, depending upon how
you want to think about it, the gauge group H, or C, a space of sigma fields,
nonlinear. There's no reason that we can't choose this as field content. Again,
we're being led by the nose like a bull. If we want to make use of the symmetries of
the theory, we have to promote some symmetry to being part of the theory, and we
have to let it be subjected to dynamical laws. We're going to lose control over it.
But we're not dead yet, right? We're fighting for our life to make sure that
this trade has some hope. So potentially, by including symmetries as field content,
we will have some opportunity to make use of the projection. So for those of you
who... So when I was thinking about this, I used to be amazed by ships and bottles.
I must confess that I never figured out what the trick was for ships and bottles.
But once I saw it, I remembered thinking, that's really clever. So if you've never seen it,
you have a ship which is like a curvature tensor. And imagine that the mast is the
Ricci curvature. If you just try to shove it into the bottle, you're undoubtedly going
to snap the mast. So you imagine that you've transformed your gauge fields, you've kept
track of where the Ricci curvature was, you try to push it from one space like ad-valued
two forms into another space like ad-valued one forms where connections live. That's
not a good idea. Instead, what we do is the following. Imagine that you're carrying around
group theoretic information. What you do is you do a transformation based on the group
theory. So you lower the mast, you push it through the neck, having some string attached
to the mast, and then you undo the transformation on the other side. This is exactly what we're
going to hope is going to save us in this bad trade that we've made. Because we're going
to add field content that has the ability to lower the mast and bring the mast back
up, we're going to hope to have a theory which is going to create a commutative situation.
But then once we've had this idea, we start to get a little bolder. Let's think about
unified content. We know that we want a space of connections, A, for our field theory. But
we know because we have a Levy-Chevita connection that this is going to be equal on the nose
to ad-valued one forms as a vector space. The gauge group represents an ad-valued one
forms. So if we also have the gauge group, but we think of that instead as a space of
sigma fields, what if we take the semi-direct product at a group theoretic level between
the two and call this our group of interest? Well, by analogy, we've always had a problem
with the Poincare group being too intrinsically tied to rigid, flat Minkowski space. What
if we wanted to do quantum field theory in some situation, which was more amenable to
a curved space situation? It's possible that we should be basing it around something more
akin to the gauge group. And in this case, we're mimicking the construction where XC
here would be analogous to the Lorenz group, fixing a point in Minkowski space. And ad-valued
one forms would be analogous to the four momentums. We take in the semi-direct product to create
the inhomogeneous Lorenz group, otherwise known as the Poincare group, or rather it's
double cover to allow spin. So we're going to call this the inhomogeneous gauge group
or Iggy. And this is going to be a really interesting space because it has a couple of properties.
One is it has a very interesting subgroup. Now, of course, H includes into G by just
including onto the first factor. But in fact, there's a more interesting homomorphism brought
to you by the Levy-Civita connection. So this magic beam trade is going to start to enter
more and more into our consciousness. If I take an element H, and I map that in the
obvious way into the first factor, but I map it onto the Morro-Cartain form, I think that's
what I wish I remembered more of this stuff, into the second factor, it turns out that
this is actually a group homomorphism. And so we have a non-trivial embedding, which
is in some sense diagonal between the two factors. That subgroup we are going to refer
to as the tilted gauge group. And now our field content, at least in the Bosonic sector,
is going to be a group manifold, an infinite dimensional function space league group, but
a group nonetheless. And we can now look at G mod the tilted gauge group. And if we have
any interesting representation of H, we can form homogeneous vector bundles and work with
induced representations. And that's what the fermions are going to be. So the fermions
in our theories are going to be H modules. And the idea is that we're going to work
with vector bundles, curly E, of the form inhomogeneous gauge group, product it over
the tilted gauge group. And we're going to work with vector bundles, curly E, of the
form inhomogeneous gauge group. Now just as in the finite dimensional case, we have
a linear and a nonlinear component. Right? Because at a topological level, this is just
a Cartian product. So if we wish to take products of fermions, of spinorial fields,
we have a place to accept them. We can't figure out necessarily how to map them into
the nonlinear sector, but we don't want to. So just the way when we look at supersymmetry,
we can take products of the spin one-half fields and map them into the linear sector.
We can do the same thing here. So what we're talking about is something like a supersymmetric
extension of the inhomogeneous gauge group analogous to supersymmetric extensions of
the double cover of the inhomogeneous Lorentz or Poincare group. Further, because this construction
is at the level of groups, we've left a slot on the left-hand side on which to act. So
for example, if we want to take regular representations on the group, we can act by the group G on
the left-hand side because we're allowing the tilted gauge group to act on the right-hand
side. So it's perfectly built for representation theory. And if you think back to Wigner's classification
and the concept that a particle should correspond to an irreducible representation of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group, we may be able to play the same games here up to the issue of infinite dimensionality.
So right now our field content is looking pretty good. It's looking unified in the sense
that it has an algebraic structure that is not usually enjoyed by field content, and
field content from different sectors can interact and know about each other, provided
we can drag something out of this with meaning. Now, what would it mean to be able to use
a gauge group in an intrinsic theory like this? We would be talking about something like
an action, let's say a first order action, and it would take the group G, let's say to
the real numbers, invariant, not under the full group, but under the tilted gauge subgroup.
And now the question is, do we have any such actions that are particularly nice, and could
we recognize them the way Einstein did by trying to write down not the action, and Hilbert
was the first one to write that down, but I always feel defensive because I think Einstein
and Grossman did so much more to begin the theory in that the Lagrangian that got written
down was really just an inevitability. So just humor me for this talk and let me call it
the Einstein-Grossman Lagrangian. Hilbert has certainly done fantastic things and has
a lot of credit elsewhere, and he did do it first. But here what we had was that Einstein
thought in terms of the differential of the action, not the action itself. So what we're
looking for is equations of motion where some field alpha, where alpha belongs to the one
forms on the group. Now in this section of GU, unified field content is only one part
of it, but what we really want is unified field content plus a tool kit. So what we
want is a tool kit. So we've restricted ourselves to one gauge group. This big unitary group
on the spinners using whatever sort of inner product naturally exists on the spinners,
and not spinners value in an auxiliary structure, but intrinsic spinners. The tool kit that
we have is that the adjoint bundle, the adjoint bundle, the adjoint bundle, the adjoint bundle
bundle, looks like the Clifford algebra at the level of vector spaces, which is just
looking like the exterior algebra on the chimeric bundle. That means that it's graded
by degrees. Chimeric bundle has dimension 14, so there's a 0 part, a 1 part, a 2 part
all the way up to 14. Plus we have forms in the manifold. So the question is, if I want
to look at omega i valued in the adjoint bundle, there's going to be some element phi i, which
is pure trace, right? Because it's the same representations appearing where in the usually
auxiliary directions as well as the geometric directions. So we get an entire suite of
invariants together with trivially associated invariants that come from using the hodge star
operator on the form. So I'm just going to call them for completeness. I'm not going
to deal with them. Now this is a tremendous amount of freedom that we've just gained.
Normally we keep losing freedom, but this is the first time we actually begin to see
that we have a lot of freedom, and we're going to actually retain some of this freedom to
the end of the talk. But the idea being that I can now start to define operators, which
correspond to the ship and the bottle problem. I can take field content, epsilon and pi, where
epsilon, where these are elements of the inhomogeneous gauge group. In other words,
epsilon is a gauge transformation, and pi is a gauge potential. And I can start to define
operators. I'm going to use, so in this case I'm going to define operators, and I'm going
to define operators. In this case, if I have a phi, which is one of these invariants, in
the form piece I can either take a contraction, or I can take a wedge product. In the Lie
algebra piece I can either take a Lie product, or because I'm looking at the unitary group
there's a second possibility, which is I can multiply everything by i and go from skew
her mission to her mission, and take a Jordan product using anti-commutators rather than
commutators. So I actually have a fair amount of freedom, and I'm going to use a magic bracket
notation, which in whatever situation I'm looking for knows what it wants to be. Does
it want to do contraction? Does it want to do wedge product, Lie product, Jordan product?
But the point is I now have a suite of ways of moving forms around. So for example, I
can define a shear of operator that takes i forms, and I can define a shear of operator
valued in the adjoint bundle. To much higher degree forms valued in the adjoint bundle.
So in this case, for example, it would take a two form to a d minus three plus two, or
a d minus one form. So curvature is an ad-valued two form. And if I had such a she-ab operator,
it would take ad-valued two forms to ad-valued d minus one forms, which is exactly the right
space to be an alpha coming from the derivative of an action. And this is exactly what Einstein
was doing. He took the curvature, which was large, and he bent it back, and he sheared
off the vial curvature, and they took that part, and he pushed it back along the space
of metrics to give us something which we nowadays call Ricci flow, an ability for the curvature
to direct us to the next structure. Well, we're doing the same thing here. We're taking
the curvature, and we can now push it back onto the space of connections.
So in this case, the idea is that we've actually got something for our magic beans. We have
an ability now to get equations of motion, which go along the group in some sense. It's
as if it was a gradient vector field, except we're using forms rather than vectors. But
now, what are the transformation properties? Well, because the curvature, so you have she-ab,
because the curvature of a connection, hit by a gauge transformation, is equal on the
nose to the adjoin action on the Lie algebra of the curvature, we know that if we have
two possible actions of conjugation under a bracket, and the bracket respects the action
of the gauge group, we know that this is going to be well preserved. In other words, we're
going to get a form that is gauge invariant relative to the tilted gauge group. And so
as a result, we now have the possibility for equations of motion, which are well defined,
even though they involve projection operators, because we've built the symmetries into the
theory and we're working on a group manifold to begin with. What about the torsion? Can
we rescue the torsion? Here again, we have good news. The torsion is problematic, but
if I look at a different field, which I'm going to call the augmented torsion, and I
define it to be the regular torsion, which would be pi, minus this expression, this turns
out to be beautifully invariant again. So neither this term nor this term is gauge
invariant, but they fail to be gauge invariant in exactly the same way. So an important principle
of life, which I took too long to realize, is that if you have one disease, you're in
real trouble. But if you have two diseases, you always have the possibility of having
one disease kill the other disease. This is true in renormalization theory, it's true
in black-scholes theory, it's true all over the place. So what we have here is we've got
more diseases into the theory, but an even number of diseases allow us to have no disease
at all. So now we have two great tensors. We've got one tensor coming from the curvature
and the Shiav operator, we have another tensor coming from the torsion and it's augmentation.
We're doing okay.
We're not doing physics yet, we're just building tools. We've built ourselves a little bit
of freedom, we have some reprieves, we've still got some very big debts to pay back for this
magic beans trade. We're in the wrong dimension, we don't have good field content, we're stuck
on this one spinner, we've built ourselves some projection operators, we've picked up
some symmetric non-linear sigma field. What can we write down in terms of equations of
motion? Let's start with Einstein's concept. If we do Shiav of the curvature tensor of
a gauge potential hit with an operator defined by the epsilon sigma field, it's going to
be 0, plus the star operator acting on the augmented torsion of the pair. This contains
all of the information when pi is 0 in Einstein's tensor. In other words, there is a spinorial
analog of the vial curvature, a spinorial analog of the traceless Ricci curvature and
a spinorial analog of the scalar curvature. This operator should shear off the analog
of the vial curvature just the way Einstein's projection shears off the vial curvature when
you're looking at the tangent bundle. This term, which is now gauge invariant, may be
considered as containing a piece that looks like lambda times g mu nu, or a cosmological
constant. This piece here can be made to contain a piece that looks like Einstein's tensor,
and so this looks very much like the vacuum field equation. We have to add in something
else. I'm going to be a little bit vague because I'm still giving myself some freedom as we
write this up. But we're going to define whatever tensor we need for these terms here. This is
gauge invariant, this is gauge invariant, and this is gauge invariant with respect to
the tilted gauge group. These two tensors together should be exact, and this tensor on
its own should be exact. We're going to call the exact tensor the swerveture. So the particular
Chiav operator we call the swerve, so it's swerve curvature plus the adjustment needed
for exactness, and another gauge invariant term which is not usually gauge invariant.
So that's pretty cool. If that works, we've now taken the Einstein equation, and we've
put it not on the space of metrics, but we've put a generalization and an analog on the
space of gauge potentials much more amenable to quantization with much more algebraic structure
and symmetry in the form of the inhomogeneous gauge group and its homogeneous vector bundles,
some of which may be super symmetric. Now the question is, we've integrated so tightly
with the matter field, we have to ask ourselves the question, can we see unification here?
Let's define matter content in the form of omega zero tensored in the spinners, which
is a fancy way of saying spinners. Together with a copy of the one forms tensored in the
spinners. And let me come up with two other copies of the same data.
So I'll make a d minus one just by duality, so imagine that there's a hodge star operator.
And when I was a little kid, I had the soma cube. I don't know if you ever played with
one of these things, they're fantastic. And I later found out that this guy who invented
the soma cube, which you had to put together pieces, there was one piece that looked like
this object. And he was like this amazing guy in the resistance during World War II.
So I would like to name this the somatic complex, after I guess his name was Piet Hein, I think.
So this complex, I'm going to choose to start filling in some operators. The exterior derivative
coupled to a connection, but in the case of spinners, we're going to put a slash through
and let's make this the identity. We'd now like to come up with a second operator here.
And this second operator here should have the property that the complex should be exact
and the obstruction to it being a true complex, to nil potency, should be exactly the generalization
of the Einstein equations, thus unifying the spinorial matter with the nil potency.
The intrinsic replacement for the curvature equations.
Well, we know that DA, composed with itself, is going to be the curvature. And we know
that we want that to be hit by a shiav operator. And if shiav is a derivation, you can start
to see that that's going to be curvature, so you want something like fA followed by
shiav over here to cancel. Then you think, okay, well how am I going to get at getting
this augmented torsion? And then you realize that the information in the inhomogeneous
gauge group, you actually have information not for one connection, but for two connections.
So in one case, I can do plus star to pick up the A sub pi, but I'm also going to have
a derivative operator if I just do a star operation. So I need another derivative operator
to kill it off here. So I'm going to take minus the derivative with respect to the connection
H inverse DA naught H, which defines the connection one form as well as having the same derivative
coming from the Levy-Civita connection on U. So in other words, I have two derivative
operators here. I have two ad-valued one forms. The difference between them is going to be
of zero with order, and it's going to be precisely the augmented torsion. That's the same game
I'm going to repeat here. So I'm going to do the same thing here. I'm going to define
a bunch of terms where in the numerator I'm going to pick up the pi as well as the derivative
in the denominator because I have no derivative here. I'm going to pick up this H inverse
DA naught H. I'm going to do that again on the other side. There are going to be plus
and minus signs, but it's a magic bracket that knows whether or not it should be a plus
sign or a minus sign. I apologize for that, but I'm not able to keep that straight. And
then there's going to be one extra term where all these T's have the epsilon and pi. So
some crazy series of differential operators on the northern route. So if you take the
high road or you take the low road, when you take the composition of the two, the differential
operators fall out, and you're left with an obstruction term that looks like the Einstein
field equation. That's pretty good, if true. Can you go farther? Well, look at how close
this field content is to the picture from deformation theory that we learned about in low-dimensions.
The low-dimensional world works by saying that similar to what we learned in the previous
lecture, we're going to look at what we learned in the previous lecture. We're going to look
atalities mapped to field content, mapped to equations, usually in the curvature. And
when you linearize that, if you're in low enough dimensions, you have omega 0, omega
1, sometimes omega 0 again, and then something that comes from omega 2. And if you can get
that sequence to terminate by looking at something like a half signature theorem or a bent back
diram complex in the case of dimension three,
you have an Atia-Singer theory.
And remember, we need some way to get out
of infinite dimensional trouble.
You have to have someone to call when things go wrong
overseas and you have to be able to get your way home.
And in some sense, we call an Atia-Singer
and say we're in some infinite dimensional space.
Can't you cut out some finite dimensional problem
that we can solve even though we start getting ourselves
into serious trouble?
And so we're going to do the same thing down here.
We're going to have omega 0 add, omega 1 add, direct sum,
omega 0 add, omega d minus 1 add.
And it's almost the same operators.
And this is now not just a great guess.
It's actually the information for the deformation theory
of the linearized replacement of the Einstein field
equations.
So this is computing the Zyrowski tangent space,
just as if you were doing self-dual theory,
or churn-Simon's theory.
You've got two somatic complexes, right?
One of them is Bose.
One of them is Fermi.
The obstruction to both of them is a common generalization
of the Einstein field equations.
What's more is if you start to think about this,
this is some version of Hodg's theory with funky operators.
So you can ask yourself, well, what are the harmonic forms
in a fractional spin context?
Well, they're different depending upon whether you
take the degree 0 piece together with the degree 2 piece,
or you take the degree 1 piece.
Let's just take the degree 1 piece.
You get some kind of equation.
So I'm going to decide that I have a zeta field, which is an
omega 1 tensor spinors, and a field new, which is a zeta
spinors, and a field new, which always strikes me as a
Yiddish field, new is omega 0 tensor S. What equation would
they solve if we were doing Hodg's theory relative to
this complex?
The equation would look something like this.
There'd be one equation that was very simple, and then
there'd be one equation that would be like really hard to
guess.
I hope I'm not screwing this up.
But all these boards, I still feel like I'm
managing to run out of room.
Now, if you have something like that, that would be a
hell of a Dirac equation.
You've got differential operators over here.
You've got differential operators.
I guess I didn't write them in.
But you would have two differential operators over
here, and you'd have this differential operator coming
from this more cartain form.
So I apologize on being a little loose here.
But the idea is you have two of these terms of 0th order,
three of these terms would be first order.
And on this side, one term would be first order.
And that's not there.
That was a mistake.
Oh, no, sorry.
That was a mistake, calling it a mistake.
These are two separate equations.
So you have two separate fields, new in zeta.
And you have a couple set of differential equations that are
playing the role of the Dirac theory.
Coming from the Hodge theory of a complex whose
obstruction to being a cosmology theory would be the
replacement to the Einstein field equations, which would be
rendered gauge invariant on a group relative to a tilted
subgroup.
OK.
So now we've dealt with two of the three sectors.
Is there any generalization of the Yang-Mills equation?
Well, if we were to take the Einstein field equation
generalization and take the norm square of it, oh, there's
some point I should make here, just one second.
I've been treating this as if everything is first order.
But what really happens here is that you've got symmetries,
you've got symmetric field content, you've got ordinary
connections, and we're neglecting to draw the fact
that there have to be equations here, too.
These equations are first order.
So why do we get to call this a first order theory if there
are equations here which are of second order?
Well, it's not a pure first order theory.
But when I say a first order theory in this context, what I
really mean is that the second order equations are
completely redundant on the first order equations by
virtue of the symmetry principle.
That is, any solution of the first order equations should
automatically imply a solution of the second order equations.
So from that perspective, I can pretend that this isn't here
because it is sufficient to solve the first order equations.
So I can now look, let's call that entire replacement, which
we previously called alpha.
I'm going to set alpha equal to epsilon because I've actually
been using epsilon.
The portion that is just the first order equations, and take
the normed square of that, that gives me a new Lagrangian.
And if I solve that new Lagrangian, it leads to
equations of motion that look like exactly what we said before.
And it ends up defining an operator that looks
something like this.
dA star, the adjoint of the Shiav operator.
So in other words, this piece gives you some portion that
looks like, right, from the Swarovitcher tensor.
There's going to be some component that's playing the
role of Einstein's field equations directly in the
Ricci tensor, but generalized.
And then you're going to have some differential operator
here so that the replacement for the Yang-Mills term, instead
of dA star of fA, you've got these two Shiav and adjoint
Shiav together in the center, generalizing the
Yang-Mills theory.
Then you say, well, how come we don't just see the
Yang-Mills theory?
Why don't we see general relativity as well?
But in the full expansion, there's also a term that's
zero at the order that's effectively acting like the
identity, which hits this as well.
So you have one piece that looks like the Yang-Mills
theory, and in these second order equations, you also
have a piece that looks like the Einstein theory.
And this is in the vacuum equations.
So then the question is, how do you see the Dirac theory
coming out of this?
And so what we're just trying to put together now before we
come out with the manuscript for this is putting these two
elliptic complexes together, the Dirac terms, go between the
two complexes.
So the idea is that the stress energy tensor should be the
up and back term, and the Dirac equations should come out
of the term that goes up and over versus the term that goes
over and up.
And you need some cancellations to make sure that
everything is of zero with order,
properly invariant, et cetera.
And that's taking a little time, because frankly, I'm not
good at keeping track of indices, minus
signs, left, right.
It's a learning-disabled nightmare.
We've got one more unit to go.
I mean, there's a fifth unit that has to do with
mathematical applications, but this is sort of a physics
talk for today.
Is there any questions before we go into the last unit and
then really handle questions for real?
All right, let me show you the next little bit.
We've got problems.
We're not in four dimensions, we're in 14.
We don't have great field content, because we've just
got these unadorned spinners, and we're doing gauge
transformations effectively on the intrinsic geometric
quantities, not on some safe auxiliary data that's
tensor-producted with what our spinners are.
How is it that we're going to find anything realistic?
And then we have to remember, everything we've been doing
recently has been done on you.
We've forgotten about x.
How does all of this look to x?
So x is sitting down here, and all the action is
happening up here on u14.
There's a projection operator.
I've used pi twice.
It's not here in the field content, it's just projection.
And I've got a sigma, which is a section.
What does zeta pulled back or nu pulled back look like on
x4?
Let's try to think about how we would come up with this field
content, starting from first principle.
Let's imagine that there's nothing to begin with.
Then you have one copy of matter, whatever it is that we
see in our world, the first generation.
In order for that to become interesting, it has to have an
equation, so it has to get mapped somewhere.
Then we see the muon and all the rest of the matter that
comes with it, and we have a second generation.
Then in the mid-1970s, Pearl finds the tau particle, and we
start to get panicked that we don't
understand what's going on.
One thing we can do is we can move these equations around
a little bit, and move the equation for the first
generation back.
And then we can start adding particles.
Let's imagine that we could guess what
particles we'd add.
We'd add a pseudo generation of 16 particles, spin three halves
never before seen, not necessarily super partners,
but we read a Schwinger matter with familiar internal quantum
numbers, but potentially so that they're flipped, so that
matter looks like anti-matter to this generation.
Then we add, just for the heck of it, 144 spin one-half
fermions, which contain a bunch of particles with
familiar quantum numbers, but also some very exotic looking
particles that nobody's ever seen before.
Now we start doing something different.
We make an accusation.
One of our generations isn't a regular generation.
It's an imposter.
At low energy in a cooled state, potentially it looks just
the same as these other generations.
But were we somehow able to turn up the energy?
Imagine that it would unify differently with this new
matter that we've posited, rather than simply unifying
onto itself.
So two of the generations would unify onto themselves, but
this third generation would fuse with the new particles
that we've already added.
We consolidate geometrically.
We can add some zero-eth order terms.
And we imagine that there is an elliptic complex that would
govern this state of affairs.
We then choose to add some stuff that we can't see at all,
that's dark.
And this matter would be governed by forces that were
dark, too.
There might be dark electromagnetism, and dark
strong, and dark weak.
It might be that things break in that sector completely
differently.
And it doesn't break down to an SU3 cross SU2 cross U1,
because these are different SU3s, SU2s, and U1s.
And it may be that there would be a high-energy SU5, or
some patissalaam model.
Imagine then that chirality was not fundamental, but it was
emergent, that you had some complex.
And as long as there were cross terms, these two halves
would talk to each other.
But if the cross terms went away, the two terms would
become decoupled.
And just the way we have a left hand and we have a right
hand, and you ask me, imagine you have a neurological
condition and an oliver sac, sort of an idiom, and if
somebody's only aware of one side of their body, and they
say, oh my god, I'm deformed.
I'm asymmetric.
But we actually have a symmetry between the two
things that can't see each other.
Then we would still have a chiral world, but the
chirality wouldn't be fundamental.
There'd be something else keeping the fermions light.
And that would be the absence of the cross terms.
Now, if you look at what happens in our replacement for
the Einstein field equations, the term that would
counterbalance the scalar curvature.
If you put these equations on a sphere, they wouldn't be
satisfied if the t term had a zero expectation value, because
there would be non-trivial scalar curvature in the
swervature terms, but there'd be nothing to counterbalance it.
So it's fundamentally the scalar curvature that would
coax the VEV on the augmented torsion out of the vacuum to
have a non-zero level.
And if you pumped up that sphere and it smeared out the
curvature, which you can't get rid of because of topological
considerations, let's say from Chernvet theory, you would
have a very diffuse, very small term.
And that term would be the term that was playing the role of
the cosmological constant.
So in a large universe, you'd have a curvature that was
spread out, and things would be very light, and things would
get very dark due to the absence of curvature
linking the sectors.
And that turns out to be exactly our complex.
So in other words, just to recap, starting with nothing
other than a four-man fold, we built a bundle U. The bundle
U had no metric, but it almost had a metric.
It had a metric up to a connection.
There was another bundle on top of that bundle called the
chimeric bundle.
The chimeric bundle had an intrinsic metric.
We built our spinners on that.
We restricted ourselves to those spinners.
We moved most of our attention to the emergent metric on U14,
which gave us a map between the chimeric bundle and the
tangent bundle of U14.
We built a toolkit allowing us to choose symmetric field
content, to define equations of motion on the cotangent space
of that field content, to form a homogeneous vector bundle
with the fermions, to come up with unifications of the
Einstein field equations, Yang-Mills equations, and
Dirac equations.
We then broke those things apart under decomposition,
pulling things back from U14, and we found a three-generation
model where nothing has been put in by hand.
And we have a 10-dimensional normal component, which looks
like the spin-10 theory.
I can tell you where there are problems in this story.
I can tell you that when we moved from Euclidean metric
to Minkowski metric, we seemed to be off by a sign somewhere,
or I could be mistaken.
I could tell you that the propagation in 14 dimensions
has to be worked out so that we would be fooled into thinking
we were in a four-dimensional world.
There are lots of things to ask about this theory.
But I find it remarkable that tying our hands, we find
ourselves with new equations, unifications, and three
generations, in a way that seems surprisingly rich,
certainly unexpected, and I think I'll stop there.
Thank you very much for your time.
So thanks for watching that video.
What I thought I would do, since that was the first time I'd
really presented the theory at all in public.
And I'd gotten somewhat turned around on my trip to England
and trying probably stupidly to do last minute corrections,
got me a bit confused in a few places,
and I wrote some things on the board I probably
shouldn't have, I thought I would try a partial explainer
for technically-oriented people so that they're not
mystified by the video.
And any errors here are my own.
I'm known to make many, so hopefully they
won't be too serious, but we'll find out.
So this is a supplementary explainer for the geometric unity
talk at Oxford that you just saw.
First of all, I think the most important thing to begin with
is to ask what new hard problems arise when you're
trying to think about a fundamental theory that
aren't found in any earlier theory.
Now, every time you have an effective theory, which
is a partial theory, there is always the idea
that you can have recourse to a lower-level strata.
So you don't have to explain, in some sense, everything
coming from very little or nothing.
I think that the really difficult issue that people
don't talk enough about is the problem of the fire that
lights itself.
And I think this was beautifully demonstrated
by M.C. Escher in his famous lithograph,
Drawing Hands, where he takes the idea of the canvas
or the paper as a given, but somehow he
imagines that the canvas could wheel into existence
the ink needed to draw the hands that move the pen
to draw the hands.
That concept is actually the super tricky part,
in my opinion, about going from effective theories
to any attempt at a fundamental theory.
So with that said, what I want to think about
is what antecedents does this concept have in physics?
And I find that there really aren't
any candidate theories of everything
or unified field theories that I can find
that plausibly give us an idea of how a canvas would
wheel an entire universe into being.
And so that really, to me, is the conceptual problem
that I think bedoubles this and makes
this step quite a bit more difficult
than some of the previous technical steps.
If you ask for antecedents, however,
there is one that, at least within physics,
is relatively famous.
And that is by John Archibald Wheeler.
And it is a picture, in some sense,
of the universe contemplating itself.
And so this idea that somehow the universe would contemplate
itself into existence, maybe the letter U
is, in some sense, analogous to the paper
and somehow the I, rather than the hand,
is drawn across to look at a different part of the U.
And whether or not that has meaning
is intrinsically always a question.
People are animated by it, but I don't know
that people have actually worked on it.
The quote of Einstein's, I think,
that really speaks to me often the most,
and maybe even was my thesis problem,
was he asked whether the creator had any choice
in how the universe was constructed.
And so I think if you believe that the canvas is itself,
that which generates all of the content
and all of the action, you're left with a puzzle
as to how would you move forward from this?
It might be easier, in a mathematical sense,
to temporarily put the U on its back,
to put it more in line with a standard picture
that many mathematicians and physicists
will be familiar with.
In sector one of the geometric unity theory,
space time is replaced and recovered
by the observers contemplating itself.
And so there are several sectors of GU,
and I wanted to go through at least four of them.
In Einstein's space time, we have not only four degrees
of freedom, but also a space time metric
representing rulers and protractors.
If we're going to replace that, it's very tricky
because it's almost impossible to think
about what would be underneath Einstein's theory.
Now there's a huge problem in the spinorial sector,
which I don't know why more people don't worry about,
which is that spinners aren't defined
for representations of the double cover of GL4R,
the general linear groups effective spin analog.
And as such, if we imagine that we will one day
quantize gravity, we will lose our definition,
not of the electrons, but let's say of the medium
in which the electrons operate.
That is, there will be no spinorial bundle
until we have an observation of a metric.
So one thing we can do is to take a manifold xd
as the starting point and see if we can create
an entire universe from no other data,
not even with a metric.
So since we don't choose a metric, what we instead do
is to work over the space of all possible point-wise metrics.
So not quite in the Feynman sense,
but in the sense that we will work over a bundle
that is of a quite a bit larger dimension.
So for example, if x was a four-dimensional,
therefore d equals four, then y in this case
would be d squared, which would be 16,
plus 3d, which would be 12, making 28,
divided by two, which would be 14.
So in other words, a four-dimensional universe,
or sorry, a four-dimensional proto-spacetime,
not a spacetime, but a proto-spacetime with no metric,
would give rise to a 14-dimensional
observer's portion called y.
Now I believe that in the lecture in Oxford,
I called that u, so I'm sorry for the confusion,
but of course this shifts around
every time I take it out of the garage,
and that's one of the problems with working on a theory
in solitude for many years.
So we have two separate spaces,
and we have fields on the two spaces.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to refer
to fields on the xd space by Hebrew letters.
So instead of g mu nu for a metric,
I just wrote gimel mem nun,
and the idea being that I want to separate Latin
and Greek fields on the y space from the rather rarer field
that actually live directly on x.
So this is a little bit confusing.
One way of thinking about it is to think
of the observer's as the stands plus the pitch in a stadium.
I think I may have said that in the lecture,
but this is what replaces the questions of where and when
in the newspaper's story that is a fundamental theory.
Where and when correspond to space and time?
Who and what correspond to bosons and fermions?
And how and why correspond to equations
and the Lagrangian that generates them?
So if you think about those six quantities,
you'll realize that that's really what the content
of a fundamental theory is assuming
that it can be quantized properly.
Most fields, and in this case,
we're going to call the collection of two tuples, omega.
So inside of omega, that will be in the first tuple,
we'll have epsilon and pi written,
sort of a non-traditional variation
of how we write this symbol for pi.
In the second tuple, we'll have the letters new and zeta,
and I would like them not to move
because they honor particular people who are important.
So most fields, in this case, omega,
are dancing on y, which was called u
in the lecture, unfortunately.
But they're observed via pullback
as if they lived on x.
In other words, if you're sitting in the stands,
you might feel that you're actually literally on the pitch,
even though that's not true.
So what we've done is we've taken the u of Wheeler,
we've put it on its back, and created a w structure.
And the w structure is meant to say
that there's a bundle on top of a bundle.
Again, geometric unity is more flexible than this,
but I wanted to make the most concrete approach
to this possible for at least this introduction.
And sometimes we don't need to state
that y would in fact be a bundle.
You could be an immersion of x into any old manifold,
but I'd like to go with the most ambitious version
of gu first.
So the two projection maps are pi two and pi one.
And what we're going to say up top is that we're gonna have
a symbol z and an action of a group row on z,
standing in for any bundle associated
to the principal bundle, which is generated
as the unitary bundle of the spinners
on the chimeric tangent bundle to y.
That's a bit of a mouthful,
but the key issue was that on the manifold y,
there happens to be a bundle,
which is isomorphic non-canonically
to the tangent bundle of y,
which has a definite and canonical metric.
And in fact, that carries the spinners.
So this is the way in which we get spinners
without ever having to choose a metric,
but we pick up some technical debt
to use the computer science concept
by actually having to now work on two different spaces,
x and y, and we're not merely working on x anymore.
This leads to the mark of Zorro.
That is, we know that whenever we have a metric
by the fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry,
we always get a connection.
It happens, however, that what is missing
to turn the canonical chimeric bundle on y
into the tangent bundle of y,
is in fact a connection on the space x.
So there is one way in which we've reversed
the fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry,
where a connection on x leads to a metric on y.
So if we do the full transmission mechanism out,
Gimel on x leads to alpha sub-Gimel
for the Levy-Civita connection on x.
Alpha sub-Gimel leads to G sub-alpha, which is,
sorry, G sub-alpha, I'm not used to using Hebrew in math,
so G sub-alpha then is a metric on y
and that creates a Levy-Civita connection
of the metric on the space y as well,
which then induces one on the spinorial bundles.
In sector two, the inhomogeneous gauge group on y
replaces the Poincare group
and the internal symmetries that are found on x.
And in fact, you use a fermionic extension
of the inhomogeneous gauge group
to replace the supersymmetric Poincare group.
And that would be, with the field content,
zero forms tensored with spinors
directs some one forms tensored with spinors
all up on y as the fermionic field content.
So that gets rid of the biggest problem
because the internal symmetry group
is what causes the failure, I think,
of supersymmetric particles to be seen in nature,
which is we have two different origin stories,
which is a little bit like Lilith and Genesis.
We can't easily say we have a unified theory
if spacetime and the SU3 cross SU2 cross U1 group
that lives on spacetime have different origins
and cannot be related.
In this situation, we tie our hands
and we have no choice over the group content.
So just to fix bundle notation,
we let H be the structure group of a bundle,
P sub H over a base space B.
We use pi for the projection map.
We've reserved the variation in the pi orthography
for the field content,
and we try to use right principle actions.
I'm terrible with left and right, but we do our best.
We use H here, not G,
because we wanna reserve G for the inhomogeneous extension
of H once we move to function spaces.
So with function spaces,
we can take the bundle of groups
using the adjoint action of H on itself
and form the associated bundle
and then move to C infinity sections
to get the so-called gauge group of automorphisms.
We have a space of connections, typically denoted by A,
and we're going to promote omega one
tensored in the adjoint bundle to notation of script N
as the affine group,
which acts directly on the space of connections.
Now, the inhomogeneous gauge group
is formed as the semi-direct product
of the gauge group of automorphisms together
with the affine group of translations
of the space of connections.
And you can see here is a version
of an explicit group multiplication rule.
I hope I got that one right.
And then we have an action of G
that is the inhomogeneous gauge group
on the space of connections
because we have two different ways to act on connections.
We can either act by gauge transformations
or we can act by affine translations.
So putting them together gives us something
for the inhomogeneous gauge group to do.
We then get a by connection.
In other words, because we have two different ways
of pushing a connection around,
if we have a choice of a base connection,
we can push the base connection around
in two different ways according to the portion of it
that is coming from the gauge transformations, curly H,
or the affine translations coming from curly N.
We can call this map the by connection,
which gives us two separate connections
for any point in the inhomogeneous gauge group.
And we can notice that it can be viewed
as a section of a bundle over the base space to come
when we find an interesting embedding of the gauge group
that is not the standard one in the inhomogeneous gauge group.
So our summary diagram looks something like this.
Take a look at the tau sub A naught.
We will find a homomorphism of the gauge group
into its inhomogeneous extension
that isn't simply inclusion under the first factor.
And I'm realizing that I have the wrong pi
that should just be a simple pi projecting down.
We have a map from the inhomogeneous gauge group
via the by connection to A cross A,
connections cross connections,
and that that behaves well according
to the difference operator delta
that takes the difference of two connections
and gives an honest ad-valued one form.
Okay.
The infinitesimal action of a gauge transformation
or at least an infinitesimal one
on a point inside of the group
is given by a somewhat almost familiar expression
which should remind us of how the first term
in the gauge deformation complex
for self-dual Yang-Mills actually gets started.
And so by acting via this interesting embedding
of the inhomogeneous gauge group on, sorry,
the embedding of the gauge group
inside its inhomogeneous extension,
but the non-trivial one,
we get something very close to the original first step
of the two-step deformation complex.
Now, in sector three,
there are payoffs to the magic beans trade.
The big issue here is that we've foregone the privilege
of being able to choose and dial in our own field content
and we've decided to remain restricted
to anything we can generate only from XD,
in this case, X4.
So we generated Y14 from X4
and then we generated chimeric tangent bundles
on top of that.
We built spinners off of the chimeric tangent bundle
and we have not made any other choices.
So we're dealing with, I think it's U128,
U2 to the seventh.
That is our structure group
and it's fixed by the choice of X4,
not anything else.
So what do we get?
Well, as promised, there is a tilted homomorphism
which takes the gauge group into its inhomogeneous extension.
It acts as inclusion on the first factor
but it uses the Levy-Tevita connection
to create a second sort of more cartan form.
I hope I remember the terminology right.
It's been a long time.
The map is injective because it's injective
under the first factor,
but it actually gives us a non-trivial embedding
of the gauge group in its inhomogeneous extension
which makes the whole theory work.
We then get to Shiav operators.
Now, a Shiav operator is a map
from the group across the ad-valued I-forms.
In this case, the particular Shiav operators
we're interested in is mapping I-forms
to D minus three plus I-forms.
So for example, you would map a two-form
to D minus three plus I.
So if D, for example, were 14,
then an I were equal to two,
then 14 minus three is equal to 11,
plus two is equal to 13.
So that would be an ad-valued 14 minus one form,
which is exactly the right place
for something to form a current
that is the differential of a Lagrangian on the space.
Now, the augmented torsion.
The torsion is a very strange object.
It's introduced sort of right at the beginning
of learning differential geometry,
but it really doesn't get used very much.
One of the reasons it doesn't get used in gauge theory
is that it's not gauge invariant.
It has a gauge invariant piece to it,
but then a piece that spoils the gauge invariant.
But because we have two connections,
one of the ideas was to introduce two diseases
and then to take a difference.
And as long as the disease is the same in both,
the difference will not have the disease
because both diseases are included,
but with a minus sign between them.
So the augmented torsion is relatively well-behaved
relative to this particular slanted or tilted embedding
of the gauge group in its inhomogeneous extension,
which this is very nice
because now we actually have a use for the torsion.
We have an understanding of why it may never have figured,
particularly into geometry,
is that you need two of two connections
rather than one to see the advantages of torsion at all.
So here's an example of one ship and a bottle operator.
I think this would be sort of analogous
if I'm not mistaken to trying to take the Ricci curvature
from the entire Riemann curvature.
But if you think about what Einstein did,
Einstein had to go further
and reduce the Ricci curvature to the scalar curvature
and then sort of dial the components of the traceless Ricci
and the scalar curvature to get the right proportions.
So there are many Schiave operators
and you have to be very careful about which one you want.
And once you know exactly what it is you're trying to hit,
you can choose the Schiave operator to be bespoke
and get the contractions that you need.
Now, I've made you guys sit through a lot.
So I wanted to give you sort of humorously
a feeling of positivity for the exhaustion.
So the years of anxious searching in the dark
with their intense longing,
their intense alternations of confidence and exhaustion
and the final emergence into the light,
only those who have experienced it can understand it.
I've just always thought this was like
the most sensitive and beautiful quote
and I wish it were one of his better known quotes,
but I think it's so singular that it's hard to feel
what it was that he was talking about
because in fact, he sort of explains this in the last line.
So given that you've been on a long journey,
here is something of what geometric unity equations
might look like.
So in the first place, you have the swerved curvature,
the Schiave applied to the curvature tensor.
That in general does not work out to be exact.
So you can't have it as the differential of a Lagrangian.
And in fact, we talk about swirls, swerves, twirls, eddies,
there has to be a quadratic eddy tensor
that I occasionally forget when I pull this thing
out of moth balls.
And the two of those together make up
what I call the total swerved curvature.
And on the other side of the equation,
you have the displaced torsion,
which I've called the dysplasian.
And to get rid of the pesky sort of minus sign
and hodge star operator,
this would be the replacement for the Einstein equation,
not on x where we would perceive it,
but on y before being pulled back onto the manifold x.
So a condensation of that would be very simple.
In simplest terms, we would be saying
that the swerved curvature is equal to the dysplasian.
And at least in this sector of the four main equations
of theoretical physics,
this would be the replacement for the Einstein equations,
again on y before being pulled back to x.
Next is the sketch of the fermionic field content.
I'm not sure whether that should have been sector four,
sector three, but it's gonna be very brief.
I showed some pictures during the lecture
and I'm not gonna go back through them,
but I wanted to just give you an idea
of where this mysterious third generation,
I think, comes from.
So if we review the three identities here,
we see that if we have a space V,
thought of like as a tangent bundle,
and then you have spinners built on the tangent bundle.
When you product, tensor product,
the tangent bundle with its own spinners,
it breaks up into two pieces.
One piece is the so-called cartin product,
which is sort of the sum of the highest weights.
And the other is a second copy of the spinners
gotten through the Clifford contraction.
So that's well known.
But now what I think fewer people know,
many people know that the spinners
have a sort of an exponential property.
That is the spinners of a direct sum
are the tensor product of the spinners
of the two summands of the direct sum.
So that's a very nice sort of version of an exponential.
An exponential would take a sum
and turn it into a product.
What happens when you're trying to think
about a tangent space in Y is being broken up
into a tangent space along an immersed X
together with its normal bundle.
So imagine that X and Y are the tangent space to X
and a normal bundle.
So the Rarita-Schwinger piece,
that is the spin three halves piece,
has a funny kind of an almost exponential property.
That is the Rarita-Schwinger content
of a direct sum of vector spaces
is equal to the Rarita-Schwinger of the first tensor
producted with the ordinary spinners in the second,
direct sum with the ordinary spinners in the first,
tensor producted with the Rarita-Schwinger content
of the second sum and.
But then there's this extra interesting term,
which is the spinners on the first sum and tensor
producted with the spinners on the second sum and.
Now recalling that when I started my career,
we did not know that neutrinos were massive
and I figured that they probably had to be massive
because I desperately wanted a 16 dimensional space
of internal quantum numbers, not 15,
because my ideas only work if the space
of internal quantum numbers is of dimension two to the N
and one of my favorite equations at the time
was 15 equals two to the fourth.
Not literally true, but almost true.
And thankfully in the late 1990s,
the case for 16 particles in a generation
was strengthened when neutrinos were found to have mass.
But that remaining term in the southeast corner,
the spinners on X, tensor spinners on Y,
looks like the term above it in line 2.15.
And that in fact is the third generation of matter
in my opinion, that is it is not a true generation.
It is broken off and would unify very differently
if we were able to heat the universe
to the proper temperature.
So starting to sum up, this is not the full theory.
I'm just presenting this in part to dip my toe back
into the water.
It's a daunting task to try to address people
about something you've been thinking about for a long time
and have no idea whether it's even remotely correct.
This is the Einsteinian replacement
and it must be pulled back to X.
That's the first thing.
The Yang-Mills Maxwell piece comes from a direct square
of the Einstein replacement.
That is, I don't believe that we're really looking
for a unifying equation.
I think we're looking for a unifying direct square.
Dirac famously took the square root
of the Klein-Gordon equation
and he gave us the Dirac equation.
And in fact, I believe that the Dirac equation
and the Einstein equation are to be augmented
and fit into the square root part of a Dirac square.
And I believe that the Yang-Mills content
and Higgs version of the Klein-Gordon equation
would go in the square part of the Dirac square.
So two of these equations unify differently than two others
and the two pairs are unified
in the content of a Dirac square.
The Dirac piece will be done separately elsewhere
when we get around to it
and contains the Ririta-Schwinger field content
which is fundamental and new.
There are only two generations in this model.
I think people have accepted that there are three
but I don't believe that there are three.
I think that there are two
and that the third unifies
other matter at higher energies.
The Cortic-Higgs piece comes
from the Dirac squaring of a quadratic.
Remember, there's an eddy tensor
which is quadratic in the augmented torsion.
The metric does multiple duties here
is it's the main field in this version of GU
with the sort of strongest assumptions
as field content that is originally on X
where as most of the rest of the field content is on Y
but it also acts as the observer
pulling back the full content of Y
onto X to be interpreted as if it came from X all along
generating the sort of illusion
of internal quantum numbers.
And I should say that the Petit-Salem theory
which is usually advertised as I think SU4
cross SU2 cross SU2
is really much more naturally spin six cross spin four
when the trace portion of the space of metrics
is put in with the proper sign
if you're trying to generate the sector
that begins as X1 comma three.
Remember, XD where D equals four
is the generic situation
but you have all these different sectors.
I believe that these sectors
probably exist if this model is correct
but we are trapped in the one three sector
so you have to figure out what the implications are
for pushing that indefinite signature up
into an indefinite signature on the Y manifold
and there are signatures that make it look
like the Petit-Salem rather than directly
in the spin 10 SU5 line of thinking.
So we will attempt to present the full theory shortly
and shortly keep in mind this took seven years
to just bring me to want to come back to this
but it must be reassembled from decades of notes
and that's part of the problem when you're working alone
and you're not really expecting to talk to anybody.
So I want to thank you for your patience and your time
and I just want to read a bunch of names
of people who mattered to me
and if I've done anything wrong,
this is not no reflection on them.
Marcus DeSotois, Peter Thiel,
Isidore Singer, Raoul Botte, Michael Grossberg,
Adil Abdullali, Harry and Sophie Rubin,
Brett Weinstein and family,
Heather Hying and Zach and Toby,
Peter Fried, Scott Axelrod,
Nima Arkani-Hamed, Louise Alvarez-Game,
Edward Frankel, Dora Bar-Natan,
Shlomo Sternberg, David Kajdan, Daniel Barquet,
Karen and Les Weinstein, Haynes Miller,
Ralph Gomery, John Tate, Sydney Coleman,
Graham Siegel, Robert Herman and here in Esther Milani.
Errors and omissions because I have too many people to thank
are all my own as for the claims
that should reflect badly on no one else other than myself.
And most especially, I just want to say
that I've asked a tremendous amount from my family
to stick with me on this quixotic quest.
And I want to thank Pia Milani,
Nyla Weinstein and Zev Weinstein.
I love you all very much
and thank you for making this possible.
I do want to leave you with one thought.
I really think that we've gotten completely bent out of shape
about trying to formalize and routinize science
and it doesn't work.
You cannot mandate science as social engineering.
You can't decide that science is always
in the zeitgeist and done by committee.
In fact, it is essential to understand
that science will not conform to what you want.
One of the things that I'm very proud of
and I think is quite true
is the saying that great science
has the scientific method as it's radio edit.
I don't think that great science
is actually done the way we say it's done.
And I think that directs 1963 Scientific American article
should be read by absolutely everyone.
Every time major theories have come out,
they've almost always been wrong,
but they're not wrong in an important way.
And I think that we have to fix the political economy
of people racing to correct theories
or point out that there's no agreement with the experiment.
We are killing many of our best ideas
by creating a terrible and combative environment
which already attempts to apportion credit
for work and more importantly risk
undertaken by individuals.
And I just think that I want people to understand
that I've always wanted to share this,
but I detest the culture that I saw that cropped up
around what has now become known
as the cyber-witten equations.
When they were put forward,
there was a period of time where I watched people
as if it a feeding trough,
trying to stay up around the clock
to use a new machine tool that had been given to them
to claim credit.
And it profoundly pushed me away from the community.
We have to become more ethical
and we have to honor the people
who are trying to speak and act imaginatively.
Now, if this doesn't work, if it's silly,
I'll have egg on my face and I'll go on, I'll be fine.
But I'm very worried that maybe some of the best ideas
are between the ears of people without the confidence
in the Hutzpah and just the sort of almost psychotic drive
to push things across the finishing line.
We've got to be kinder and nicer and more decent
and stop stealing people's lives, their credit,
their future and their ability to have families
and make a living and that's absolutely essential to me.
And I look forward to finding out whether this theory
has merit to it or is without merit,
but I guarantee that if I'm going to go down with the ship,
I'm also not going to be knocked off the ship
as I was many years ago, completely unfairly.
And I won't dwell on it,
but the amount of power you professors have
is absolutely almost without parallel
because nobody really understands enough
to adjudicate disputes that happen in academics.
I'm going to insist that we fund you better
and that you are nicer to the people who depend upon you
in this beautiful chain that we call
science, scientific method and most particularly
American science, which I think is still
the envy of the world.
So you've been through the portal.
I know it was a long slog.
I hope you found it interesting and enjoyable
and we'll see you again soon.
Be well everybody, stay safe.
