Many words interpretation simply multiplies realities.
We lose a special everything is true in the sense of all possible variations are true.
So what I and in some sense what fascinates me the ontological incompleteness again disappears.
Everything is fully there. The problem is our limited standpoint.
Am I missing something here?
Yeah, so I'm happy about this one because you are missing something and I can I can help a little bit where I like you.
Yeah, yeah.
Hello, Maggie Slings. It is Mother Goose, Robinson Earhart, here with the podcast and the introduction to Robinson's podcast number 118,
which incidentally confirms that we are on a very strange branch of the wave function because my guests are
Slavoj Žižek and Sean Carroll and I will keep their bios short since everyone knows them.
But Slavoj is International Director of the Birkbeck Institute for the Humanities at the University of London
and a senior researcher at the University of Ljubljana's Department of Philosophy.
He was also the guest on episode 109, which was all about psychoanalysis, wokeness, racism, sexism, Nazis,
curb your enthusiasm and 100 other things. It would be impossible to encapsulate all of the topics that we cover without
talking for the talking for 90 minutes, the length of our episode.
But Sean Carroll, on the other hand, is actually a quantum physicist. He is a cosmologist, a philosopher.
He's a homeward professor of natural philosophy at Johns Hopkins University and fractal faculty at the Santa Fe Institute.
He's also host of Sean Carroll's Minescape, which is an absolutely terrific show. I love it.
I've listened to every episode on science, society, philosophy, culture, arts, ideas,
and anything else Sean has been thinking about. But Sean, along with David Albert of Columbia,
was a guest on episode 106, which covered the many worlds theory of quantum mechanics in great detail.
And then we also talked about entropy and the enduringly fascinating topic of Boltzmann brains and then the fine-tuned universe.
But in this episode, I am, as Slavoj refers to me, merely the middleman and a wallflower along with pins.
And so I don't do much of the talking. So Sean and Slavoj, while I giggle in the background,
do talk about quantum mechanics, the indeterminacy of small scale reality, cosmology and the Big Bang,
some major figures like Niels Bohr, Einstein, Stephen Hawking, and then the world of sci-fi,
including movies like everything, everywhere, all at once, Indiana Jones and the Avengers.
And now one thing that I really have to mention, so pay attention now, is that Sean Carroll is an
honorary fellow of the John Bell Institute for the Foundations of Physics, which is directed by
another Robinson's podcast alumnus, and that is Tim Modlin of NYU. It's, at this point,
still very much a nascent organization trying to secure its home. And it is meant to give a home to
many of the topics that we discussed today and really has the who's who in the foundations of physics
as contributors. And the JBI can really use any donations at this point in their early history.
I've donated once and will certainly donate again as soon as my meager budget allows it.
So anything you contribute will be greatly appreciated by the JBI. And finally, there are
links to Sean's website, Sean's Twitter, and the biggest ideas in the universe in the description.
So without any further ado, I hope you enjoy this wide-ranging conversation as much as I
didn't so much have it, but got to enjoy listening to it as it happened myself.
Slavoj, you're very well known for thinking about a lot of topics and Marxism, psychoanalysis,
and Hegel come to mind, but quantum physics isn't one of them. So just to get us started,
when did Q.M. and the various quantum theories catch your philosophical interest to the point
that you've been concertedly writing and thinking about it a lot more lately?
My, it's quite a series of topics. The first one is my philosophical obsession. I've written
about it repeatedly and so on. And Sean, this is already to provoke you interrupt me at any point.
What absolutely fascinates me in quantum physics is, again, maybe it's already wrong,
I will say, this idea of to put it in philosophical terms, ontological incompleteness.
For example, the point is not we cannot measure, at the same time, position and movement.
That's for me not radical enough. It still means the particle has a measure in the position, we
just can't, movement and position, we just can't measure it. But what if in more radical reading,
reality is in itself ontologically incomplete? The point is not that if you analyze reality to the
end, you will get a complete, a complete description with everything at its place and so on and so
on. And as far as I can see, now you will ask me, how does this link with my philosophy? Because
it's a very unorthodox reading. In my reading, even of Shegel, the final result is not you get
the whole truth. The final result is that what you thought was just an epistemological obstacle,
like we cannot get it all, just one aspect of the other. The final result is when you realize that
what appeared to you as a limitation of your knowledge is, defines already the reality itself.
Reality is in itself incomplete. Now I follow debates and I know the problems with this. If she
known in the United States, she being Sabine Hosenfelder, the German one, her idea is, I'm sure
you know a thousand times better than me, is a super big feminism. And basically,
her idea is, if I follow it correctly, on Einstein's line, she had variables and so on,
we just don't know it all. Where I see an interesting point that she makes is, and now comes
Sean, my first question to you. Some physicists, one to which who I spoke, not as highly graded as you,
insisted that all this focus on not the agent, what triggers the so-called collapse of the wave
function, that is a secondary, unimportant problem, that you can even, this is the radical
tendency, if I got it correctly, that you can define collapse even in an objective way. What
comes to my mind are so-called decoherence theories, or another version is a quantity that as soon as
the object is no longer at the subparticle level, but becomes part of our reality,
automatically decoherence happens. Now, this brings me to another point, I hope we will
have time later to approach it, which is time and space. Do you agree, because I was informed that
this is also one of your topics? Is it true or not that this hidden variable's Einstein view
is more focused on space as a more primary dimension? Didn't Einstein even at some point
propose the theory that what we perceive as time, time movement, is really just moving along a certain
spatial line and so on? On the other hand, there are many others, and for obvious reasons, it's
closer to me, who claim that time is more radical, primordial, but let's begin with this, with what
I told you. All this problem, and I know that- I think so, yeah. Collapse of wave function,
observer, registration, when does it happen? Because I find all different versions, up to the
cosmological one, that it's God himself, who is the ultimate observer, no reality without God,
and to this more modest version, whatever, okay, teach me, where I'm totally losing my mind,
and tell me at least the state of the things today. I think this is very good, because the time and
space questions that you're raising are very, very good, but they come later, so the quantum mechanics
collapse of the wave function questions come first, and to me, it's extremely embarrassing,
but true, that physicists don't know what to think about exactly the questions that you are raising.
So let me just quickly run through some of the options, because there are sensible people who
believe all of them. You know, the fundamental fact that we're trying to
accommodate ourselves to is that we have a way of describing the world that is super duper successful
with what we call a wave function, the quantum state, the Schrodinger equation, all this mathematical
apparatus, but then when we look at it, when we measure it, when we perceive it or experience it,
we don't see that wave function. We see a position or a momentum, some observable quantity,
and this is completely... Which is absolutely not reality, what we see always.
Well, we... Yes, I don't want to prejudice by deciding what's ordinary reality yet, but we see
things, and the things we see, I think what you're getting at is they do remind us of what we thought
the universe was back in the days of classical mechanics. Newton would have said that there is
a position, there is a velocity, now we say, well, we observe those, but that's not how we discuss
what's really going on. So I can quickly run through at least three options that are very
much on the table. There is a very conservative way of going where you say there really are
positions and velocities, those are real things, and there is also something called the wave function,
and it's a whole big complicated mess, and that is the hidden variables approach that,
like you say, Einstein would have liked. There are still people who follow that, mostly in the
context of what is called Bohmian mechanics. You have both a wave function and articles.
That's what I wanted to say. How could these pilot waves... Isn't this still...
There are the substantial entity particles or whatever, and you just accompany them as a
capable aura with wave functions, you know? You know, I have to be honest, I'm not sympathetic
to this point of view, so I have trouble defending it. For purely philosophical reasons, I'm not
sympathetic, but let me now directly move to the third degree, but my KGB file on you
tells me that you are sympathetic to many worlds. Reading. That's going to be the third of the three
options I give you. Sorry, sorry, go on. Yes, sorry. Yes, one is hidden variables, just like you said.
The second is more or less what you were pointing to yourself at the beginning there, which is the
most radical one, which is essentially to deny the existence of reality, or at least to deny the
existence of something that is mathematically precise and that pre-exists our observations,
to make this incredibly radical move that says that we can calculate the probability of what our
observations will be, and we can then make them, and when we see them they're real,
but there was no such thing as what they were before we observed them. There was only this
instrumentalist kind of calculation, and weirdly, even though that is clearly the most radical and
hard to really wrap your brain around, that's the one that came first. That's the more or less
what Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg would have advocated, you know, a completely epistemic
instrumental approach to thinking about quantum mechanics. Whereas the third option I would give
you is a happy medium, where you say there's the wave function, and that's it. There is nothing else,
and the wave function does not collapse, and there are no extra variables, and the Schrodinger
equation, which tells you how the wave function evolves, is always true, just like Newton's laws
were always true in classical mechanics. And the crucially important thing to make that viable
is because when we look at things, like I said, we don't see the wave function, so if it's what is
real, why don't we see it? And the answer is that we have a wave function ourselves, and we have
superpositions of who we are, and they all exist, but the we that does the observing and the
experiencing is only a tiny, tiny fraction of what is going on in the whole wave function,
so we call this many worlds. And it is on the one hand the most simple and straightforward working
version of quantum mechanics. On the other hand, it makes you a little bit dizzy to think that all
these different worlds are coming into being. And I would put super determinism and Sabina's
theories, which come from other people also, as a fourth category, which is even wackier
than the ones that I've told you about, but we can talk about them if you want.
Yeah. Thanks very much. Listen to me. Okay. My first story to go on in this police
style, my problem is the standard reproach that I hear and read about many worlds is that
it's one cannot even imagine how to test it with today's knowledge. That it's just an empty
hypothesis. It resolves such many paradoxes, blah, blah. But with today's knowledge, we cannot get a
clear test. Good. That's wrong. But you do hear it a lot. Yeah. Please. Go on. I'm sorry. It depends
on what you mean by test and we have to get very carefully into the philosophy of science here,
right? For two reasons. If what you mean by test is just the very naive falsifiability kind of
idea that Karl Popper would have put forward, right? Can you rule out the theory by doing some
experiment? Then the answer is clearly and straightforwardly yes, because the theory just
says that there is a wave function and all it ever does is obey this particular equation.
So if you ever see the wave function not obeying that equation, you have ruled out the theory. You
have falsified it. And there are I didn't mention, but there are other versions of quantum mechanics
that predict exactly that in a very quantitative and testable way. So far, what we call the objective
collapse of the wave function has not been observed in experiment. But as soon as we do
observe it, if that ever happens, we will rule out many worlds. Sorry to interrupt,
but when you say has not been observed, so you don't buy this simplistic materialist,
I also don't buy it version, which says that no problem collects happens all the time in
reality and so on. And you try to define registration or decoherence in a totally
objective way. You don't buy this. Well, I am super duper materialist. But I think that the
only thing the wave function ever does is obey the Schrodinger equation. It does not collapse
all by itself. So the alternatives, there are there's sort of sub degrees within this materialist,
physicalist camp. People like me think it's the Schrodinger equation from start to finish.
And what we perceive as collapses are only apparent, because we're not seeing the whole
story. There are other people like Roger Penrose or others who think that the wave function
violates the Schrodinger equation by suddenly collapsing on itself. I think it's very, very
difficult to actually define a theory that works along those lines, but it does have the
nice quality that it's very, very testable, and it's very, very different in its predictions
from what many worlds is. Okay, now there's the other- I'm sorry, I'm sorry, please. I will
discipline myself. Finish, please. There's the other even more subtle philosophy of science
question, which is, okay, but what about many worlds versus the Copenhagen interpretation or
Bohmian mechanics or something like that? And these are all very tricky, worthwhile asking
questions. My answer is the following. The problem with Copenhagen versus many worlds is that Copenhagen
is not a theory. It is not precise. It does not tell you when wave functions collapse,
what a measurement is, what qualifies as a measuring apparatus. It's not that I can't test
it. It doesn't even tell me what the predictions are or what the ontology is. So if you're comparing
many worlds to Copenhagen, it's not a fair fight because one theory is well-defined and the other
one isn't. It is true that as far as I know, they have no difference in terms of experimental
predictions, but they have huge differences in terms of being well-defined. Whereas with
pi-the-wave theories, Bohmian mechanics, hidden variable theories, those are well-defined.
I would like to be able to distinguish many worlds from them. I have a deep suspicion that
they are experimentally distinguishable, but nobody has actually pinpointed what that difference is.
So that is, to me, an open question. I think that there's a lot of Bohmians who think that
their predictions are exactly the same as many worlds. I suspect they've not just been trying
hard enough. Okay, now I will try to be more precise. I agree with you. There isn't even one
about Niels Bohr. There is even one very vicious, but I like vicious,
formulation's point that it repeats almost that the basic formula of Copenhagen interpretation is
don't think just calculate. Don't even ask these questions. Okay, let me go step by step. My
problem with many worlds is that the way you put it, I would love this. The only wave oscillations
collapse is something that appears, blah blah blah, but isn't in some sense, although
when I say in some sense, I don't mean it in a precise scientific sense, but it seems to me that
many worlds interpretation simply multiplies realities. We lose a special, everything is true
in the sense of all possible variations are true. So what I, and in some sense,
what fascinates me, the ontological incompleteness, again disappears. Everything is fully there.
The problem is our limited standpoint. Am I missing something here?
Yeah, so I'm happy about this one because you are missing something and I can, I can, I can help a
little bit. I like you. Yeah, yeah. So two, again, two points worth making. One is that
it is certainly not true that within many worlds, every possibility exists. It's very easy to
to point to possible worlds that don't come into existence. What, what many world says after all is
that we obey the Schrodinger equation. And that implies a lot. For example, electric charge is
conserved. I can imagine a world where a proton spontaneously turns into an electron. There is
no such world in the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. There are many, many
imaginable worlds that just don't come to be. The second issue, which is much more subtle and
worth, you know, you're allowed to disagree with many worlds on this one is many worlds not only
says here's the bunch of worlds. It says that the worlds don't count equally. That there is a weight
or a thickness to them. And that helps explain why in quantum mechanics,
you predict there's a probability for X or a probability for Y, but the probability for X
is 99%. And the probability for Y is 1%. And that's a crucially important part of many worlds
that you don't necessarily get if you're just thinking about David Lewis and possible worlds
or something like that, right? Many worlds on defies how big the worlds are. And that's crucially
important. But now I would like my police instinct to gain kind comes into action.
When you say how big worlds are, is this ontological category in the sense that some
worlds are sorry to use this term, you can explode in some sense more substantially real
than others? Or can you specify a little bit more, this idea of more and less,
whichever way you name it, big or strong worlds? Well, you know, and I do say the
following thing often and always makes me feel bad. But this is something where if we write down
the equations, it's crystal clear. In words, it's hard. But the answer is that it's not that one
world is more real than another. They're both real. Let's let's get take the 99% versus 1%
example. They're both real. But the way it works out is if you don't know the outcome of the
experiment, so you do the experiment, you make the observation and you haven't looked yet.
So maybe you're in the 99% world, maybe you're in the 1% world, right? The impact of this
calculation, which is completely quantitative, is that you should assign a credence of 0.99
to being in the 99% world and a credence of 0.01 to being in the 1% world.
So they're both real, but you're not equally likely to find yourself in them.
What I still don't get and sorry, I, although I'm totally opposed like you to that
hidden variables in the sense of there is one single substantial reality, that's what I still
don't get here. Okay, Schrodinger equation said 99% blah blah. Then I agree with you because of our
limited standpoint, something happens. Why insist that parallel or I don't like the word
parallel is too physical, that at the same time, another reality exists, alternate. What do you,
what do you gain by this? Nobody wants this to be the case. Nobody is insisting that both
worlds are there. That is the prediction of the Schrodinger equation. And the question is,
you can either accept it, like I think of what Hugh Everett did as more therapeutic. He was a
joclican of physics. He wasn't writing down new equations. He was just saying, here are the equations,
here are their implications, you have to deal with it. Or you can modify the theory, you can do
violence to the Schrodinger equation to get rid of the other world if that makes you feel better.
And you're welcome to try to do that. That's basically what the hidden variables people
are trying to do. They're trying to invent a finger that points to one world and says,
here's the one we're actually in. The others are there, but there's only one that we're actually
in. That's why David Deutsch, for example, says that hidden variable peoples are just
many world's people in denial, because they know the other worlds are there, they don't want to
live in that. I like the Hegel formulations, because back to, okay, back to the opposite vision,
back to Niels Bohr. I was surprised at how, at some level, he is ultra commonsense,
really. Doesn't he repeatedly say, all that we can observe, all that exists out there is our
common reality. Everything that we measure, it shows on the screen, we're measuring apparatus in
our common reality. So, he insists that all these wave function formulas and so on, they have no
ontological status in the sense that we have to presuppose another type of reality.
He insists that it's simply, and here he escapes, I think, too easily into some kind of
naive epistemological reason. He says, these are just our mathematical means, formulas, or sometimes
he even says language symbolic fictions to account for how did we come from A to B, but both A and
B are firmly here. So, does he ever try to make a step further? I know I will be very precise here,
I'm not, I'm laughing, but not substantially, because what would then in this view prove,
I, of course, follow this with fascination, the, these years you remember the three guys,
the old French one, Alain Aspect, and the Zeilinger, an Austrian man, and the third one is American,
I think, or whatever, no. What did they really prove? Isn't, nonetheless, in what they say,
a little bit more realist tendency, that in some sense, there must be a level of
reality, which work reality, whatever you call it out there, that works in a different way from our
ordinary reality. Another thing, usually what they did is, with these experiments, is usually read as
Bol's victory against Einstein. But isn't it more complex, because they didn't prove that there is no,
that there is pure contingency, no. They only proved that if you go to Particle A, this then the
correlated Particle B down up, but this only means that there is no link at the level of speed of
light or lower. There still can be a link at the higher level, higher, okay, outside, no?
Exactly, that's exactly right. Bohr has his, you know, I don't read a lot of Niels Bohr,
he's famously hard to understand, but he has his modern avatars, right, there are people alive right
now, who very much think that reality does not pre-exist our measurement outcomes. And as you
imply, Einstein, as well as Schrodinger for that matter, were very much on the other side. They
were very much physicalists, materialists, they wanted to see the mechanisms behind what was
going on before we made our observations. The problem that they had, as you're pointing to, is that
they had a, you know, Einstein invented relativity. He thought that spacetime was very fundamental
and the speed of light was absolute. So what he pointed out in the famous EPR paper, Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen, is that quantum mechanics, but maybe the audience doesn't, so I'm trying to be
careful. You know, quantum mechanics seems, he said, to be incomplete with any kind of underlying
theory that would take locality seriously, the idea that not only is there space and time,
but things that exist have locations in space and time and things that interact
do so at the same point of space and time. And Einstein says quantum mechanics seems to be
incompatible with that. And John Bell proved a theorem saying, yes, it truly is incompatible
with that. And then the people who measured their correlated photons, their entangled photons,
Ospey, Klauser and Zeilinger, verified that Bell was correct, that you cannot reproduce the
predictions that we observe in the real world with any naively locally realist theory.
But only locally, no? Only locally. It must be locally.
Only locally, exactly. So even the, amusingly, even the Nobel Committee got this wrong in their
press release. They said that these experiments ruled out hidden variable theories, but that's
just false. They ruled out local hidden variable theories. Because this was my first reaction.
Sorry, it doesn't rule out all hidden variables, just those operating locally.
In fact, just to, you know, make the story more amusing, John Bell was motivated by the fact that
David Bohm had written down a non-local hidden variable theory that was very successful. And
Bell really liked Bohm's theory, and he asked himself, is it, you know, Bohm's theory is clearly
manifestly non-local? Is that a necessary quality, or can we get rid of it? And what you proved is,
you cannot get rid of it. It's necessary if you want to match the data.
But again, here, first, sorry, let me return for a brief moment to Neil's board. I hope we
are both here on the materialist side in the sense that what I worry is not so much this
direct new age spiritual reappropriation if I were to be a ruler of a Stalinist empire.
If you say, as I read somewhere, some Indian idiot, not Native American, India said,
oh, but all the Xilinger and those guys proved is not we Indians know from Upanishads, from
Bhagavad, you know all that bullshit. Even the movie, I haven't seen it, but it didn't prevent me to
write the review of it. Oppenheimer goes into this, you know, all those voting Bhagavad Gita,
and the destroyer of the world, whatever. So even, even the board was not clear here.
When he, when he, what's his principle? Sorry, I'm so confused now of
complementarity, yeah? He had this tendency to falsely universalize it in a pseudo-spiritualist
way. For example, he said, it's not just particles, it's also, he said, to the Bible,
then, then wisdom versus knowledge and all that bullshit and so on. So this is where we need,
we materialists, intellectual police, no? We need some agency to say the moment you mention this,
do you know what I give you here, one-way ticket, first class to Bulak for 10 years,
no, but seriously, isn't this, that's why also quantum, why quantum physics interests me,
because precisely because it breaks the confines of our ordinary notion of reality,
it is always exposed to this pseudo-spiritualist danger. So my,
my problem here is, I read this and I learn also from people like you that,
that golden era of Copenhagen shut up, daunting, calculate is over. We are returning to what
traditionally is called ontological, metaphysical questions. My temptation is, and please tell
me from what you know, am I totally wrong or not? If I, you know what vacillates me in this
Bell's theorem, no? What if this element of maybe even contingency is not the right term, just this
openness, not full determinism and so on, are we back with many worlds in
determinism or do, is this openness of the universe maintained? Wonderful idea for me that
you know, even if you look at details, details, no, it's not. You discover deep at some point,
reality is blank, open. I would like as a philosopher for non-scientific interest to
save this, hit me. I mean, with counter. I think that two things, you know, your, your,
your characterization of Bohr is right on. Not only was his philosophy of quantum mechanics
a little bit fuzzy, with not defining what he meant by measurement and whatever, but he did,
you know, unabashedly connected to ideas from ancient eastern wisdom and complementarity.
And you were doing this, I thought you were trying to only come in him. Even eastern wisdom,
he was already dead. Oh, yes. Oh, my God. He was. And not to anyone's benefit.
But out of police when we take power. Right. But the determinism question is a much trickier one,
because then, I mean, just so everyone knows in the background here, so, you know, quantum
mechanics came on the scene in the 1920s and 30s with the Copenhagen interpretation and whatever.
It was in the 1950s that people like Bohm and Everett finally wrote down 100% physical
material versions of quantum mechanics that fit the data completely well. The physics community
could not care less. They just ignored it. They go on. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. If you care about this,
you're not going to get a job. You'll be kicked out of the field. But we know. You can't now say.
Bohm also a political one. He was very left leaning with. That's right. He was kicked out of the
country, not only of the field. Ever left the field by himself. But he picked out a few different
reasons. Yeah. Not because of quantum mechanics. No, no, because of his point. Yeah. But, you know,
yeah, so there's there and there are still people today who will, who will be, are you in favor
of idealism on the basis of quantum mechanics that we have to put consciousness. Sorry.
It should be. Isn't sorry for Roger Penrose approaching death a little bit.
Maybe a little bit. A little bit. But at least, yeah. But I think, you know, there are some people
who will simply deny the existence of objective reality and put mind and agents at the center of
everything. That's one thing. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe that's right. Maybe it's wrong. But my point is,
quantum mechanics doesn't force you in that direction. There's perfectly mechanistic versions
that fit the data perfectly well. But so, so again, your answer to this mega reproach from Einstein,
Janssen, Savine, Rosenfelder, and so on, that quantum mechanics describes, it's very simple
reproach. I just repeated for the viewers, describes a certain universe, which is in itself
consistent wave function, blah, blah. But it cannot account in its own terms of the,
our ordinary reality measuring, and so on, and so on. In, if I read you correctly,
many worlds does this in some sense. Yes. Yeah, exactly. So I think, you know, I forgot, you
also mentioned determinism, which is a crucial point here, which again, physicists don't agree on.
So for both hidden variable theories, boom, by the waves, etc., and for many worlds, you're in a
situation where the underlying equations and dynamics are 100% deterministic. Laplace would
have been happy. Laplace's demon could predict everything that happens. But in both theories,
there is some epistemic uncertainty. There is some subjective probability that comes in.
In the case of hidden variables, it's because you don't know where the hidden variables are.
In the case of many worlds, it's because all these different branches exist, and you don't
know which branch you are on. So there's the appearance of indeterminism, because you cannot,
even if you know the wave function of the universe perfectly, you still can't predict the outcomes
of your next experiment. So it's a weird in-between ground. You know what I would like to do? Now,
this is a pure abstract, in a bad sense, philosopher speaking through me now. I would just like to
elevate into, as you may have guessed, into ontological status to put into reality itself
this element of uncertainty. Can't we say, while keeping sure the equation and so on that,
and that's for me the mega greatness of quantum physics, that there is an element of uncertainty
which is not just epistemological, but which is in itself. Isn't this also implied in what you said,
99%, 1%, it's not that we don't know. It's in reality itself, in some sense, because it's
99%, 1%, and so on. You don't like this idea. Yeah, I am honestly, I know that you told me to just
say the truth and not say that I'm not sure about my opinions being true or false. This is a good area
where it's okay to be a little uncertain. I would say that in the many worlds point of view,
we're faced with a novel, unique metaphysical challenge, because like I said, we can know
everything about the universe and still not make a prediction. And the reason why is because
that 99% world and the 1% world are both going to become true. And there will be a
future version of me in each of those worlds. And there's no unique, it's not even sensible to ask
which one of them am I going to be. They're both going to be in there in existence. They're both
going to have all of my memories, right? This is utterly unprecedented in physics or philosophy.
So I claim that the way to distinguish it is to say that both of those future selves are real
people, but they're in positions of self locating uncertainty, indexical uncertainty. There's
something they don't know, which is where they are in the universe, which branch of the wave
function they're on. And it's perfectly deterministic, underlying dynamics, but a new situation in
which there's no univalent you that can ask questions about the universe. There's many
different future versions of you. This nonetheless reminds me of problems that emerge even with
Descartes, Kogito in modern philosophy, where here I see the actuality of Descartes. Yes,
universe is mechanistic and so on, but I cannot locate myself into it deterministically.
This is the big enigma, I think, in some sense of the entire modern philosophy.
I recently did a podcast with Robinson, with David Albert, who is another very well-accomplished
philosopher of science. And we talked about the fact that there is an analogous situation
that also comes up with the multiverse, not the many worlds of quantum mechanics, but the
cosmological multiverse, where we imagine that just very, very far away, there's many different
observers and so forth. And philosophy is just not currently up to the task of dealing with this,
I think. It needs to get better, but how do you evaluate questions like,
what would a typical observer see in this ensemble? And should I care about that question,
because I am not a typical observer. Should I reason as if I were typical? Cosmologists
bless their hearts. They think the right thing to do is to reason as if they were a typical
observer in the universe, even though they know perfectly well that they're not. So they go through
this weird thing where they say, okay, I'm going to forget everything I know about my actual situation.
I'm going to pretend I was a typical observer. I'm going to make predictions. I'm going to open
my eyes and go, oh, this is very surprising. But we can do better than that and we don't do yet.
But you see, now we don't have time to go into it, but this is another
metaphysical topic that fascinates me. Why? And often, for me, deterministic philosophers get
caught into this. You want to be as realistic as possible, but to formulate your position,
you have to pause at an impossible point of subjectivity, where you see an all-universal
observer and so on and so on. What tempts me, but I don't have, of course, not a scientific
formula here, is, but okay, let's return to many worlds. But you think that, but doesn't
Schrodinger equation, equation, just give probabilities from what will happen now,
like 99% this happens, okay, everything happens. I got your point.
Yeah, so not everything happens, but something's happened and something's happened more than others.
So, you know, I think that this is the challenge, because if you're a many worlds person,
you do think that the Schrodinger equation is all there is. And let me back up just a second
to make it even a little bit more reasonable. If you believe in quantum mechanics at all,
and you want to be realist at all, right, so then you will have to say that the electron
that can be spinning clockwise or spinning counterclockwise, quantum mechanics says it
could be in a superposition, right? It truly is some combination of spinning clockwise and
spinning counterclockwise. And so if you believe that that can be physically true, not just a
state of our knowledge or prediction, then you should be able to believe that the whole universe
can be in a superposition of many different possibilities. So you're not asking for anything
more by becoming a many worlds person, all the possibilities were always there in the
quantum mechanics. All of the new challenges are philosophical. How do I deal with the fact
that there are many people like me with exactly the same epistemic states? How do I make predictions
of what they're going to see when they open their eyes and things like that? It is a radically
different view of the world, maybe not as radical as the view that says that there is no reality,
but still pretty darn radical. And I think the quantum mechanics forces us to be radical one
way or another. I see, I see. Okay, let me move it connect. You know what fascinates me? Now I move
into my own speculations about philosophy language and so on. I like so much the notion of superposition
because I think I will try to put it in very simple terms, but it's a more complex theory.
A guy who teaches French guy who I think, is he Stanford or Santa Cruz? Did you hear the name
Jean Pierre Dupuis, D-U-P-U-Y, a French theory. A very familiar but not an expert, yes.
Tried to introduce, but without any bluffing about quantum physics, the notion of superposition
into historical processes and knowledges. I will give you an extremely simplified example.
Let's say today we are in an, I will go even specifically, Russia put in Ukraine war.
Again, maybe it's already decided in the terms of the Schrodinger equation 99%, but we don't
know what, that there will be global war or not. But his idea is this one. And again, this is pure
speculation, more pertaining to human language. Is that in our human, human universe, I'm here
often referred maybe to that famous quote from T.S. Eliot, who was an idealist conservative, but
others, he put it nicely that every new invention, really new in art, in some sense also changes the
entire past. It makes it readable in a different way. So Dupuis interpretation against these lines
would be, let's say that in two, three years, there will be world war three. Then automatically,
we will retroactively read it as it was clear all the time that this should happen. We just
had illusions that we can avoid it. Let's say that world war three will not happen. Then we will
have the way we read today, the Cold War. No, yes, it was danger, but somehow we avoided it and so
on and so on. But Dupuis point that I like is that it's not enough to say that these were just
different possibilities, options. It's a stronger term. It's in the sense that if something happens,
it, of course, it doesn't restructure the past in its brutal reality. But the whole symbolic
constellation of how we read the past page. And this now I could go on here for hours. I love
these examples. That's why I am not, and I think in my crazy way, I got this lesson from one of
these mechanics. I am not, I totally reject this stupid historicist view to understand Shakespeare.
You must study in detail Elizabethan era and so on. I would say first the opposite. To understand
Elizabethan era rejects, you will learn more. But more seriously, you know, for me, really great works
of art are precisely the ones which cannot be limited to a specific historical constellation.
Every new epoch reinvents them. For example, with Shakespeare. Many people don't know, but immediately
after his death, it was the horrible era of Racine and all those strange guys, classicists, and
Shakespeare was considered vulgar. Only through romanticism, Shakespeare was reinvented. And I
love these paradoxes. How sometimes precisely not knowing all the context of Shakespeare historical,
you can propose a reading which is much more convincing. And it's not simply an external
reading. Again, I'm back to my point about openness. It is as if, which is obvious,
Shakespeare didn't really know what he is doing. You know, which is here my wonderful example. You
know that it's attributed to Lincoln, but I read somewhere that he was not really the first to
say that, you know, you can treat some of the people all the time, all the people
sometime, but you cannot treat all the people all of the time. This is a deeply ambiguous statement.
It can mean there are some idiots who can be treated all the time, some the same, or it can mean
in one situation, I will be the idiot in another situation, you or you. You see, this is for me
how language is structured. It is open. The author himself is not a possessor of some hidden meaning.
That's why my favorite example is, you know, where Shakespeare, for me, the best cinema version
of Shakespeare Hamlet is Kurosawa in 62 in Japan, did a version of Hamlet with a wonderful title,
Only Evil People Sleep Good, which is a deep truth, you know, real evil people don't care. They
they're not haunted. And again, it's set in modern Japan, Hamlet is a student returns to
Tokyo from United. But what I'm saying is you see what I'm aiming at. This I or I'll give you
another classical example. I remember from the Puy this quote, you are too young, call to be some
23 years ago, there was a presidential candidate in France, Edouard Balladur, who say, but when
there were some pre-elections in Le Monde, there was a wonderful comment saying, if Balladur will
win next election, his victory will be necessary. You know the paradox, after something happens,
it becomes retroactively necessary. And now you see where I am aiming at. I'm desperately looking,
but you almost converted me, I will have to work more in quantum physics for some kind of
ontological foundation of this openness that I like this idea of retroactive determinism. And I
will give you the ultimate social proof. This is not physics at all. But I love it.
A protestantism. People don't notice this obvious paradox. Weber, protestant, ethics,
origin of capitalism, blah, blah. But since if anything, capitalism is a system which
pushes you to constant effort and so on, isn't it strange that you would have then expected
that capitalism, sorry, protestantism would have been against, and this brings me back to your
point in a very nice way, that capitalism would have been against predetermination. Because if
everything is predetermined, why not my seat at home must await and watch Pornhub or whatever.
It's already decided. But precisely capitalism, which is the most active system, needs predestination.
Along what lines, along what you said, here I come back to you, here I will use you,
when you said wonderfully, yes, setting an equation objectively valid, but with one small
point, I don't know where I am in it. And that's protestantism in religion. You see now what I am
aiming at, you know. But nonetheless, you know, let's go to the end in
metaphysics. I see your point. But then what would be your answer to where
does then our limitation, now I'm going back to you, there is an objective description,
we can give it, we just don't know where we are. You don't think that
how can, how can many words interpretation account for this uniqueness of us?
Not uniqueness in any metaphysical sense, but how we are one unique, but still can arrive at this
objective, as it were, view of this. So let me say two things. For me, how do you account for the
subject itself? Him sense himself, I will not go into this bullshit now.
So I'm happy we can solve these questions so easily in this podcast. It'll be very,
very valuable to future generations. I'll say two things, one a little bit negative and one more
constructive that the negative thing is, I am reluctant to think about quantum mechanics when
I think about the uncertainty of human history, because there is a difference between quantum
mechanics and probability or stochasticness, right? There's plenty of room for unpredictability
in the world. In addition to what quantum mechanics gives us, what's special about
quantum mechanics is that there's not just the probability, the probability is derived from
this thing called the wave function, which distinguishes the idea that there's two possibilities,
but we don't know which one is true, from the idea that there's really both possibilities
at once. And I think that at least when it comes to human subjectivity and history,
you don't need to imagine that all the possibilities are simultaneously physically true.
You can just work with the fact that there's so much uncertainty and, excuse me,
unpredictability in the real world, that we need a language of probability and computation and
information to really make progress on these things. And it might involve the past in an
intricate way. In fact, I'll reveal, I'll mention two funny things. One is, I recently did a podcast
with Katie Elliott, who's a philosopher, and she made very much a similar point that you're
making about Protestantism. We were talking about predestination and eternalism, and she said that
she can make eternalism. She convinced herself that Calvinism was okay.
I know, but this is the latest theory. It's no longer Luther, it's Calvinism, which is elevated.
The problem with Calvinism is you're either blessed and going to go to heaven or you're not.
But you never know. But you never know. So the worry, she points out, is very well known,
is that, well, I can just act bad because I'm predestined to go to heaven or not. But what
you don't understand is that God knows that you're going to act bad. And so if you act bad,
you're bringing to reality the possibility that you're not going to go to heaven. So even though
it is predestined, because you don't know, it is still in your best interest to act good.
I know this thing, I forgot his name.
My God, I forgot his name. Protestant, I'll put it back, whatever. Theodist, theologist,
who is also known as the one who uses analytic philosophy. And he precisely in the terms of
beyond the speed of light, he defended Protestantism because he said exactly what you said now.
Like, if I'm predestined, why should I act good and so on? But again, God is beyond time.
God knows how you will decide. Exactly. No, that's why it's...
It's like Newcombe's paradox. That's how we got into it. Yes, if you believe that there are
oracles that know about the future, you will behave differently than if you don't. But anyway,
the other thing I wanted to say, I wrote a short piece, a short essay that I published on my blog
years ago called, I hope you'll be amused by this, the universe is structured like a language.
So somehow for me, I am universe, not unconscious, but universe.
Not the unconscious. The universe is structured like a language. So I quote you and I quote
some quantum physicists. And the basic idea is that the universe evolves from
a very orderly, low entropy early state to very disorderly, messy future state. Along the way,
complex structures appear. This is the kind of thing that at the Santa Fe Institute,
we're very interested in understanding. And the implication is that there...
Somewhere there in the laws of physics, in the laws of dynamics, in the way that we think about
how the universe marches forward, there exists the potential, the potentiality for
interesting complex things to happen. And even though they were not sort of embedded intrinsically
in the initial conditions, they came to be because of the structure of the dynamics along the way.
And maybe quantum mechanics does play a role in that. This is all stuff that nobody claims to
understand very, very well. But if there's something computational or useful about complex
structures coming into existence, then that would be very nice to understand. And by the way,
by complex structures, I include you and me. Why did living beings come into existence,
even though the second law of thermodynamics says that the universe just rolls down to more
and more disorder? And the suggested answer is that the way that you get to more and more disorder
is to pass through intricate, complicated things. And you can't predict very well which one they're
going to be. Can I now bombard you with my last big meta-physical point? Since I was told and you
indicated you also do cosmology and so on. Okay, to cut it thought directly to the thing.
Is Big Bang theory out or not? Because I hear again and again that you can get that. I'm sorry.
Traces of something that must have gone off before Big Bang and so on, all that stuff. So the idea is
almost a kind of Stalinist dialectical materialist visual of repeated Big Bang here,
collapses here, explodes there. Where do you stand here? So the sad thing is that the phrase
the Big Bang theory refers to two very different ideas at the same time. One is the whole history
of the universe from t equals zero to today, where it started hot and dense and it rapidly
expanded and galaxies and stars coalesced out of it. And the whole bit, the universe is approximately
14 billion years old, all of that. That story is just 100% solid. It's not going away. There was
just this week excitement on Twitter because someone claimed it was completely wrong, but they were
completely, they were themselves completely wrong. What can I tell you? There's so much evidence in
favor of this general picture, 14 billion years, et cetera, that we don't need to worry about that
being overturned by future experiments. Nobody wants to do this. They just claimed that there
must have been something other Big Bangs before. They don't say there is no Big Bang.
Well, sadly, no, there are people who still think that even the story I just told you is wrong,
but then they're sadly misguided people. I'm just letting you know that you can find some
crazy claims that the universe is 30 billion years old or infinitely older. There's still people out
there who say those things. 6,000 also last Thursday. Yeah, these are all on the table.
But now the harder question is that sometimes we use the phrase the Big Bang to refer to
just the moment t equals zero, right? Just the first moment. Forget about what happened after that,
but the actual event. Lots of nature, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. That's right. Now there,
the only honest thing we can say is we have no idea what happened. Physics is not up to the task
of saying whether there was truly a singularity, whether that was truly the beginning of the universe,
whether it was a bounce or a quantum nucleation event. All the options are on the table. I'm
responsible for some of the options. There's a picture. This picture right here is one of my
favorite theories where the universe is infinitely old. So I think that the idea that the Big Bang
that we talk about is not the beginning is absolutely viable, but we have no way of knowing
whether it's true or not right now. Now, can I, so you don't agree with those? I read some reports
on it that if we analyze these early stages, Big Bang, blah, blah, we can find in it
immanently traces of something that must have happened before. You don't think this is necessary?
I don't think so. I know that people have pursued that possibility and Penrose is one of them,
and I'm very, very glad they are pursuing the possibility, but I think that the data so far
as well as the theoretical predictions are that anything interesting gets wiped out in the interim
in that period since the Big Bang, everything was just smooth and featureless. I would love
to be wrong about that, and I hope I am, but I wouldn't buy any existing claims along those lines.
But another thing that bothers me, not bothers me, it is that I hope we are here on the same
materialist side. You must have known, everybody quotes it, a dialogue, I even don't know, did it
really happen or not? Stephen Hawking was at some conference with the Pope and the Polish reactionary
guy told him, here we have no misunderstanding, Mr. Scientist, your topic is Big Bang and after
our topic is before, you know, I don't buy the story. I think this, sir, within the space of
science for an opening where somehow religion or another dimension enters, I hope we agree,
this is absolutely wrong perspective, this desperate attempts, you know, to, to, to,
completely wrong. I mean, I don't think that religion is very informative for anything interesting. I
think that it's, it's plays a hugely important historic and cultural role that I respect very
much. But when I want to think about why the universe exists or where it came from, I'm going
to think about science and philosophy. I'm not going to think about religion. In fact, I think
that your Hawking story is true. And it's a reflection, there was a previous story, you know,
lot of the development in early days in the thirties and forties of the Big Bang model
was by George Lemetra, who was a Belgian priest. And the Pope put him on some commission to, you
know, science and religion. And the Pope at the time, who I think was pious, said, well, this
Big Bang theory is great. It proves that Genesis was right. It proves that the universe had a
beginning. And Lemetra said, no, no, no, no, do not, do not say that. Because if you started
saying, well, we've proven religion right by science, tomorrow, science is going to change
its mind. And you don't want to say, oh, well, we were wrong about religion.
You know, this may interest you. I always admire, but I despise them. Don't be afraid.
Some fundamentalists, I had along these lines, a very interesting debate,
some time ago with the Catholic friend, who was at least honest. You remember that mystery of
the Turin Shroud, you know, are those are those stains there, Christ blood. And you know what
confidentially this highly placed bishop told me, she prays to God every evening that this is not
really Christ's blood. You know what, how he reasoned. If this is somehow we prove it, what
don't ask me how Christ's blood, then the first question is, let's analyze DNA. And what we will
get there, probably now an extremely brutal, that Christ was the result of, of Virgin Mary
screwing with some servant there. But it's better not to know. But some American fundamentalists
had a crazy answer. God doesn't have a DNA. So we will just get the double DNA of Virgin Mary
herself. You know, so this is for me the most dangerous temptation. This naive fundamentalist,
which even lack this, what I find in authentic religion is this radical openness. For example,
great guys, the one who was loved by by Nils Bohr Kirkegaard, he said, I'm not sure that I believe,
I only maybe believe that I believe. And I think the moment you go into fundamentalism,
you are lost. You are lost in the sense that you put, but so the final point,
you know why I like so much this quantum physics against this Einsteinian view,
because it's usually, and I think they're idiots. I hope we agree here generally, usually people claim
Einstein was more a materialist, objective reality and so on while Bohr
opened up the path for all this stuff. But I believe that it's almost the opposite, that
Einstein is interesting. You know, his famous
retort to Nils Bohr. God doesn't play dice. And then he even says that I don't believe in personal
God, but there is a divine dimension in this eternal cosmic order, the beauty of loss of
nature and so on and so on. And we all know Bohr, here I bow my head to him, gave a perfect answer.
Don't tell God what to do. What I like here is that I think that if not in the sense of any fully
religious sense, but in a sense of a belief in a firm order of our reality, this is for me
the most basic, even today I would call it not theological dimension, but this belief in what
in my Lacanians were gone, I call the big other. Even if we don't know it, there is a cosmic order
and so on. But you know that here, I think that one tool mechanics opens up a path to a much more
radical materialism. And I put it, maybe you know the story in this way. And I was so glad
narcissistically. Two, three months ago, I watched on Austrian TV and interviewed the Austrian guy,
Salinger, the one of the three. And the interviewer lady asked him, literally mentioning my name,
that what about my idea that quantum, this old joke that I like to repeat, you probably know it,
that quantum physics demonstrates that God is an imperfect lazy idiot, that God was too lazy to
determine things to the end. And we, as it were, went too far. And he said that there is a lot,
at least in Europe, a lot standing joke about this, that quantum physics is one big proof that
God is lazy. He didn't want to do all the work, you know, and that now, so I think this is my big
effort. We have, we are on the same line here, I think, how to read quantum mechanics in a strict
materialist way, how to get rid of all this, you know, quantum mechanics means, you know,
the whole syllogism is horrible. Quantum mechanics means only observer brings possibilities to
reality, A, the universe really exists, B, so there must be a mega observer who is,
who is God. But still, let's maybe slowly and at the same time, conclude with some, so I will
have to think a lot more, because I'm still Boda, and I will quote you simply by your final
formula, which is this wonderful one of many world's interpretation, we can describe the world
perfectly, we just don't know where we are in it. My goal, I obviously don't know enough of size, is
to somehow in a totally, not in an idealist way, this means a reality just to have an observer,
but in a truly materialist way to somehow find a crack inconsistency in reality, which is not
subject, but which opens up the space for subtlety, in what sense, let me conclude before I confuse
you, because we here come at the point of freedom, I read Penrose, who likes to, he's one of those
who think that you can ground human freedom in quantum phenomena, but I think that even if you
accept a radical uncertainty, openness, this is not freedom, freedom is not as intelligent people
want to call it, and freedom is not contingency, freedom is a different sort of determinism,
I do that because I decided so and so on, so this quick link, and it's very popular among
chief philosophers today, oh but doesn't already quantum physics open up the space for freedom,
it's, do you agree it's wrong, it's totally, I completely agree that that is wrong, but I will
mention something that I've been thinking about only recently, in fact maybe in the last hour you've
helped me clarify it, but there is a role for quantum mechanics, literally quantum mechanics,
not just metaphorically, in accounting for the richness of the world that we see around us in
the following sense, what if classical mechanics were true, right, what if there was no wave
function, everything was perfectly deterministic, you could be Laplace's demon, so you could know
the complete state of the world today, and that would predict the state of the world in the future
in the past, if that's true, then all the richness around us, including you and me,
Robinson having this discussion, was inherent in the initial condition of the universe, right,
but no, I would play your role before, it depends how you define the work inherent,
you can also read, yes it does, but I have a definition, stability, blah blah, not fully
deterministic, you know, sorry, go on. What I'm imagining is if classical mechanics
had been true, then you could take our universe now, you could use the laws of physics to evolve
it to the early time, and it would look smooth and, you know, featureless, but only because
there were very, very, very subtle correlations there, that you could then evolve backward,
back forward to the present day, like we were implicit, let's put it that way,
in the initial conditions of the universe, but when you have quantum mechanics, now that's not
true anymore, the early universe can be truly simple and featureless, and what happens is,
as these branches happen and decoherence happens, then individual parts of the universe can begin
to look complex, and you can't predict exactly where you're going to be, because like we said,
there's many different futures, and you're going to be in all of them, and there's different versions
of you that will be in all of them, but the sort of, the action of quantum mechanics is to start
from a simple, beautiful, pristine state, and create many, many, many very complicated, very
interesting world. Now I will try to strike back with a precise metaphysical question, you said
at the beginning in a much more complex way, but some basic, simple, whatever you call it,
simplicity, but wouldn't it, if we were to be able, I'm returning to your idea of this
ideal observer, which would have seen the entire picture, all the possibilities, wouldn't that
also involve some kind of return to simplicity, I'm not saying that it is a simplistic image,
it's very complex, I know all the options and so on, but in a way it would have been a flat well,
like everything is, well I think this is good, there's a very good point, but I think it's the
difference between hardware and software, right, an observer like Laplace's demon who could know
everything and do all the calculations is a very simple concept, not that complicated, but the data,
the software that that person would need to actually do the calculation correspond,
where universe would be incredibly complicated, whereas in quantum mechanics, Stephen Hawking
and Jim Hartle wrote it down, the way function of the universe, and all of the complexity can just
come about universe by universe, world by world, afterward.
No, no, I see, I see, yes, oh my god, there are so many, okay, sorry, I'm
slowly getting tired, but there are so many points here, now I see where I will have to
rethink my position, I will, can you, this precise idea that you mentioned, now you can
you can even use the middleman, exclude this or what, but I would love to have,
do you have a text where you develop that precise point, many worlds, ideal observer,
everything objective, we just don't know where we are, is there a text by you?
Not yet, but I'm happy to write something down, like I said, I've just been thinking about it,
in the last few weeks, I like this idea that this is my dream, that I write texts so that
somebody will quote them, if it's directly, it's very possible if someone else has written it down
already, the big problem for me, yeah, you know, yeah, I mean it might be completely unoriginal,
that's very possible, so I will look to see if anyone else has already written it, and if not,
I will write something down, what's the trick that people use different terms, this nightmares
happen to me, they do, I know, yeah, you don't find it, but another guy with just different terms,
yeah, I know, the same thing, you know, we're all just remixing, Slavo, I know it's late for
you where you are, is it okay if I butt in with a couple of questions before we finish, yeah,
but don't expect, I mean, I'm here, I will direct them toward, toward Sean, and you can, you can
cut in as you, as you like, but now I love this idea, now I always make this joke when people
ask me, would you like to have a dialogue, I say, yes, I love dialogues, but the way they're written,
the late Plato's dialogue, where one guy talks all the time, and the other guy just every 10 minutes
says, by Zeus, so it is Socrates, so I really don't know, to that, please ask him, ask Sean.
Okay, yeah, so I haven't read any of Lee Smolin yet, though Einstein's Unfinished Revolution is on
my list, but so I've read an article that Slavo wrote, I think it's upcoming in a book next year
on quantum theory, but in it, in theory, just one short chapter, sorry, yeah,
yeah, just one chapter, just one chapter, but Slavoy paraphrases Smolin's belief that quantum
mechanics is the most successful theory ever formulated, but the only problem with it is that
it is wrong. And I have the sense that it is at least incomplete in that it doesn't
go here with relativity, so there's no quantum gravity, no theory of everything that's going
to find here at Smolin. Right, right, but what I'm wondering is how you glossed this idea and
more important, more relevant to our discussion is whether the many worlds interpretation is
something that's in jeopardy on the road to this theory of everything.
Yeah, so I, there is a temptation in certain circles to, sorry, that's that's a little too
prejudicial. We don't know what the final theory of everything is, right, so each one of us as
individual researchers will have our favorite ways of trying to make progress. And this goes back
to what we discussed at the very beginning about preferences for different versions of
quantum mechanics. Many worlds, as a theory, is as simple as it is possible for a theory to be.
The problem with it is that connecting it to the richness of the world involves some tricky
metaphysical and physical steps, right, about which people can be rightfully skeptical. Whereas
something like hidden variables or whatever is an ugly complicated theory, but the world is
ugly and complicated, so it matches the world in a more easy way. And you can, you can have
different feelings about what to do. Somewhat, there's a, there's a third way, which is someone
like Lee who says like, I don't quite see how it is working right now. Therefore, I will throw it
all out and start from scratch and try to do better. And to me, we're nowhere close to that
point yet. We have not yet done anything like trying to understand the world in the quantum
language to motivate trying to improve on quantum mechanics. In particular, just to be clear about
relativity, there's special relativity and general relativity. Quantum mechanics and special relativity
are 100% compatible. That is literally quantum field theory, which is the best tested theory in
the universe ever. General relativity, which says that space time is dynamical, and that's what
gravity is. It is true. We do not have a once and for all final quantum theory of gravity.
But again, to me, many worlds is the most promising route forward for doing that.
And if you'll indulge me just for, you know, one more minute here, the reason why I think we're,
we're stuck is because even the most highly trained physicist learns classical physics first.
Newton's laws, the Kepler's laws, the planets, etc. And then they're taught how to take a classical
theory and convert it into a quantum theory to quantize it, right? And that's what we do with
electromagnetism and the standard model of particle physics and all those things. There's no law, rule,
or even suggestion that says that the correct quantum theory of the universe has to be obtained
by starting with a classical theory and quantizing it. The universe doesn't do that,
it just is quantum from the start. And if you want to imagine that maybe that's why
it's been difficult to quantize gravity, because you shouldn't be quantizing gravity,
you should be thinking about quantum mechanics and finding gravity within it.
And clear, I would argue, I'm not going to bother you with it now, but I would strongly
argue the right framework to do that in is exactly many worlds.
But okay, now it came to me, my last, not attack, but problem. You know, I mentioned this, I admit it,
very suspicious parallel between many worlds and you pointed out immediately the difference and this
in our symbolic universe superpositions, this may happen, that may happen. But what is,
this is my restraint, not that the theory is too crazy, my god, I'm a Hegelian, the more crazy
it is, the more we like it. But I have another problem. But this different, for example, 99%
the discappals, 1% okay, and we have both. But though these two, or I don't know how many,
intimate universes, somehow interact or it's just totally different lines. This is, as a
philosopher, maybe it's a wrong instinct, I would be obsessed with some interaction, you know,
let's to say it's very primitive, what I will say, I in advance apologize once to say yes,
we live in this 99%, but somehow to understand it, you have to read it against the background of
that shitty 1%, which that's what I don't find in many worlds, or I don't know enough about it.
How would you react to this? The short answer is the different worlds will not interact.
This is something which Everett, when he first wrote down the ideas in the 1950s,
he was not clear on, he didn't have quite the technology that we have, the intellectual
technology we have. But this is exactly what decoherence gets you. Since the 70s and 80s,
when we understand decoherence better, it's not just that you are allowed to think about
different parts of the wave function as separate worlds. But it's literally the right way to think
about them. They don't interact, they won't interact going forward, because they've decoherent
from each other. And there's a technical exposition about that involving states in the environment
being perpendicular to each other. There's a small footnote there, because if you wait
really long, if you wait 10 to the 100 years, then all of the worlds will in some sense blur back
together into one big world. The use of our universe is a crucial feature in allowing these
different worlds to be separate. But even though Hollywood would like it to be otherwise, in the
real world, the separate many world branches are completely non-interacting with each other.
It was mentioned to me by our middleman that, did you or am I misreading you,
that you kind of read in detail the strip of that shitty movie and this very predicate makes it
clear why they don't like it, everything everywhere and so on. Because what I didn't like in it is
that with all these different versions, at the end it has this shitty conclusion, but this is the
real world, we should accept it and so on. I would like, what is missing for me in the movie is
precisely what you're going to tell this, but we don't know where we are and so on. This uncertainty
is lost, I think, in the movie. You know, you're completely right. I didn't read it ahead of time,
but I did interview the director's writers on my podcast. We had a wonderful conversation.
They're very smart people, but the demands of narrative are different than the demands of physics
is the problem. And not only multiverse movies, but time travel movies have the same
feature where even though there's multiple timelines or whatever, the narrative focus
implicitly lends more value to certain characters and devalues other characters.
And if this were the real world, that would be completely illegitimate, right? Like all the
different people in the different timelines, they have a right to exist. You're telling me
you're going to eliminate my timeline just because it's not yours? You're a genocidal monster. That's
terrible. No, because that's my problem. Now I will go even one step lower. Did you see Indiana
Jones's face? I did, I did. You did? Oh, we are normal people. You know, the moment I, like,
it's a shitty movie, but for some reasons I found some, first for me, it's a very desperate movie.
It's clear that Indiana Jones's desire is archimedes. I want to remain there. And that
beat punches him, go back. And it's a very desperate ending. Her function of fervor,
that actress, is not erotic. It's just to bring the couple back together. And you know how they are,
two desperate old men embracing and so on. Can you even compare this with being in Syracuse at
that point and so on? This I find much more productive. The conclusion is not, but this is
the real world or whatever. You know, I could not possibly agree more. I am, I don't like the movie,
but I find now, you know what attracted me to Indiana Jones 5? That it was so universally
attached, a total bullshit or whatever. It's, no, it automatically evokes my sympathy, no?
Well, there's, there's a fundamental conservative, teleological aspect to this way of thinking that
our timeline, our universe is the right one and we should be in it. And we cannot possibly think
about improving it by changing the past or anything like that. I think that the filmmakers missed a
chance they should have left Indy, spoiler alert, back there with Archimedes. He would have been
happier. He's getting old anyway. They went for a sappy lowbrow ending. No, but so at least
we can conclude in this way then that in spite of all from my side, unresolved dangers and so on,
we, you put it wonderfully now. The big lesson of also in many words, the quantum physics is
always bear in mind that this is not the only possible world. You know, don't, don't put this
universe as a major or as you put it nicely in this teleological sense, like that's what again
bothered me in everything everywhere. As if the reality is here in that tax office even with
genie liquor display and all these tricks gotten back is thus so that you return more satisfied,
happy to this world. I would opt for a much more desperate solution that, that she that actors
would have traveled in different worlds were many much better than totally desperate. She ends up
here with the awareness of what would have been, you know. You know, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't
see the script for that before it was made, but I did consult on the Avengers movies with Thanos
destroying the world and then they went back in time to fix it, etc. And I argued that if you go
back in time and fix it, you know, you're, they had this multiple timeline thing and I don't want
you to eliminate a timeline. I think that's, that's terrible. But as I said, what you should do is allow
the timelines to re rejoin each other so that individuals have memories of both in their
future selves, but they didn't go for that. It was too complicated. No, but that again, the problem
for me would be, I would like to rework many worlds interpretation, but I know I'm here
confusing a pure physical process with symbolic one where this would have been possible, you know,
this rejoining key, not in this sense, because as for this time travel travels and so on, you know,
which is a wonderful, totally pessimist version of it. I forgot the title, you know, the the
British now he's a little bit old actor Christopher Fry. She played Oscar Wilde also in the movie.
No, yeah. She wrote a novel which is so desperately pessimist. He even done almost
realistically physically scientifically nonsense. A guy, a scientist whose family died in Auschwitz,
wants to prevent this. So she invents a rather primitive time travel machine. Not you can
move up and down. Just you pick up a moment in time and you can do some little change there.
So what she does in this is this, this scientist, she there was in the village where Hitler was
born, a small stream above for which all the village was drinking water. So she puts around the time of
when Hitler had to be conceived, she puts into the water very limited intervention, just some
poisonous element which makes women infertile. So Hitler is not born. Then he steps out of his
laboratory and goes into the world and finds a nightmare. Nazism developed, but instead of Hitler,
somebody like Werner von Braun, a much more able scientist became the leader and developed the
bomb and the Nazis won. So here we have a wonderful, totally pessimistic denouement.
He tries to go back to bring back Hitler, so that at least the good guys will win.
I love, speaking about alternate histories, there is a wonderful book that I love, I forgot the title,
a whole book on alternate histories, stories about what might have happened with Hitler.
There are the usual lines, he survived, went to Argentina, whatever, blah, blah, blah. Then
different battles, how he might have won, but my favorite one is in his youth. Isn't this wonderful
alternate history? Hitler succeeds as a painter and whoops into painting his horrible visuals,
becomes a great modernist, becomes a celebrated artist and end of Nazism, so on, you know. Although
this is, I know, I don't take it seriously, but it's very refreshing to think along these terms,
that's all I'm saying. It was so delicious, sorry I'm getting tired, but I really will,
so you will write, you don't yet have that text. I don't, but I'll think about it, definitely.
Please, because, okay, then, can I, in quoting Q, refer to this event here? Because I really want to
immediately, quickly, in the chapter that you, the middleman know, I will add a footnote and,
as not a footnote, a couple of pages, but in a sincere way. You know how we intellectuals,
you are more honest, I hope so, physicist, human, you know how you cheat? I will
to write a page and then I put a footnote. When I already wrote these pages, I noticed that a
friend of mine will cheat a similar idea and so on, you know, Eurella, I will not do this, I will do it.
100% yes. I'm really grateful for this, because, you know, no, we didn't just blah, blah, and we
didn't just fraternally agree, we located the difference, but at the same time, we draw so many
precise lines, you know, because would you agree to finish in a more upbeat sense that, my God,
we live in a wonderful time where the big, the big even metaphysical questions are again
arising, you know, in the sense of, yeah, even one big fan sees it now, you cannot just
ignore it, no? Right, and I do want to, I just want to insert that if you, if you go back to the past
and change things, they like, as you imply, they might get better or worse, there's no rule that
we live in the best, or the worst, because I even read a pessimist novel about Stalinism,
where Stalin is killed, but he's killed in 35, and the one who takes over is Yezhov,
his secret policeman, and it's even worse, you can imagine, you know, if you were, yes.
Yeah, that's, I think my pessimist lesson also from my, although in Yugoslavia, communism was pretty
soft, you know, but you know, here also, I think a quantum approach in a general sense
gives you to think, for example, I will make not just a political point, but the modest ones,
I was recently at the round table, sorry, in London, and there were some black ladies from South
Africa, and I asked them frankly, I wanted to be honest, not Eurocentric, I said, listen, I read
a lot how in South Africa, electricity, cops, the state is falling apart, blah, blah, blah,
and I almost cried, one of the black ladies was so honest, he said I'm engaged for decades in A
and C struggle, but he told me he told us that the situation is now so sad that among the poor blacks,
blacks, poor in South Africa, you notice the predominant nostalgia forever, because he said,
listen, the standard of living was even a little bit better than now. They had enough thought, blah,
blah, now it's no electricity chaos, while there was, it was a police state which wins
less violence, some kind of basic order, and now, you know, the black are, you know, that now,
under, after three decades of how of A and C rule, you know that South Africa is a country with
the greatest tension between rich and poor in the world, in the entire world, and then, of course,
something totally predictable happened, another black lady attacked me, although I didn't say
anything, as a racist, you don't have the right to talk about this, you know, she played the game of
you, white people are responsible even now for all the mistakes, to be cynical, he played this in
bad sense, super determination, you white people are responsible for all the mistakes now, you know,
and here I think this kind of alternate thinking is necessary, like where did think really go wrong,
and I think it's too naive, because the radical leftist answer is too naive, it's because Mandela
didn't go to the end, if he were to make no compromise with, but then it would have been,
then it would have been Mugabe Zimbabwe, you know, only earlier there, you know, and this is a terrifying
problem for me, but we are losing time, listen, it was such a pleasure for me, I hope that we
meet again, and are you allowed the middleman to give me Sean's email, and no, but I have it,
because you CC connect, yeah, I have it, if I will, can I don't, don't be afraid, I'm not this
kind of a stalker who now in two hours will ask you 10 questions, and say this, but if I have a
short precise question, can I ask you and you give me one sentence answer, you know,
because you are my only, the last thing I'm always tempted,
it's sensational, but is it true what many quantum physicists, okay, sound, which means that
Stephen Hawking did his real work while he was young, lately he was more just popularizing
thing, is this true or it's not so simple? I mean, that's, there is some truth in that,
but there's also truth in exactly the same statement applied to a lot of people who did
not have a degenerative neuron disease, so he was obsessed with these hidden variables for decades,
but it's, he'll meet 20s that he did his great work, no? This is a young person's game, one,
no matter what your level of physical ability is. That's why I shade, it's even historically wrong,
this tendency to look at the old age, the last text of words by a big name, as if there is some
final truth in them, it's totally wrong, like to amuse you with the last story,
Jacques Lacan, when he was dying, had a young mistress, Catherine Mio, and she almost made the
career out of being there at his side when she was dying, and he mumbled some things,
what did she mean with those, well, what if it was nothing, it was just a confused trembling,
and I see this even with many philosophers, a lot of them reach their greatest point in their
middle ages, and then they just slowly go down, I mean, no? Well, I hope sincerely that in the battle
of quantum physicists, you will emerge as a winner, and then it's your KGB terror to
do, you know, when I give a talk, and you know, usually before they ask you there,
could you just say somewhere to test the microphone, you know what I always say,
Robespierre, no freedom for the enemies of freedom, this should be our motto, we thanks
very much, thanks very much, if you, the middleman, if there is something too stupid or whatever,
I give you, now I will be the victim, I give you all the Stalinist right to cut it short,
though we did whatever you want, I'm not a narcissist here, I'm really a communist at this
level, you know that whenever there is a conflict between an individual and an institution, I prefer
to be automatically on the side of the institute, because I edit some book series, and don't you
hate authors, you see, you talk one comma there, destroys everything and so on, you know, so I'm
really grateful for this, it helped me a lot, the only, my only reproach to you, Sean, is that
you ruined my evening, because I wanted this so dirty old movie, now I will have to go into it
and quickly write two, three pages, no? My apologies for that, that's what I do. No, here, I, you're
pardoned for everything, but not for this, when the people take power for this, okay, I'm a good guy,
you don't get gulag, but you will get two years of reeducation camp, you know, like, get up and
fight. I could use that anyway, that's okay, education is always good. Thanks very much, and
again, the middleman, really, I mean it, don't even ask me, do all the dirty stuff,
you know, all my confusions and one, sorry? The middleman is probably, is not going to be
cutting anything out, because this has been the middleman's most successful conversation yet,
since I haven't had to speak at all. But I like the middleman, the term, you know why, because
he wrote this show today, people don't like authority. I always like authority in the sense
that sometimes you need authority in the debate when it goes, but today, already at the level of
words, it gets confused, no longer likes to talk about director, leader, the favorite
term is ordinator, you know, it sounds, you keep all your power, but it sounds much more innocent,
you know, and just coordinating things, you know. So I know, and you know, that's why I still have
hope in Iran, I have connections there on the opposite side, and they told me, you know,
still you cannot contend Iran in spite of all that's going there now with something like Saudi Arabia.
Women were able to, women were able to protest precisely because they have a strong role, for
example, it's a common joke there that the big guy is a minister, usually a man.
Although, or even this is not the case, you have one, two feminine ministers in government, but
immediately when you make there to make a business deal, you discover that the minister is an idiot,
and you have to talk with persons around him who are in majority women.
What underestimated Iran, it's tremendous, they are so crazy, they translated 15 of my books,
they are, it's intellectual, no, this is not a good sign for them, it's a sign of contusion,
if I want to say is that it's intellectually alive, while in other countries, Egypt and so on,
it's very tragic how little they translate, they simply don't have this humanity, social sciences
life that we share, you know. The history does matter, the histories there are very different.
Yeah, yeah, but as Iranians point out, they are not simply a Muslim country, they are Farsi,
Persian, no, and they always proudly point out, we are not Arabs, you know, sorry for this
because today you never know what will be proclaimed as racism, you know.
Yes, thank you both, this has been a blast. Hold on Geeselings, before you go, please like,
subscribe, follow if you haven't already, smash all those buttons, and also if you haven't followed
me on Twitter at Robinson Earhart, or if you're not joining me every morning as I eat my pint
of ice cream on Twitch at Robinson Earhart on Robinson Eats, please do so.
