Hello, this is Robinson Earhart, here with the introduction to Robinson's podcast, number
196. And this episode is with the brilliant Stephen Wolfram, who is the founder and CEO
of Wolfram Research, the creator of Mathematica, Wolfram Alpha, and the Wolfram Language. And
among his many other accomplishments, Stephen received his PhD in theoretical physics from
Caltech when he was only 20 years old with the renowned physicist Richard Feynman on his committee.
This is Stephen's second appearance on the show, much to my delight. And in episode 102,
we talked about artificial intelligence, chat GPT, and then there was a lengthy and enjoyable
digression into the philosophy of math. In this one, though, we turn to another of Stephen's
ambitious projects, which is his search for the fundamental theory of physics, and how it has
led him to a very mysterious structure called the rouliad, which is the entangled limit of all
possible computations. That's a mouthful, but we'll get into that in a lot more detail. And
Stephen believes that the rouliad, though I don't want to put words into his mouth, so these are
my words, is the universe or that the universe is part of the rouliad. And observers like us are
simply embedded in the rouliad and experiencing it in different ways. We also, along the way,
get into some ideas in the philosophy of science, some metaphysics about abstract and concrete
objects, and then the foundations of quantum mechanics. A lot of the material that we discussed
can be found in Stephen's book, A Project to Find the Fundamental Theory of Physics, and in
writings on his website, including an article titled The Concept of the Rouliad, links to which
are in the description. He also does plenty of live streams, he posts plenty of other articles,
there are Q&As, so there's also a link to his website where you can find all of these things.
On my end, reviews, likes, comments, subscribes, these are all very much appreciated, and there is
also now a Patreon, a link to which is in the description. If you are interested in supporting
the show, add free episodes, there's an RSS feed to that, and then some very nice show notes and
takeaways. But now, without any further ado, I hope that you enjoy this conversation as much as I
enjoyed having it with Steve. Before we get to the rouliad, I want to start a bit with its history,
which I guess is also your history, and my understanding from talking with string theorists,
causal set theorists, loop, quantum, gravity theorists is that many other theories of everything
have come out of quantum gravity since general relativity and quantum field theory are two
best physical theories, but my understanding is that the rouliad did not come from this direction
at all. So where did your search for the fundamental theory of physics begin?
Well, it's complicated stories. So when I was a teenager, I was interested in physics, and
I became a pro before too very long, and I worked on quantum field theory and general
relativity, basically, particle physics and cosmology and so on. And that was in the late 1970s,
and at that time, I wasn't in the, let's find a theory of everything, I was in,
we have some theories, they're starting to actually work, things like QCD,
things about the early universe and cosmology and so on. Let's figure out the consequences of
these theories. And that was a fertile thing at that time. And it was, I managed to make some
progress on that. Then I got, I was making computational tools that I used, I don't know
why other people didn't use them, but at least at the time, there were these computational
tools for doing calculations in mathematical physics and so on. I used these to great effect.
Then in 1979, I kind of realized I had outgrown all existing computational tools, and well,
next step was build my own. So I started doing that. And that led to this thing called SMP,
which was kind of a forerunner of Mathematica and both in language. And in building SMP,
I kind of was a, this is, I want to make this computational system, what are, think about it
like a natural scientist, what are the kind of primitives of computation from which we can build
this. And so I did that, built the system, practical system, etc, etc, etc. And then I got
back into doing basic science. This is probably 1981 or so. And I had this, you know, this basic
question about sort of where does complexity come from in the universe. And that the sort of the
standard mathematical physics that I knew didn't tell me much about that. Well, I realized, and
this is sort of back projecting history, because at the time I wouldn't have explained it this way.
But the thing I realize now is that the experience of building this computational language SMP
back then, from sort of these abstract computational primitives kind of gave me the meta idea that you
could just sort of construct a theory from nothing, so to speak, that you could construct a theory,
sort of from the ground up, rather than doing what one traditionally does in natural science,
which is to say, look at the universe as it is, and try and say, how does one get to,
how does one reverse engineer the universe as it is. So that kind of experience of building
this computational system from sort of abstract primitives was the thing that kind of got me into
this idea of let's, let's see what happens when we just start from some abstract primitives and
build things from there. What, what do we get? Do we get something that's like the natural world?
Do we get something completely different? And then the big kind of set of discoveries that I made
about these things called cellular automata that are just, you know, simple rules applied to grid
lines of black and white squares and so on, that the big surprise was, if you just do the computer
experiments, you just sort of turn your computational telescope out into the computational universe,
you discover some remarkable phenomena, particularly you discover that even when the rules are very
simple, the behavior is complicated. And so that to me at first, that was a story of kind of the
explaining things in the natural world. How does one explain sort of the complexity of snowflakes
or turbulence and fluid flow? What are the underlying sort of foundational ideas, the kind of
sort of pre physics sort of abstract ideas that lead to this? It's not traditional mathematics,
it's not traditional mathematical physics. It's something different. It, I realized,
was this kind of computational foundation. So I worked on that for a number of years,
then I kind of had a sort of an attempt to build what ends up getting called complexity theory
as a sort of, as an actual activity in the world. And the process of doing that convinced me, okay,
plan B is just figure out a bunch of stuff myself. Let's not wait for the rest of the world to do
this. Let's just figure it out myself. And that led me to start building mathematical
law from language and our company. And also in the end, this book, big book, a new kind of science
that I would now describe as being at its heart, it's a work of Ruleology. It's a given these rules,
what happens in the world. And the big surprise there was that sort of given these rules, the
given very simple rules, there was just a lot of richness in what happened and a lot of general
principles like the idea of computational irreducibility, the principle of computational
equivalence and so on, these kind of emergent general principles that I kind of realized were
there from having done this kind of essentially in a natural history study of Ruleology of kind
of what do rules out there in the computational universe do. Anyway, they're one of the use cases
for this kind of new kind of science based on sort of thinking about things computationally.
One of the use cases like couldn't avoid looking at was fundamental physics, because after all I
knew a bunch about fundamental physics. And the obvious question was, you can see that
from such a simple rule, you can get all this complicated behavior. So now the question is,
well, what about the universe? That's our sort of biggest example of sort of complicated behavior.
Could it to be the result of some very simple rule? Well, the first thing I knew was that
cellular automata weren't going to do it. That was what we know from relativity about the structure
of space and time and so on. Cellular automata say, let's start off assuming we know that sort of
things are laid out in space in a particular way, that they sort of update in time in a particular
way. We've already locked in the structure of space and time as this kind of grid. And that's not how
the universe actually works. Actually, I recently learned that back in the early part of the 20th
century, well, I knew that many physicists believed that, for example, spaces that was
discrete at that time. But I think Heisenberg in particular had a model of kind of discrete cells
in space that's very much like a cellular automata model. And he didn't actually make it work. And
the fact that he didn't had some interesting historical consequences. I didn't I didn't
really know that had been done by him at that time. But anyway, that wasn't going to work. So
early 1990s, I'm sort of thinking about this kind of thing. And the big idea at that time was the
realization that a network is a much more flexible structure from which you can potentially build
space than this sort of fixed grid. So that sort of a technical thing, it's like you imagine
that space is made of just discrete points. And the only thing those points sort of have to say
for themselves is how they're related to other points. So you're building up this kind of network
of relations. And then the result that I knew by the mid 1990s was much like when you look at a
fluid with a bunch of molecules bouncing around, what emerges from that molecular dynamics on a
large scale is fluid dynamics is kind of the large features of fluids. I knew that what emerged
from sort of the small scale of these this network and updates on the network and so on,
what would emerge on the large on a large scale with all sorts of sort of footnotes
was general stability, the structure of space and time as we are familiar with it from 20th
century physics. So it was kind of exciting. I didn't figure out quantum mechanics at that time.
I had ideas about it. I was frankly prejudiced from my own sort of desire, I suppose, to believe
that sort of the the the progress of history is somehow unique. And that there wasn't, you know,
that there weren't lots of copies of us all over the place doing different kinds of things.
And I didn't, you know, I didn't really see how that worked. So then I well, I kind of it was sort
of my my friends in physics at that time were like, like, you know, we hate the fact that you're
going off to this completely different idea about how fundamental physics might work from the
mathematical physics that we've all been doing for the last, you know, 50 or 100 years. And
so I was like, okay, fine, you know, the market doesn't want this, I'm going to go off and do
other things. So I worked on both Malphyr and computational language and all sorts of things
like that. 20, what was it, 2018, I guess, I kept on coming back to thinking about this kind of,
you know, what could one make progress with in fundamental physics. And the the thing that
that then happened was I sort of realized that there was some with some things I didn't like,
there were kind of arbitrary and the way that I done these set up these networks and things,
I made some progress, thinking about hypergraphs instead of ordinary graphs and so on, that helped
sort of unlock various technical aspects of things. Then 2019, a couple of young physicists who knew
about what I've been doing were like, you know, you can't just leave this project undone, you know,
you got to go forward and actually actually do something with this. And so that led to
something that went vastly more quickly than I expected in 2019 of building up our physics
project and actually understanding about how quantum mechanics works and turned out the thing
that I was afraid of doesn't actually happen for reasons that I could not did not previously foresee.
But the, okay, so so how does that work? This is a long tangled tail. I mean, the sort of big,
you know, the next big sort of injection of of kind of confidence building was the fact that
we seem to be able to reproduce the main features of 20th century physics from this underlying
completely abstract infrastructure. And but then there was still a problem, because the problem was,
I thought at first, we're searching for the fundamental rule, the fundamental computational
rule from which our universe comes. But that always bothered me, because it's like, we get to that,
it's kind of the end of Copernicanism in some sense, you know, we were, we keep on being told,
we're not special, you know, our planet isn't the center of the universe, etc, etc, etc.
So then if we find this rule, and it's one particular rule, we can hold it in our hands,
and maybe it's a simple rule that seems to us simple, why did we get the simple rule universe
and not some completely different universe. So that really bothered me for a long time. And as
is usually the case with these kinds of things, that, you know, it's like, I don't know how I'll
explain that, it's kind of like, in, you know, when Newton was doing sort of celestial mechanics,
we're saying, well, once the planets are set in motion, I can work out what happened. But,
you know, how did they get into their initial configuration? You know, that's the work of God,
so to speak, was what he said at that time. Same with Darwin trying to figure out, you know,
sort of the natural selection, but how did the first life come about? In both of these cases,
what we know from sort of the long run of history is that sort of the, it was a thing from outside
the systems that they were thinking about, that led them to eventually led people after them to be
able to understand, you know, how could a solar system form, etc. etc. etc. So in this case,
the thing that we realized was that this idea that you're searching for the rule, and then you
have to say, well, why this rule and not another, it's just not the right question. The, what's,
what's really going on, I think, is that all possible rules are being run. Now, we had a big
tip off to this, because in this network, and the network is continually getting rewritten,
and you're getting a new network at every moment in time, there are many different ways that that
rewriting can happen. And that leads to many different parts of history, where you've got this
network, it can be rewritten one way, it can be rewritten another way, those are two different
branches. After a while, the, the ways that it can get rewritten may end up with the exact same
network, two different branches may end up producing the same network. So then you have a merge in
this, in this thing, we call a multirate graph, which is this kind of graph of the histories,
possible histories of the universe, not possible, the graph of histories of the universe. And, and so
the kind of the, the first big tip off is that we're not looking for the history of the universe,
we're looking for this graph of these different histories of the universe. And, and in some sense,
the sort of the, I suppose, ontological sort of view of this is they're all happening. It's not
that we picked a particular one, it's they're all happening. And then the realization is that as
observers of the universe, we, our, our minds are also doing this kind of branching and merging
that the rest of the universe is doing. So this kind of how do we perceive the universe, it's the
story of how does a branching and merging mind perceive a branching and merging universe. And
that story ends up essentially being the story of quantum mechanics. And it's so, so kind of
this idea that we are an extended thing with respect to what we call branchial space, the
space of possible branches of history. So, so that was, that was kind of the, the realization there.
Then we realized, well, but you can take this even further, rather than taking a particular rule and
applying it in all possible ways. Let's just consider all possible rules. Now the question is,
so how do we perceive the thing you get from studying sort of the evolution of all possible
rules? You might say, how can you say anything definite from a thing where all possible rules
are happening? Well, it is in fact, a very rigid structure. You might think it's a big floppy thing,
because everything can sort of in some sense, everything can happen. But there is a dynamics
to it. It's not as if everything can sort of happen all at once. It's that there is, you know,
this thing happens, then that thing happens, there is a chain of causality about what happens.
And yes, it's sort of all possible chains to be followed. But there's, there's still a sort of a
very rigid structure to this whole system. And so then the, that thing, that sort of entangled
limit of all possible computations is what we call the Ruliad. And so now the point is that what one
has to think about is, if that's what there is, in some sense, what do we perceive about what there
is? Because we are part of the Ruliad. So the question of what we perceive about the universe
is a question of how do we, there's a certain kind of observer of the Ruliad. We're not observing
the whole Ruliad. We are observing some tiny little piece of the Ruliad. It's very much like in
physical space, we're sitting on this particular planet, you know, in this particular corner of
some particular galaxy. And so our perception of the universe is based on that particularity of
where we are. And there isn't really a theory of where we are, we are where we are, we can go and
trace back and say, well, you know, our galaxy evolved in this or that way. But, you know, once
we know where we are, so to speak, then we have a certain perception of the universe. And the point
is, the realization is, it's the same story with the Ruliad. That is, we are, we as observers are
sort of, we are taking a particular tiny slice of the Ruliad. Now, the big question is, so can we say
anything sort of scientifically based on this? And the thing that I realized is that, that the key
observation is that for, it depends on what kind of an observer you are. If you were an observer
outside the Ruliad, observing the Ruliad from the outside, if you could do that, you would have
some conclusion about how complicated the universe is. But it actually, we're observers with some
very particular characteristics. For example, we are computationally bounded. Our minds are sort of,
you know, we have finite number of neurons, 100 billion neurons, whatever it is, we're bounded
in the computations we can do. And we already know, you know, I studied a bunch, the second
order of thermodynamics, law of entropy increase and so on. And that's a case where we, what we
observe is that all those molecules bouncing around, they seem to us random in the motions that they
have. Now, if we were to trace molecule by molecule and trace all the computations about how all the
molecules interact, we would say, they're not random. They follow very particular rules and we
can work out what they are. We can work out what the molecules will do. But the point is that,
as computationally bounded observers, we can't do that. So we kind of have to throw up our hands and
say, it looks random to us. And that's sort of an example of how being an observer of the kind
that we are necessarily leads us to certain conclusions about the way the world is. That
is, we believe in the second order of thermodynamics, because we are computationally bounded observers
observing this kind of irreducible computation of these molecules bouncing around. And so that
then leads us to the question of, well, given certain assumptions about us as observers,
what does that mean about the physics we can perceive? And I think there are two key
sort of features of us as observers, although I think there are other ones that seem so obvious
that they've never really been called out as assumptions about how the world works.
But the two that I think are critical for 20th century physics, at least,
one is that we're computationally bounded, and the other is that we believe we are persistent in time.
So it is not self-evident that we believe that there is a consistent thread of us
that goes through time, even though in this model of physics, at every moment we're made of
different atoms of space and so on. Even despite that, we believe that we persistently exist through
time. Well, it turns out that those two assumptions, computational boundedness and persistence through
time, those two assumptions with the mathematical structure of the Roulillade are sufficient to
give us the three fundamental theories of 20th century physics, which to me is completely
remarkable, because the fact that it is possible to derive laws of physics is something that is
at some level very surprising. I mean, the three kind of fundamental laws that we're talking about
that are the cornerstones of 20th century physics are statistical mechanics, where the main event is
the second law of thermodynamics, general relativity, theory of spacetime, and quantum mechanics.
And what has been believed in the past, what was believed from the 1860s on, is that look,
statistical mechanics, the second law of thermodynamics should be derivable in some way
from the laws of mechanics. Once you know how all these molecules bounce around,
it should just be a matter of pure mathematical derivation to show that they satisfy the second
law. Nobody's succeeded in showing how that works. In the end, I think the reason is that to understand
it requires understanding about observers and computational irreducibility and computational
validness and so on, which is a rather different kind of set of concepts than people were pursuing
in mathematical physics. But the thing that is then very surprising is general relativity and
quantum mechanics, both of these were seen by me as well as everybody else as kind of wheel-in
features of the universe. That is, we could have had a universe that has general relativity,
we could have had a universe that doesn't have general relativity, likewise quantum mechanics.
But what seems to be the case is that for observers like us, it is inevitable that what we
perceive must be a universe which has those particular laws. So now you ask, well, what's
the foundation of that? I mean, the Rulliard, in some sense, it's a necessary object. It's not an
object that is like, well, it happens to me this way. It is sort of as necessary as the fact that
2 plus 2 equals 4, given our definition of what 2 is and what plus is and so on. It's not, that's not
something we can wiggle out of. That's not something we can say, well, on Mars, 2 plus 2 might not be
equal to 4. Given our definitions, it is inevitable. And so, similarly with the Rulliard, given the
kind of the concept of computation, the abstract concept of computation, the Rulliard is a
necessary object. Strangely, it's an object and it surprises me as well as other people
that hadn't been studied before. It's an object that, in some sense, is an obvious object to
consider. I think the reason it wasn't studied, certainly the reason I haven't studied it,
is because, in a sense, computation, well, in my lifetime, computation has been gone from being
super valuable to being somewhat every day. But the profligate wasting of computation done by the
universe is something that it took me a while to kind of come to terms with. That is that there
could be, you know, all of this computation happening that is all irrelevant to, that's all
way below anything that we perceive. And that that was, and that there are all these different
branches of history and different rules being followed and so on. And that that, you know,
that sort of the universe is just doing all this computation was something that seems,
it felt like, well, actually, we should concentrate on the particular computation that we care about.
But in any case, I think the, so what's, I think you write that the Rulliard is sort of in its
origins is not a reverse engineering natural science effort. It is a, you know, a bottom up
effort of this is an abstract object, does it now relate to what we see in the world?
And as I say, in my personal history, you know, the fact that I ended up thinking about science in
those terms is a is a consequence of the of the of the pure coincidence that, you know, I worked
on sort of building computational tools for which I had to think about things sort of from the bottom
up. After I happened to learn about a bunch of things about sort of top down natural science.
Mm hmm. Well, that was wonderful. My hope, and I'll give you a break now, my hope with this time
is to get pretty deep into Rulliology, which is a new word for me. You've already taken us there and
presaged a lot of the things that I wanted to discuss. Before I go on, though, maybe I ought to
just, I have this quote here, it's basically a slogan, just to get maybe a sort of definition
of the Rulliad on the board for our listeners. And so you wrote that the Rulliad may be defined as
the entangled limit of everything that is computationally possible, i.e. the result of following
all possible computational rules in all possible ways. Yes, returning to what you were saying,
I'm not a philosopher of science. But like most people, I've read the structure of scientific
revolutions by by Kuhn a number of times. And what really struck me about what you were saying is
how closely this story sort of mirrors his picture of revolutions in some ways. So you
started out working in in normal science, so to speak, we already had these established
programs, general relativity and quantum field theory. And my understanding is that this is really
where some of the other theories of everything emerge from. So string theory comes out of
modeling the strong force, so on, and so forth. But then, yeah, and then the path integral
is a key part of causal set theory. But then a young person comes along. And of course,
you were well versed in these theories. But you throw it all away. And I think your words were,
you realize that you could construct a theory from nothing. And this is like the revolutionary
effort. And the normal scientists do not like this. And as you put it, like a lot of people
hated that you were going off and doing this in a completely different way.
I don't know if I have the book on my shelf. I don't know if it was in a project to find the
fundamental theory of physics, or it was it was in one of your posts on your website. But there was
this really funny cartoon where a dragon with cellular automata for teeth is about to chomp
down on a physicist who's writing equations in a blackboard. And I think this came out around the
time a new kind of science came out. You know, I just looked at this again when we were working on
the physics project and I was trying to try to explain its background. It was a review of a
new kind of science in the New York Times. It was a very, it was actually a very well written review
and a sensible review by a journalist. But the, I hadn't looked at this for, you know, for 20 years,
and I'd completely forgotten what was in it. But the thing that, you know, and at the time,
I was like, you know, why would my friends, the physicists, you know, they might not care about
what I'm doing? Why would there be any kind of negativity about it? And then I'm looking back
20 years later at this cartoon and, you know, realizing that from the outside, from the point of
view of this journalist writing this, this review, it seemed obvious to him that what this was was,
you know, as you put it, the dragon, you know, about to eat the sort of mathematical physicist.
But I think, you know, it's a funny thing because, for example, our physics project,
and now what's led to the Rulliard and so on, there are a whole series of sort of personal,
I don't know, circumstances that led to that path being a possible path, any one of which,
had they not been there, that path simply wouldn't have happened. And, you know, the fact that I've
sort of alternated between doing basic science and doing technology development, the technology
development drives this desire to kind of understand computation at a fundamental level for practical
reasons. You know, it's a somewhat strange kind of set of circumstances. And I think
you're right that the, I mean, the traditional, you know, physics went through a big kind of
transformation in the early part of the 20th century. And that transformation was, you know,
a lot of paradigmatic change. After that time, there wasn't a lot of paradigmatic change. There
was a lot of difficult technical work, but it was within that established paradigm. And it's,
you know, I think the fact that we have, you know, my own efforts, you know, had somebody said to me
when I was in the middle of doing these things, you know, are you sort of purposefully inventing
a new paradigm? I would say absolutely not. I'm just, you know, pursuing things using methods
and techniques that I understand. What happened as I was writing my book, a new kind of science,
I did realize somewhere in the middle of that, gosh, this is a different approach to science.
That actually wasn't my, you know, initial take on things. And but that was, you know, in a sense,
what I realized was that the, you know, in the sort of the long view of sort of history of science,
there'd been a long period starting in the 1600s, when mathematics and sort of things like calculus
were the dominant way of explaining things in nature. I mean, there had been methods from
antiquity just saying, this is what things are made of. But then we had the sort of mathematical
mathematicalization of exact science. And the thing the question was, well, you know, is there more,
so to speak? And this was a realization. Yes, there is more. And in a sense, it was a thing
that was obvious, given the ambient technology of our time, namely, you know, computation, that
doing mathematics, it's sort of ironic that I've, you know, spent lots of effort sort of making
mathematics doable by computer. And yet, the in a sense, the bigger picture is the computation,
not sort of this specific corner of it that ends up being the mathematics that we've currently done.
In our, in our last conversation, we talked a bit about the formal mathematical dimensions
of the roulette and how it connects to mathematical logic. But I wonder if you think
that maybe one way of putting the crux of this paradigm shift and how science is performed
goes back to something you said earlier, but it's sort of an adoption of a formal mathematical
framework. The way people do math, formal math, where computational theory has its home, where
as you put it, though, physics is derived, laws of physics are derived, rather than
being reconstructed based on experiment, the way that it has been done in the past.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's worth realizing that it's a funny difference of paradigms between
mathematics and physics. I mean, we could do axiomatic physics. We could say, you know,
a bunch of experiments, we don't care what's underneath, we're just going to figure out,
you know, how to piece together one experiment and another. In mathematics, we are doing,
we are doing, you know, we often have thought of mathematics as an axiomatic business,
where we simply say, you know, we put down these particular axioms, and then we see
their consequences. We don't necessarily, in physics, we think there's a there there,
we think there is a physical universe that's sort of underneath the things that we observe.
In mathematics, you know, the prevailing view from the early 20th century had been,
it's just you make up your axioms, and then you work out their consequences as a purely
formal kind of thing. I think the thing that I sort of realized is that this process of working
out the consequences of axioms is the same kind of process as this process of figuring out what's
going to happen in the physical universe based on sort of these abstract structures, and the
particulars of, oh, well, you've got sort of kind of symbolic expressions versus you've got
hypergraphs, none of that matters. They're all, it's kind of all a big bucket of equivalent things.
And what's really going on in mathematics, as in physics, is that you are, you know,
to derive one theorem from another, you are sort of applying rules to get from that one
theorem to the other theorem, just as in physics, you're applying rules to get from one state of
the universe to another. So in the end, kind of the structure that you build, that is the kind
of underlying structure of mathematics, is in fact the same structure. It's just this really odd
structure. And sort of it's a weird thing, because in physics, we're used to thinking about, for
example, space in bulk. We don't, we're not, we're not personally, you know, acquainted with the
individual atoms of space. We don't give them names. In mathematics, in sort of axiomatic way
of thinking about it, we have things which are like the atoms of space. There's things even below
axioms, but let's take the level of axioms. But we give these particular sort of points in
mathematical space, we give them names, it's so and so is theorem or whatever else. We actually
don't tend to think of mathematics in bulk. You know, in the history of human mathematics,
people have proved, I don't know, few million theorems. There's, this question is, what is the
limiting structure of mathematics? If we just went on proving theorems, and we had a quadrillion
theorems, what would we, what would mathematics be like? And there's sort of this, and both
mathematics and physics are, I think, rooted in the Rulliad. They're both stories of what are the
consequences of possible computations. The big difference between mathematics and physics is
that the way we're sampling the Rulliad for physics is different from the way we're sampling it
from mathematics. So in physics, we are these kind of computationally bounded observers,
sort of progressing through time and experiencing through time. I think in mathematics, the better
view of the mathematical observer, still computationally bounded. But instead of sort of a progression
through time, there's more like, it's almost spatial, but not quite. There's sort of a,
you're putting more and more theorems in your bag of things you believe. So instead of, I'm
experiencing the history of my life, I'm kind of progressively sort of putting more things that I
believe are true into my bag of, a bag of beliefs, so to speak. And that that's kind of the, the, the
sort of progression of mathematics looks like that. And there are all kinds of, you could ask, well,
what are mathematical observers like? Can we conclude things about the structure of mathematics?
Just as from the nature of physical observers, we can conclude things about sort of global laws of
physics. Are there global laws of mathematics, for example? Mathematics, as we normally practice it,
is a kind of theorem to theorem kind of business. Whereas it's not a thing where we make bulk
statements about the structure of all possible theorems and so on. And sort of, but in physics,
we're not talking about physics at the level of individual atoms of space, or even at the level
of individual molecules when we're doing some dynamics, for example, we're talking about sort
of bulk properties. And so there's sort of a question, what are the, what are the bulk laws
of mathematics? The first bulk law of mathematics, I think, is that high level mathematics is possible,
which is not obvious. In other words, if you look at what, I don't know, a proof assistant system is
doing something, automated theorem proving system, you're looking at you say, let's, let's look at
mathematics at the level of really low level axioms, let's go all the way down to the sand
and start trying to build up mathematics. The, you know, that is a deeply inhuman activity.
I mean, it's a long time to find it. Yeah, but, but right, but it's also,
it's something where the typical thing you do that, you know, is it's made from tiny pieces
as a human looking at what's done by the computer, it's incomprehensible. Oh, right.
And, right. And it's some, you know, and I think the, and when you build up, if you want to build
up something that, you know, humans might talk about right on blackboards, you're talking millions,
billions, quadrillions of individual little axiomatic steps. Right, right. Humans can't
read formal proofs. Right. Normal, like, mathematical proofs that mathematicians
use are so not rigorous compared to what a formal mathematician would take as rigorous,
and even what they do is not at all what a computer would be reading at that.
Right, right. So I mean, you know, you can build up the structure of a completely formalized proof,
but it is way below the level of human mathematics. So, you know, I think the analogy that's useful
is to fluid mechanics, where there is a molecular dynamics, there are individual molecules bouncing
around, but we humans do not experience that we humans experience the overall flow of fluids and
things like this. And so it is with mathematics, I think, I think that deep but that that sort of
foundational axiomatic layer, it's not what we experience. You know, for example, we routinely
will talk about the Pythagorean theorem. What do we exactly mean by that? You know, what definition
of real numbers are we using? What axioms are we using for this or that thing about set theory and so
it doesn't matter. It's, you know, we can still talk about the Pythagorean theorem,
and we can do kind of human level fluid dynamics level mathematics, just batting around features
of the Pythagorean theorem without always grinding ourselves down and looking at the molecules,
so to speak, looking at those sort of individual microscopic axiomatic pieces.
And that I think is sort of the first sort of big law of mathematics is that that's possible,
that it is possible to do mathematics at the level of the Pythagorean theorem,
rather than at the level of the microscopic axioms of set theory and so on. You don't have to,
you don't have to go down to that level. And I think that's a, you know, that's a feature of
sort of mathematical observers like us, just as physical observers like us believe in space,
believe in thermodynamics and so on. So it is, I think, that mathematical observers like us
believe in kind of higher level mathematics. And, you know, it's sort of interesting because
there are places where we run into problems with that. You know, when we look at, you know,
when we run into undecidability in mathematics, when we run into Beatles theorem and so on,
those are places where we hit the edges. We can't look at things at the level of the sort of pure,
the sort of fluid dynamics where we just can, we're somehow forced to look down to that lower
sort of mathematical level. And I think that, you know, it's, that's a question that sort of
seeing down to the foundations of mathematics in a way that most mathematicians in their daily
work, they just don't care. That's, that's not important. And I for a long time, I was very
confused about why undecidability is so rare in mathematics. You know, that is, you know, we've
known since 1931, there are, you know, there are theorems whose proofs are arbitrary, long,
infinite, unprovable from a given set of axioms and so on. Why doesn't that, you know, when,
when it comes to figuring out the piece of mathematics that somebody cares about,
why is there a finite proof of it? And, you know, the, I sort of was, because for example,
when you look in the computational universe possible programs, many things you see there are,
you run right into undecidability. You, you know, many questions you might ask, there's no finite
computation that can answer them, etc, etc, etc. So why isn't this more common in mathematics?
And I think the reason is because mathematics, as we practice it, is the sampling of the Rulliard
done by mathematical observers like us, who, by the very nature of us as computation-bounded
observers, has, have this feature that we end up sort of believing in this higher level,
sort of fluid dynamics level mathematics. And that that's sort of why it's, it's because
if, if we were different kinds of observers who were looking down at the level of those
individual computations, we would be continually confronted with undecidability as we are when
we study sort of arbitrary things in the computational universe. But when we study things of the kind
that are, can be studied by a mathematical type observer, we end up most of the time just being
able to operate kind of fluid dynamics level without being forced down to this level where
there's lots of undecidability. And I think, so I mean, there's a, there's a lot of
this, the thing that, again, is, is sort of, I think, perhaps philosophically interesting
is this, you know, does mathematics exist in some sense? You know, is there a there there for
mathematics? And, you know, my, my belief nowadays would be that there's as much there there for
mathematics as there is for physics. You know, in physics, we just have this intuitive sense
that there is a universe out there that is sort of an objective thing that's out there. And,
you know, what, what, what one's saying is that, well, in the end, there's the really out out there,
but the sort of the way that we, the sort of the experiences we have are a consequence of the fact
that we're observers of the kind that we are. And the same, that the same is true for mathematics.
You, you said, just like, just a minute ago, you said that you think this is
philosophically interesting. And I can confirm that it is a philosophical gold mine. And I mean,
this is a good example of how this new kind of science might require a new way of thinking
of doing or thinking about philosophical questions. I mean, not just in philosophy of
mathematics or philosophy of science, but in metaphysics and epistemology and all of these
areas. But for the moment, though, I'd like to stick with science because there are some really
big questions there and some big distinctions that I'd like to clear up. And the first is between
theory and object. And I mean, I suppose one might define physics as it has been done
so far as the study of matter and energy and the fundamental building blocks of the world.
But there's a distinction between the theories that a physicist develops and then the world that
they describe. But I hear when I hear you talk, I hear about the Ruliad as an object, like the
world or the universe, or a multiverse, maybe, but it also seems like it's our fundamental
theory of the world in a way too. So the question is, what the physicist, what the physicist is
doing here? Is the physicist developing theories that describe the Ruliad or is sampling and
understanding the Ruliad, sampling and understanding the theory itself? Or do these things break down?
It's sort of a question of what is science? What is natural science? And the way I see it is,
natural science is kind of a translation layer between kind of the underlying computation,
the underlying world as it is, and the stuff that we can sort of talk about and think about with
our minds. So in other words, what we've got kind of the things that are just happening out there,
and we've got our way of describing what's happening. And I think that the fundamental
role of natural science is to figure out of all the stuff that's happening out there, what can we
parse out that we can package in such a way that we can kind of have a narrative about it in our
minds? I mean, there is something that's just happening out there. But the question is, what is
it that we, you know, how do we talk to ourselves about what's happening out there? And we are only
sampling tiny pieces of what's happening out there. But I think to your question about sort of,
it's almost, I was surprised that I was able to say anything about this, but the why does the
universe exist question? You know, because there's, you know, you can say, well, I've got this theory,
but why is the theory actualized? In what sense, you know, what breathes the fire into the universe,
so to speak? What, you know, what is, and, you know, I suppose from a, and I don't know all the
philosophical history here, but, but, you know, I certainly know the quote from Spinoza about,
you know, the universe is the thoughts of God actualized, so to speak. And it's, it's kind of,
you know, it's, it's a, this question of what is, how does one think about sort of,
what is actualization in a situation where what we somehow, and I'm, this is, this real-time
philosophy is a bit, is a bit too hard, I think, but it's, I know when, you know,
my mother was a philosophy professor, which caused me to say that if there's one thing
I'll never do when I'm growing up, it's being a philosopher. But one of the things that,
one of the many things that I sort of would give a hard time to about some, about philosophy was that
the, you know, the Oxford philosophers would give a talk and they would read every word of this talk.
And it's like, that's very, you know, that's very wooden, you know, you can do better than that.
But actually when you have to really, you know, get all these distinctions correct,
it's actually pretty hard to do that in real time. So it's, it's, so I'm, I'm,
but this question about sort of, okay, so I think on this question about sort of why does the
universe exist? Why is anything actualized? I think that the way to think about that is
there isn't really a question of why the Ruliat exists any more than there's a question of why
2 plus 2 equals 4 exists, right? It's just an abstract thing. So now the real question is sort of
then we have the sort of a prior knowledge that we are perceiving this thing, we are here
perceiving this thing. It is in a sense less obvious that we should exist than that this
abstract thing should exist. But, but in a sense by the very fact that we're here doing the perceiving,
we know that if we want to describe something as existing, we, you know, we know that we're here,
so to speak. And so I think the kind of the, the why, why is there a, you know, I suppose it comes
down to asking why, you know, why is the universe, why is there a perception of something like the
universe out there that we have access to? And my, I think the answer would be that it is
the Ruliat is this inevitable thing. The given that you know that we're here as observers,
you know, having a perception of things, it is inevitable that the things of which we have can
have a perception are these are is this abstract object, because the abstract object doesn't,
you know, the abstract object is the only thing we have to argue, the only contingent fact,
and even this gets more complicated. The only contingent fact is that we are computational
and not, for example, hyper computational. That is the fact that we exist as a place in the Ruliat.
So the Ruliat is sort of this entangled limit of all possible computations,
computation, something that follows rules. But as we start to say, what precisely do we mean by that?
We might say follows rules like a Turing machine, or like a cellular autonomous or like a network
rewriting system, those are all equivalent. Those are all computations of the standard thing that
we refer to as computation. But if we're just thinking about it, we can say, well, let's take
things that are undoable in finite time by any computational system set up in this way. Let's
just say we have a magic box that can do those those hyper computations do computations do in
finite time, computations that would take an infinite time for any computational system of
the kind that we're describing. Let's say that we have a hyper computational system. Well,
then we could start building up a Ruliat from hyper computation as well. We can build up a
hyper Ruliat, we can build up an infinite collection of hyper Ruliat. So the question
that is again, not I think is a contingent fact about the world. Okay, there's going to be an
interesting footnote to this. But the initial observation would be the fact that we are in
the Ruliat and not in the hyper Ruliat is something that is no more derivable than the fact that we're
in this galaxy rather than some other galaxy. And it's just we happen to be here. That's the first
first level of I don't so much like that explanation. And as I said, I think, well,
we're about to about to come to an even more bizarre point, which is but but but so
and and well, we say, Well, what about let's just go observe the hyper Ruliat? Well, you can't do that
from inside the Ruliat is kind of an event horizon that prevents you ever having any kind of causal
connection to things in the hyper Ruliat. By the way, there's a whole hierarchy of these things.
Within our universe, there are things that don't have all of the kind of richness of our universe,
namely, black holes, you know, you know, I wrote a piece about about cats. So we'll have to talk
about that. Yeah, right. They, which is relevant to the Ruliat, but we'll, we'll, we'll get to that
perhaps. The in the case that the thing that
the thing is sort of interesting, perhaps, is we have our universe, which is sort of a
computational kind of thing. And then we have things like black holes. And one feature of sort
of the simplest kind of black holes is time stops. In other words, in our universe, we believe
time just keeps going, keeps going, keeps going. But in a typical black hole with a space like
singularity, there's a time just stops. In our models, it's pretty easy to see how that works.
There are these rewrite rules, and there's just no rules to apply. But the point is that what would
in our universe would be this thing where we say, well, you can have arbitrary long proofs,
you can have arbitrary long sort of experiences of the universe. And if you are stuck inside a
black hole, you don't have that. So similarly, from the point of view of the hyper Ruliat,
our whole Ruliat's worth of experience looks like a black hole. It looks like gosh, you can't,
it's not quite time is finite in the sense that well, time is time is infinitesimal relative to
the what can be achieved in all the time of our universe is infinitesimal compared to what can
be achieved in a moment of time in the hyper universe. And so that okay, so now one of the
things which is again one of these. So you say, well, we got the Ruliat, we got the hyper Ruliat,
why did we get stuck in the Ruliat? Why didn't we have a, you know, why aren't we in hyper Ruliat
numbers such and such? I'm pretty sure that there is a notion of Rulial Relativity, that basically,
once you are an observer that have certain level of computational capability, that it is your
experience of the world is necessarily the same. In other words, if you're an observer in any level
of the hyper Ruliat, you are your, you know, when you perceive things, you will, if you're in a
hyper Ruliat, then your perceptions are hyper relative to what they would be in our Ruliat.
But if you are, but that you match the level of Ruliat that you're in. And so I think, I mean,
we still need to work out the details of this, but I think that it's going to end up that it
doesn't matter, that you're, that kind of, that there is no, that that removes that piece of
contingency, so to speak. But I'm not sure, let's see, I forget how we got to this now, but
but the, I mean, we're talking about kind of the necessity of the, well, the existence of the
universe, why is it necessary that the universe should exist? And my claim is that these abstract
constructs necessarily exist. And that the, the once you, the question of whether, well, okay, so,
I think I managed to get a bit further than this, and I'm, I'm trying to remember what the,
what all the arguments were here. But this, this question of whether,
yeah, the issue is, within the Ruliat, why is there a thing that is like an observer?
Why should, why should there be anything that is like an observer like us? And I think that,
so, so one question is, what does an observer like us fundamentally do? And I think the answer is,
what observers do is they take the complexity of the world, and they try and stuff it into a finite
mind. Because, you know, there is all the stuff going on out there, but we don't perceive that
stuff. We perceive this tiny, you know, tiny trickle of information. I mean, we're, you know,
the photons falling on our eyes, there are zillions of them every second. But yet,
all we perceive is I'm looking at a face or something. In other words, we are equivalencing
and the same thing in a much more physical setting. Imagine we're trying to measure the
pressure of a gas, and we have a piston, we got some, you know, and all the gas molecules are
hitting the piston. And there's a zillion configurations of these gas molecules. But all
that matters in measuring the pressure of the gas is what the aggregate force on the piston is.
And so that, that measuring process is equivalencing a large number of states of the world.
And I think that's, that's the essence of a computationally bounded observer,
is that you have to equivalence lots of states of the world to stuff your experience of the world
into, you know, a finite mind, so to speak. And so then the question is, you know, you start
asking, well, you know, are there pieces of the Rulliard, are there pieces of what's possible
that we can interpret as kind of a thing that is equivalencing things and, and sort of reducing
them to something where we can, where, where we can interpret it in this way. And I think it's
one of the features, one of the sort of scientific facts is this phenomenon that within any
computationally irreducible system, there are necessarily an infinite number of lump of sort
of pockets of computational reducibility. So to unpack that a bit. So given that you have a set
of rules, and you say, I'm going to run these rules, you might say, if we know the rules for a system,
then we're done. We know how the system's going to behave. And that was what people sort of assumed
was true. But it isn't true. Because what happens is the working out of those rules involves a
certain amount of computation. And it can involve an irreducible amount of computation. So if you
say, I want to know what's going to happen a million years from now, it's like, sorry, the only way
you can work that out is to live through those million years and do all those computations.
That is not, you know, the conceit of mathematics in a sense, is you just solve the equation,
or you fill in the numbers in the formula and you're done. There is a quick way to work out what's
going to happen. But the difference, the fundamental difference between sort of the mathematical
paradigm for thinking about science, I think, and the computational one is in the computational one,
you're given a rule, and then you have to run it to find out its consequence. It's not,
you can just nail it and have something which is kind of finite mind narrative of this is the
mathematical result. So there's this phenomenon of computational irreducibility. It is, I think,
it is a really central phenomenon. I mean, if there's one thing that I think is sort of a
takeaway from lots of things that I've done, it's the idea of computational irreducibility,
because it's what leads to, you know, it has consequences all over the place. It has consequences
for, well, for things like free will, it has consequences for, you know, if we say, if there
wasn't computational irreducibility, then the passage of our lives and the passage of time
would not really mean anything. Because we'd always be able to say, you know, you lead your life,
you live out many decades or whatever, but the answer is 42, you know the end, you can just jump
to the end. The fact that we have to experience all of those intermediate steps is a consequence of
the phenomenon of computational irreducibility. It's also in a quite different domain, you know,
if you're thinking about, you know, AI, and you say, I'm going to put in these rules for AI
governments, and they're going to work perfectly. It's like, well, no, they're not, because there
will always be an unexpected thing that happens, because the working out of those rules will show
computational irreducibility. And it's computational irreducibility is a completely ubiquitous thing
among systems rules. But the thing then that's surprising, okay, so given computational irreducibility,
why is science possible? In other words, why is it possible to make statements about the world
that are useful narratives of finite minds? It, you know, you might say it's just hopeless,
we can't figure out anything. The thing that is then a sort of a fact about computational
irreducibility, it is inevitable that within a computational irreducible system, there'll be
an infinite number of pockets of reducibility of places where you can make a little prediction.
And if you, it's rather a fairly easy argument that if that wasn't the case, if it was sort of
uniform computational irreducibility, you could use that very fact to make predictions. And so,
you know, that that sort of diagonal argument gives you gives you this result. But then so that
means there are all these pockets of irreducibility. What are those? What are those? Well, those are
the places where those are what we live in. You know, the fact that our lives are somewhat our
universe is somewhat predictable is because we're looking at a slice of reducibility in all of this
computational irreducibility. That's throughout the Roulillade, we are sampling a piece of it,
observers like us sample a piece of it that represents a pocket of reducibility. And by the
way, there are a lot of other things that those sort of pockets of reducibility correspond to,
like, for example, I think technology, you know, scientific discoveries, technology,
these are all examples of pockets of reducibility. You know, the world's a complicated place,
but we can make a scientific statement. You know, the fact that science is possible is science is
possible because there are these pockets of reducibility. And that's essentially where,
you know, where the science lives. That's what the science is doing is it's identifying,
you know, these pockets of reducibility. By the way, that has another consequence, which is
science will never be finished. There are always more pockets of reducibility. That's not self
evident, I think. It could be the case that, you know, if it wasn't for computational irreducibility,
then we would say we found the rules of the universe were done. But that's not correct,
because of irreducibility. But it's still got to be the case, even given the irreducibility,
that we can say things, and there'll be an infinite sequence of things we can say. I mean,
it's the same thing with technology. There's a question of how will, will there be a moment
when every invention has been made? And the answer is no, because inventions are these places where
you're getting sort of your, your making use of some pocket of reducibility. I mean, that the
footnote to that is, one thing that could happen is every invention that we humans care about has
been made. I don't think that happens because I think that the domain that we care about gradually
expands. And I think that's, you know, one thing I, you know, a sort of a little bit of a whimsical
way to talk about it. But, you know, we, the progress of science and sort of the arch of
intellectual history is a story of kind of, you know, additional paradigms, additional ways to
measure things about the world and so on. And the question is, you know, if we look at our,
our sort of presence in the Rulliard as a species or something, one aspect of our expansion is we
send out spacecraft when they go a certain number of, you know, astronomical units away from us.
That's exploring physical space. The growth of paradigms, I think, is a growth in Rullial space
that we're gradually sort of putting, there is more, there are more domains of that there's
sort of more descriptions of the universe that we can put in our bag of things that we can stuff
into our minds. So in other words, we're, as we invent a new paradigm, we are able to sample
where we're, we're sort of exploring more parts of the Rullia, we're exploring more different
kinds of rules that we can use to sort of talk about the universe and so on. So that's, that's
so it's kind of a sort of the expansion of, you know, in, in our, we can, we can make a choice
that you can set up more spacecraft, we can do more theoretical science and, you know, or some
more experimental science and find, you know, more different kinds of measurements that we can make,
you know, we start some. So these are, we can move farther or get smaller. Yes. Yes. Well, right,
I mean, that's another issue. It's another very interesting thing I think about us as
sort of a contingent fact about us as observers, we're actually pretty big. That is, if we're,
the universe is, you know, 10 to the 26 meters across in physical space, and we're give or take
a meter tall, you know, we kind of think the elementary length, the sort of the, the, an effect,
the effective distance between atoms of space or something might be 10 to the minus 100 meters.
So relative to that, where maybe, I don't know, that estimate is right,
where 100 orders of magnitude bigger than we, than the smallest and 26 orders of magnitude smaller
than the biggest, so to speak. So we're pretty big. And, and there's sort of a question of,
what's that? Good for the ego. Yeah, right. Well, okay, we'll get to, don't get too confident there,
because I think we're big in physical space in, in the Rulliard in rural space, we're pretty damn
small. In other words, you know, so one, one sort of way of, of probing that question, really that
the question of how big are we in rural space is the question of, of sort of, how do, what is the
diversity of, of what different kinds of minds can perceive? You know, if we have some point in,
in the Rulliard, then, then with minds of the kind we have, and each of us has a different
mind, so to speak, where all these little points in rural space, humans with similar kinds of,
you know, backgrounds or whatever might be quite close in rural space, your, your cat there is a
little bit further away in rural space. Although, you know, we can recognize, you know, certain
features, the emotional, you know, characteristics of the cat are sort of recognizable to us, even
though cat philosophy is probably not something that, you know, if there is a cat philosophy,
we don't, you know, we don't know what it is. And I think it's very tuna-centric.
Yeah, right. That's, that's, you know, I do think that the modern times of machine learning,
one of the things that, you know, the talk to the animals thing should be a thing. The main block
is this question of sort of the, the distance in rural space, the kinds of things that, you know,
that one might talk about may be so bizarrely different, that they're not things where, you
know, it's a, again, it's like science, it's like this translation layer between, you know,
science is a translation between the natural world and what goes in our brains. And this is
sort of a level of a science-like thing that is, you know, the translation from what's going on in
the animal brain to what's going on in ours. But I think, let's see, we were, yeah, right. So, I mean,
in, you know, this question of how big is the space of possible alien minds? What is the diversity
of possible ways to look at the universe? And I did a little experiment. It's a very, very,
I would say, sort of very basic approach to that question, which is, think about an AI and you're
thinking about kind of a generative AI system. And, you know, the typical image generation AI
system has been trained on billions of human produced images. And then it's generating things
that are like those human produced images. And so you can start asking, well, that's a mind that's
aligned with a human mind, because it's trained from human produced images. But you can like take
that mind and just start changing the weights and the neural network. And then you have something
which is not quite like, you know, it's kind of, it started from a human mind, but now it's,
it's sort of modified relative to, to that human mind. And you can start asking, well, what are the
images that you produce in that, in that case? There's even a simple thing you can do. You can
just say every, every image that is generatable is, there's this kind of latent space, there's this
kind of sort of numerically defined, coordinated space of possible images, so to speak. And you
can just say, well, there's a particular region of that space that corresponds to a picture of a cat.
And as we change our coordinates in that space, we'll make other kinds of pictures. And so then
the question is, there are some pockets of that space that correspond to human concepts, cats, dogs,
elephants, whatever, right? And the question would be, if you look at that whole space,
what fraction of the space is covered by those human concepts? So for example, one of the things
that, you know, I made some pictures of is cat island, the, you know, the thing which is
near the concept of a cat. As you go further away, you stop, you see pictures that don't really look
like cats anymore. And pretty soon they, they degrade into things that are not really recognizable
by us humans as pictures of anything that we know about. So even in the simplest case,
the region of, in a sense, rural space, that there's a small tiny slice of a real space,
but the region that corresponds to concepts that we are familiar with is about one part in 10 to
the 600. So in other words, the stuff, the, the, the part of rural space that we are familiar with,
even in this very simple slicing of rural space is an absolutely infinitesimal fraction.
What's, what else is out? You know, I was referring to it as inter concept space.
There is, you know, dotted around the space are concepts that we humans have decided to
invent so far in our, in our sort of civilizational history. But in between those concepts, it's
like interstellar space. There's, there's things that we haven't explored yet. And those are huge
compared to the ones that we already explored. So in some sense, we are that that's a, and by,
but by the way, I mean, what we, what we can imagine is that over the course of time, we will
gradually bring into our kind of domain of knowledge more and more things that are sort of out there
in this, in the space. So, so an example would be, you know, go back 50 years, we're making these
pictures, some things that show up in these pictures are nested fractal patterns. If you
go back 50 years, and you saw those things, you're just kind of like just shrugging your
shoulders. I don't know what that is. It's just something I don't really know about or care about.
Now that we know about fractals and nested patterns, we immediately say, oh, that's a
fractal pattern. And no doubt there are many other things out there in that space, where in time,
for whatever reason, we may start caring about these things, we may give them names
in our human languages and so on. And, and then that may be part of our sort of domain of things
we think about. I mean, it gives one, there's a sort of a funny twist, which I don't know that I
fully understand yet, which is, you know, you say, well, what's the future of history? Well, it's,
it's kind of like we explore interstellar space and physical space and so on. And then we explore
the Rulliad. We go on exploring more and more of the Rulliad. And kind of the story of intellectual
history could be the story of sort of just expanding, expanding, expanding the Rulliad space.
They say, well, then eventually we get to this wonderful situation where we've expanded throughout
Rulliad space, we're done, we've discovered everything. The problem is, I think in that case,
by the time we've expanded our mind to encompass everything, our mind is no longer coherent.
We no longer coherently exist. That is, I think that the, the, you know, coherent existence
requires sort of, in some sense, smallness. If you, if you are everything, then you're not,
there's no coherent you to the whole story. There has to be a, you know, the fact that we,
that we, we have coherent minds that believe that we have definite experiences and things
like that. I think as a consequence of the fact that our minds are not, you know, they're limited,
so to speak. If it wasn't for that, we wouldn't, you know, we wouldn't have this kind of coherent
sense of being us, so to speak. And so I think it's kind of a, a be careful what you wish for
situation, but it's like, yes, we, you know, we just succeeded. We expanded throughout Rulliad space.
The problem is now we don't coherently exist. And, you know, I think that's some,
I think that has all sorts of resonance with, with things people talk about in many kind of
Eastern traditions and philosophy and so on, which are, you know, I find it interesting how little
I understand about those things. Because in a sense, that's a story of, of one's kind of limitation
in Rulliad space. And that, you know, I've grown up in sort of a Western thought tradition, so to
speak. And it's really difficult for me to understand, you know, even if there is some there, there,
it's, you know, I, with my way of thinking about things, it's like I try and, I try and approach
it with my way of thinking about things and it just doesn't quite fit. I mean, this particular
point is perhaps the point of contact between these kinds of different, different ways of
thinking about things. Well, these notions of exploring the Rulliad, of sampling the Rulliad
of the translation layer. I mean, it all just raises, it raises so many more classical questions and
epistemology and metaphysics and the philosophy of science. And you said a while ago now that
natural science is what we can parse about what's happening out there. And you also said,
with regard to the Rulliad, I mean, it's this necessary abstract object. And that we have
this perception of it. But where I'm getting at is that physics is generally considered to
concern, I mean, quite naturally, the physical world, though, I mean, physical or material,
these terms, they get a bit murky when one starts talking about things like fields and
wave functions and so on. But even though I mean, physical objects like the computers we're using
right now, they do carry out calculations and so on. But computation itself is an abstract
process. And the Rulliad itself is to use reference that quote again, the entangled limit
of everything that is computationally possible. So it's like a, it's a collection of equivalence
classes or something of that. And so I wonder then, whether ultimately you view the universe as a
physical object or an abstract object, or these categories just somehow don't make sense anymore
at this level of discussion, or whether we're physical, I think they don't make sense. Because
I think that, you know, all, yeah, I mean, all, all I, all I know is what I perceive. And, you
know, it's not to have the, you know, you might say, that's a very, and I know there are traditions
and philosophy where, where one sort of gets oneself tangled up by thinking that way, and saying
there's no, there's no there outside, so to speak. It's a little different in what I'm talking about,
because there is that there is something there, it's the Rulliad. But it's not this question of
whether there is a, you know, is there a, is there a thing that makes in what sense is, you
know, a solid object more real than some concept of mathematics? I mean, that's, that's kind of the,
you know, they, that I suppose, yeah, I mean, there's this question about what's out there
in physical reality. You know, one of the things we've got to realize is that as we have progressed
in the history of physics, we've had different kinds of measuring devices. There are things which
where they were presumably features of the universe all along, but we never knew they were there.
And I think that's kind of a, you know, that's the experience of, of saying, you know, so in
what sense is it even worth talking about a thing about the universe that we are completely unable
to perceive? Is that a, you know, you might still say, well, it's there, but we can't perceive it.
And so it's not something that's going to be part of the, the canon of our physics.
You know, it could be that there are, well, you know, gravitational waves, okay, that's a thing
that wasn't, you know, that, that was a long expected thing. But there could be, you know,
all kinds of, of strange phenomena, you know, that I could imagine, well, for example, in our
models of physics, there are dimension fluctuations. Our universe, we think of it as three dimensional,
but actually in our models of physics, it isn't exactly three dimensional, it has little dimension
fluctuations. And that's something that we are not currently, we don't have a good, I don't know
how we measure those, possibly they're related to gravity, possibly they're related to dark matter.
But, you know, once we get to the point where we suddenly realize, oh gosh, we can use this method
to take these dimension fluctuations and render them in a way that sort of connects to our minds,
then we've got a whole different set of things that we can talk about in terms of physics,
and a whole different set of things that we can kind of say are, you know, to discuss as, as physical
constructs. But I think it's a question of what, what is it that we can successfully perceive?
Those are the things about which we're going to have a, have a physics discussion. If we can't,
if we're not perceiving it, we don't, you know, we don't discuss what we don't perceive. And there
might be, and you say, well, there might be things where there's a little, you know, there are a lot
of things which in the history of physics, for example, things about quantum mechanics, where we
just, physics went along for years without ever caring about any of that stuff, until there started
the experiments which rubbed our noses in those phenomena, and which came about, I think, because
of electronic amplifiers and things like that got invented, and that allowed us to amplify small
signals and we could start to detect things we haven't been able to detect before. But I mean,
you know, this, this question of, well, I mean, from a, it's sort of interesting as one, as one
starts to kind of, you know, one of the things that's always challenging is to live the paradigms
one invents. And, you know, I've, this is a thing which is, honestly, I think it's one of the more
challenging things. It's like, you know, as you have different generations of intellectual thinkers,
it's, you know, it's usually a couple generations later, the people kind of can really sort of,
you know, the paradigm is so obvious to them that you can sort of build on it. And I have to say that
the, the kind of the perception of, of sort of this, this, this idea of the Ruiad and the idea that
all that is real is our perception of, of, you know, our particular perception of it and so on,
the, I'm not sure that I've totally internalized that. I mean, just to talk a little bit about
personal history and the internalization of paradigms, it's, it is interesting to me that,
you know, in my life, at least many kinds of ideas, they take a couple of decades at least
for one to internalize it. That is, you see a phenomenon, you know, the primary problem of
doing things like experimental science and Ruleology, just studying possible rules in the
computational universe is a kind of experimental science. The challenge of experimental science
is to discover things you didn't expect. Because too often, your, your paradigm for thinking about
things is, is one which makes you blind things that you don't expect. And in fact, this phenomenon
of complicated behavior from simple rules, people had observed that for at least 50 years, if not
longer, before the things that I did, but they just ignored it. They said, oh, we're studying early
neural nets and they sometimes they have noise and the noise is a nuisance. And we want to study,
you know, how do they behave like, like brains that make decisions or something. But, and it's
even the case, you know, when I was first studying these simple rules and their, and their consequence
is a number of very good mathematicians got involved in doing that. And they said, this is,
you know, we're going to be able to solve this, these are simple rules, we're going to be able to
crack this with mathematics. After a couple of years, they were like, no, we can't say anything,
we give up. Okay. And I suppose that the thing that, in a sense, I realized many years after the
fact is my main intellectual achievement at that moment was to realize the fact that one was giving
up was itself very interesting. I mean, the fact that there was a, you know, a paradigm that was
all about computational irritability and all these kinds of things that was orthogonal to the
mathematical paradigm, in some sense, or different from mathematical paradigm, that was in itself
very interesting. But it took, you know, I would say that a lot of these kind of,
you know, a lot of these ideas, they take a surprisingly long time for one to kind of internalize,
so to speak. I mean, in, and it's kind of the role in some sense of scientific history is to go back
and look, you know, because there are lots of things I can see from my own history where, you know,
for example, the fact that building this first computational language of mine was important
in the realization that you could build the physics from nothing, so to speak. It took me
several decades after that had happened before I realized that kind of intellectual connection.
And, but I think, you know, this question of, of what does it, if one now is thinking about the
world in terms of the Rulliard and perceptions of the Rulliard and so on, how does that make one
feel about one's experience of the world? And, you know, it's, it feels,
and I, you know, I'm at the early stages of understanding that. I mean, I think it kind of,
you know, I think it's sometimes easier to see the scientific consequences. I mean, there are,
there are broader consequences of things. I mean, like, for example, a, you know, if you look at
sort of a big arc of scientific history, there are, you know, one very dramatic moment inside
of history was sort of the whole Copernican Revolution story, which one can interpret as being,
you know, it's obvious, you know, before that time, it's like, you know, we're on the earth,
the earth is still, you know, is stationary, and we're looking at all these things moving
around the sky, and it's obvious that the earth is stationary. You know, how could it not be,
you know, that is a matter of our common experience. And then, you know, the surprise is,
you can make up a bunch of math that shows that the earth isn't stationary, so to speak.
And, you know, it's better to think about it as going around the sun. And then it's like, okay,
really, you've got to sort of switch off your common sense and say, the math is going to solve
the problem. It's going to be a, you know, it's a different way of getting access to what's going
on in the world. And I think that, and finally, after a few centuries, people got used to the idea
of so we can calculate stuff. And then people got to this belief that, you know,
then we can calculate everything, you know, we just, we run science a bit longer, and we can
figure out, you know, what's going to happen in this epidemic, or what's this or that, or the other,
you know, we can figure out everything just from, quote, science, science interpreted as
this kind of jump ahead, kind of, we can make a formula for what's going to happen.
I think the thing that, in a sense, if there is a broader significance to figuring out things
about fundamental physics, it's that, you know, in this picture, things are computational all the
way down. And so just as one is forced by sort of the whole Copernican story to say, there's a
certain amount that we just have to figure out with math, and we can't figure out from common
sense. So one is forced by the idea that everything is computational all the way down to say,
so the phenomena that happen in computation are ones that we have to confront. We can't say
everything we do, you know, yes, there is computational irreducibility in principle,
but it's not going to be important for for the things that, you know, for, but it's something
that's just out there, and not another thing that that will be relevant to what we're dealing with.
So, you know, I think that's some, yeah, but I mean, you're, you're asking the sort of question
about how does one feel about whether, whether sort of there's a, there's a, there's a thing
out there, and what is that thing? And one, you know, and I, I think this is more a question
of humanly coming to terms with what is essentially an intellectual structure,
than it is a question of, I mean, I think the intellectual structure is, is I like to think
reasonably clear at this point. Now, the question is, how does one come to terms with that intellectual
structure? It's just like saying, you know, at the Copernican time, and, you know, it's like,
there's an intellectual structure that was, you know, now, now we have to come to terms with,
you just calculate it with math, which is totally disorienting. If you're starting from the,
look, it's obvious that the earth is standing still, so to speak.
Well, talking about living with one's paradigms, another paradigm that you're very familiar with,
and that is notoriously difficult to live with is quantum mechanics. And I mean, it's, it's one
thing to accept that quantum field theory is so successful. And it's another thing to accept
or really live, I suppose, concepts like entanglement, just to take a common example. And
okay, there are so many fascinating ways in which the Ruliad connects to or derives more
explicitly interesting physics, like that of general relativity and black holes, like you
mentioned a little bit earlier, but to focus on one for a moment. I'm curious about how living
with these two paradigms, the Ruliad and quantum mechanics has been for you in that.
Does it, I'm wondering if accepting the Ruliad forces a specific interpretation of quantum
mechanics on you? Because as I take it, the Ruliad is deterministic.
Yes. So I mean, okay, you know, they, my old friend Dick Feynman was used to say
after spending his life studying quantum mechanics, one of his favorite quotes was,
nobody understands quantum mechanics. And, you know, I think I am inching towards the point
where I can say I actually understand quantum mechanics. I don't think I'm fully there yet,
but I'm, I'm, you know, at least inching towards it. And I think the, the sort of key observation
is this point about the many parts of history, and the fact that we, in our experience,
span those parts of history, span multiple parts of history, just like we don't cover the,
we don't fill the whole universe. We don't span all possible parts of history, but we span a,
a chunk of parts of history. And that's in a sense, when we say there's so, so, okay, so then
there's the, there's the question, okay, so that one of the issues is, why do we think
that definite things happen? If there are many parts of history, why, why aren't we just living
in a world where many different things are happening? And inside a quantum computer, I think
that is what's happening. That's what, that's what a quantum computer, you know, inside the mind of a
quantum computer, it has many different things happening. The challenge with a quantum computer
and the challenge of what happens with quantum mechanics is somehow you have to take those
many parts of history and somehow aggregate them to something which is compatible with observers
like us, who believe that definite things happen. And so what is, it's like a measuring device.
It's like the, you know, the molecules hitting the piston. They, all those molecules are doing
different things, but the piston has one uniform kind of thing that it's doing. I think, in the
case of most kinds of quantum measurements, that it's more like a weighing balance. That is,
it's, you know, in the case of the piston, it's just aggregating real numbers and it's eventually,
you know, this is the average pressure type thing in a slightly different, but very similar kind of
measuring device is a weighing balance, where there are many different ways you can book grains of
sand on the two sides of the balance. But in the end, it will go to sunk one direction or the other.
And I think that's similar to what's happening in the measuring devices that are used for measuring
things like qubits and so on, where there's sort of this binary decision about, was the spin-off
or down or whatever else. Now, you know, in, if you then ask, so what, you know, when you're
thinking about sort of the rules of quantum mechanics, and you're asking what, you know,
I think the underlying rules of quantum mechanics rather easily map on to this sort of underlying
dynamics of these multi-way systems and many parts of history and so on, that stuff is pretty
directly the path integral. The issue is, can we explain why it's a discretized version of that,
which is quite mathematically interesting, blah, blah, blah. But in the end, it's sort of unsurprising,
because it's kind of just like the actualization in some sense of their mechanization of things
like the path integral. But then in traditional quantum mechanics, it's been kind of a hundred-year
wimp out, because it's been, it's basically, it's just like, and then there is this idea of measurement,
and we go from the quantum amplitudes to the measured results, and then something definite
happened. And we haven't had to describe, you know, the formalism of quantum mechanics as
mathematically tiptoed around this question of how does the measurement actually happen.
And in our models, there's much better chance to say, let's unpack what's inside the observer.
What is the observer doing? The observer is taking all these different things that can happen,
all these different threads of history, and they're equivalencing many different configurations,
and they're saying, so the spin was either up or it was down. And now we get to start unpacking
that and saying, well, what were the actual processes that caused that equivalencing to
happen? Just like in the case of the piston with the molecules and so on, what were the processes?
Well, every molecule that hits the piston causes the piston to deform a little bit. But, you know,
there are effectively sound waves in the piston that are exchanging momentum between the different
places where it gets hit. And it's a rigid thing. And so pretty quickly, it dissipates kind of the
little deformations that come from the individual molecules, and then you have a sort of collective
motion that occurs. And so similarly, and I haven't done this, and I've been wanting to do this,
is to really go through the sort of the details of how different quantum measurements are made
mechanically, you know, in the lab, what you actually do. And, you know, I've gone through
in qualitative terms, and I think you can kind of trace that it's a bunch of equivalences that
are being done. But then the question is, well, what can you say when you unpack this process of
measurement? What can you then say about quantum mechanics? What additional things can you say?
For example, you know, will quantum computers work? Or is it the case that what you gain in having
these many parts of history and many sort of parallel threads of computation, you'll lose
by, but then you have to knit all these pieces together. And that takes a lot of effort. And I
think that's an example of where you get to kind of make a finer sort of a finer statement about
quantum mechanics. Now, you could ask, you know, do we understand why the born rule of quantum
mechanics works? Not completely. We have arguments about it. We have arguments for why it should
work. Have we dotted the i's and crossed the t's not yet? I am confident that that's going to work
out. But we don't, you know, we, it's just, you know, this is one of the challenges. You have a
very foundational theory. And you're trying to get to the point where you can say, go do this
experiment. I mean, there are lots of people who've said to us, you know, we have this giant
telescope. What should we look for? You know, what, what, what actual experiment should we do to look
for, let's say, dimension fluctuations in the, in the, in the universe as it is, or, or look for
some other kinds of phenomena that our models predict. Problem is that actually going in and
nailing down kind of, you know, what the details of what the telescope should see are is a whole
bunch of work. And it's a big stack of kind of mathematical physics, and other things that
you need to go through. And computational irreducibility is not your friend, as far as the
stuff is concerned. And, you know, that is, we're slowly getting there. We now have nice
simulations of black hole mergers. We're starting to have simulations of quantum black holes and so
on. But it's a, you know, it's a, it's a whole bunch of work. And lots of people are getting
involved in that, which is nice. But, you know, when it comes to, so, you know, let's reproduce all,
okay, so I can say, in terms of, okay, so I mean, I think the fundamental point about
quote, understanding quantum mechanics is this idea about broad shield space, this idea that
quantum mechanics is, well, so for example, the fundamental law of quantum mechanics,
you could say it in different ways, but a nice way is in terms of the Feynman path integral.
And the path integral says that the ample sheet you get out is this, you know, you integrate
over all possible paths, and you take each path is weighted with e to the i times this quantity,
the action divided by h bar plants constant over 2i. So it's, it's a, it's a phase and e to the i
something or other. And the something or other is this action object, which is essentially an energy
density. And so the thing that's really cool is what, what what it's saying is the phase of the
quantum amplitude is determined by this energy density like thing. And the, well, okay, so in,
in physical space, the thing we know is that the paths particles take in physical space
are deflected by the presence of gravity, gravity, the source of gravity is energy,
energy momentum, mass energy momentum, whatever the whole same thing. The, so in other words,
a path taken in physical space is that path is determined by the presence of energy momentum.
It's, it's deflected by gravity. And so now we go to the same thing in Brown-Shield space in this
multiway graph and we're looking at and what turns out to be the case is that the paths in
Brown-Shield space basically are also deflected by the presence of energy. Energy in our models
is essentially the density of updates in this network. So paths in Brown-Shield space are
deflected by the presence of energy. And then I'm sort of skipping lots of pieces here, but, but,
but basically the, the current, our current belief is that position in physical space,
we understand what that is, that's kind of our common experience of position in physical space.
Position in Brown-Shield space, we're pretty sure corresponds to quantum phase. So saying that
the presence of energy momentum deflects paths in Brown-Shield space and so on is basically saying
the presence of energy momentum changes quantum phases, which is essentially what the path integral
is saying. And so the, the, the belief is that what in physical space is the Einstein equations
for space time and gravity and so on in Brown-Shield space, it's the exact same sort of underlying
process, but now it's the Feynman path integral instead. So this is, I mean, I mean, as a, from a
pure sort of elegance in physics point of view, this is quite spectacular because it means, you
know, general relativity and quantum mechanics, people have wondered how do they fit together? Well,
the answer is they're the same theory, that they're the same theory played out in a slightly
different space. And by the way, there are already echoes of that in what's been done in
mathematical physics, the holography principles and the ADS CFT correspondence and so on between
sort of things in general, so do things in Brown-Shield theory. I think those are, those are kind
of echoes of the exact same phenomenon that there is that in some sense, these two theories are
really the same theory. And for us, there's this thing called the multiway causal graph,
which is the kind of the biggest, the big graph where one projection of it is physical space,
another projection of Brown-Shield space. So in a sense, this graph encodes both quantum mechanics
and general relativity, and you're projecting it in different ways to, to get sort of the experience
of different things. So that's, I mean, that's a, but let me give you one more, one more kind of
picture of sort of how quantum mechanics tries to work. So one of the things that's
always confusing in quantum mechanics is things like destructive interference. So, you know,
you have two slits, you have, you know, the photon can go through one slit or it can go
through the other slit, but you say, well, it can go through either one or the other.
So, you know, by the time you're looking in the center of the, the screen behind these things,
it's, you know, there's got to be something there because after all, it could have gone through
once that it could have gone through the other slit, but how can you end up with nothing there?
How can you end up with destructive interference of the probability of that, that a, that a,
that a photon gets there? Okay. So here's what I think happens. And I think it's bizarrely similar
to a phenomenon in mathematics, actually. Let me, let me explain, let me actually explain
the phenomenon in mathematics first. Sure. So in, you know, my picture of mathematics is
the mathematician is, has a bag and they're collecting theorems that they think are true
and putting them in this bag. The, the, the mathematician with a finite mind only can have
a finite bag of theorems that they kind of coherently think are true. But now imagine that
you put a false theorem in there. Well, now in sort of from the middle ages, people have said,
you know, material implication, if you have a false premise, you can derive everything.
This is this kind of idea of, you know, principle of explosion or whatever, that once you, you know,
if you were seeing a false hood, then the, you know, then you can derive any possible,
any possible result. So what happens to the mathematician when they put a false theorem
in their bag? The answer is that false theorem entails all possible theorems.
So that bag explodes. And so they, the, the, you know, so that their mind explodes in some sense,
they can't, they can't maintain all these things together. So, so that's kind of the, that's sort
of, so now let's look at the quantum mechanics case. So now what I think happens is that the two
photons, they go to slightly different places in physical space, but in Braunschild space,
these two photons that both could end up at the center of the screen are at kind of opposite ends
of Braunschild space. And so the, the observer who is bounded in Braunschild space is trying very
hard to say, well, what happened? You know, I could imagine both photons were there, but to
imagine that I would have to expand my mind in Braunschild space. In fact, I would probably
have to expand it in some idealized way, infinitely. And so just like the mathematician can't put that
false hood into their bag, so similarly, the observer of these two photons can't conclude
that they just can't make consistent the picture that the photon went through either one thing or
the other. And so they have to say, didn't, you know, the photon just disappeared, so to speak.
That's, that's my, but you know, there are, there are lots of, you know, all these different
phenomena of quantum mechanics, you can start to have, I think, almost intuitive kinds of,
you know, kinds of views of what's going on there. I think it's, I mean, to mention one
from relativity that I think is very lovely. And by the way, there's an analogy in mathematics here
as well, time dilation and relativity. So, you know, if you are an observer who's going faster,
time to, to an observer, you know, the time appears to be progressing more slowly to an
observer who's going, going faster, the phenomenon of time dilation. So in our models, you have a
thing, it's represented by some sort of tangle in this network. And the thing is moving in this
network. Well, the process of motion requires a certain amount of computation. You've got a thing
in one place, it's got to reconstruct itself in another place, that takes a certain amount of
computation. But the progression through time also takes a certain amount of computation.
And the thing has a certain computation budget, so to speak, that is ultimately determined by the,
the fundamental processing power of the universe, you know, that's sort of the, the way of measuring
distances in the ruler. And so this, this, what you end up with is you can either use your
computational effort to sort of progress through time, or you can use it to rewrite your position
in space. But as soon as you're rewriting your position in space, you're using up some of that
budget. And so you don't get to evolve as quickly in time. And so you, you have to, you know, it's a,
that that's, that's why that's sort of the mechanical reason that time dilation happens.
So in the case of metamathematics, well, okay, let's see, there's, there's sort of a similar
phenomenon that has to do with, if you were investigating something in one theory, using
another theory, like algebra and geometry, you were, you were, you're trying to use algebra,
but you're studying geometry. And you're kind of going back and forth between algebra and geometry.
There's this translation cost that let's see how does this work. The, I mean, but basically the
time dilation phenomenon comes about because as you are trying to sort of think about geometry
in terms of algebra, let's say, you are necessarily incurring some, you're slowing down your progress
in geometry, because you keep on having to do this translation back and forth to algebra.
And that's a, that's, I'm not untangle all the pieces to this quite right. But, but that,
I think there's a phenomenon there that is similar to time dilation, which is very weird.
And, and by the way, these, these correspondences speak to sort of, you know, help convince me
that this picture that's sort of underneath both mathematics and physics is the same rule
here. The fact that there are these correspondences makes that encouraging. I mean, another, other
correspondences that what is a black hole in mathematics, a black hole, I think is a decidable
theory. So just as in, you know, in physics, there can be unbounded time. So in mathematics,
there can be unbounded proofs. But by the time you have a decidable theory, the proofs are going
to be bounded. And so that's like a decidable theory is like a black hole. And then, then you
have an physical space, you have all these singularity theorems that say when you have too
high a density of energy momentum, you inevitably form a black hole. In mathematics, the statement
would be when you have too high a density of proofs, you inevitably end up with a decidable
theory. And so this leads to very bizarre things, like for example, the future of the universe may
consist of a bunch of black holes, the future of mathematics may consist of a bunch of decidable
theories. And in other words, that the, that the sort of inexorable future of the universe
sort of is similar to the future of mathematics, so to speak. Another thing corresponding to
mathematics and physics is homogeneity in the physical world. That is, that we can move around,
you know, we believe that physics is kind of the same here as it is in the Andromeda galaxy.
In mathematics, the statement would be mathematics is kind of the same in the algebra place as it
is in the geometry place. So in other words, there is a, an inevitable translation from one field of
mathematics to another. If the mathematical universe is reasonably homogeneous, which I think I can
argue that it is, then it is necessarily the case that there will be these correspondences between
these very different areas of mathematics. And we see some evidence of this of all these kind of
dualities between different areas of mathematics and so on. But it's sort of interesting to see that
homogeneity in physical space, the analogy to that is the presence of these things. And I think,
by the way, in a recent thing that I've sort of come to, to imagine is that category theory,
for example, which is one example of a kind of a broad sort of structural sort of description of
lots of areas of mathematics. Category theory is a, is a characterization of a, so one feature
of category theory is you say, oh, we apply this morphism, then we apply this morphism. And category
theory says if you can apply this morphism, then that morphism, then there's always a morphism that
just jumps all the way. That's, that's just an axiom of category theory. That axiom can kind of
denies computational irreducibility. Because if each of those morphisms was a computational
irreducible step, then to say, oh, but there's just a supermorphism that jumps all the way is to
kind of say, but we're, you know, that there shouldn't be that supermorphism if you had to go
through all these computational irreducible steps. And so I think that that's, in a sense,
category theory is a, is a description of computationally reducible sort of, is a,
is that some kind of meta description of computationally reducible pieces of mathematics.
And, but it's, it's one of these things that I think is, is, you know, somehow there's a
correspondence between that and this thinking about sort of homogeneity in mathematical space.
Time does fly. And this was terrific. Thank you so much again for talking with me. And hopefully
our third round comes closer than the, to the second than the second did to the first. Thanks again.
Yeah, it was, it was great. Good stuff.
