In this video, we're going to focus on Bayes theorem.
But first, let's go over some formulas, particularly with conditional probability.
The probability of events a occurring, given that event B has already occurred, is the
probability that event A and B will occur divided by the probability that event B will
occur.
In this case, we can say that the probability of B, given A, is equal to the probability
of B and A occurring divided by the probability that event A will occur.
Now the probability that event A and B will occur is equal to the probability that event
B and A will occur.
So basically what I'm doing is I'm setting these two equal to each other.
Now this is equal to the probability of A given B times the probability of B.
So let's replace that on the left side.
Now on the right side, the probability of B and A occurring is the product of the probability
of B occurring given A has already occurred times the probability of A occurring.
Now what I'm going to do is divide both sides by the probability that event B will occur.
And so this is going to give me the formula that is associated with Bayes theorem.
So the probability that A will occur given that B has already occurred is equal to the
probability that B will occur given that A has occurred times the probability of event
A occurring divided by the probability that event B will occur.
So Bayes theorem helps us to calculate the conditional probability of an event if basically
you know the reverse conditional probability with some other probability values as well.
But this is the basic formula of Bayes theorem.
So P of A given B is equal to P of B given A times P of A divided by P of B.
Now let's use a simple example that will illustrate the use of Bayes theorem.
So let's say that in a bottle there's a bunch of pieces of papers with numbers on it.
Let's say event A represents the following numbers being drawn 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
Now let's say event B represents the numbers 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Now what is the probability of A given B?
Let's use Bayes theorem to calculate this particular probability.
Even though we don't need to for educational purposes, let's do it.
Now what I'm going to do is create a Venn diagram.
So let's say the first circle is for event A, the second one is for B.
So A and B has these two numbers in common, 4 and 5.
So that's the intersection of A and B. A also has the numbers 1, 2, and 3.
B has the numbers 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Now in order to calculate this using Bayes theorem, we need to know the probability
of event A occurring, the probability that event B will occur, and basically the reverse
conditional probability.
The probability that B will occur given that A has already occurred.
So what is the probability that A will occur?
Well we need to write the sample space.
The sample space represents all of the possible numbers, the numbers in A and B. So the numbers
that we can get represent all of the natural numbers from 1 to 9.
So A has 5 out of the 9 possible numbers that we can choose from.
So the probability that event A will occur, assuming that each number has an equal chance
of being drawn out of the bottle, is going to be 5 out of 9.
Now B has 6 numbers out of the 9 numbers here.
So the probability that event B will occur is 6 out of 9.
Now what about the next one?
What is the probability that B will occur given that A has already occurred?
There's a formula for that which we talked about earlier in this video.
But to think about it conceptually, how much of B is in A?
A has 5 elements, it has the numbers 1 to 5.
Out of those 5 numbers, there's only 2 numbers that is in B that is part of A.
So the probability that B will occur given that event A has occurred is 2 out of 5.
So now with this information we can calculate this particular conditional probability.
So probably that A will occur given that B has already occurred, it's going to be P
of B of A or rather B given A times P of A over P of B.
And let me get rid of this.
So P of B given A, that's what we have here, that's 2 over 5 times P of A which is 5 over
9 divided by P of B which is 6 over 9.
So right now we could cancel the 5's and if we multiply the top and the bottom of the
fraction by 9, we can also cancel the 9's.
So we're left with 2 over 6 which reduces to 1 over 3.
So the probability that A will occur given that B has already occurred is 1 out of 3.
Now let's confirm that using conditional probability.
So P of A given B is the probability that event A and B occurs over the probability
that B will occur.
So we know that the sample space has 9 numbers.
How much of that is A and B?
The intersection of A and B is basically 2 numbers 4 and 5.
So the probability that event A and B will occur is 2 out of the 9 possible numbers.
Now the probability that B will occur is what we see here, it's 6 over 9.
So multiplying the top and the bottom numbers by 9, we're going to get the same result.
Initially it's going to be 2 over 6 which reduces to 1 over 3.
Now granted we could have done this from the beginning but now you see how Bayes-Derm works
with the formula that we wrote earlier.
But let's consider another example in which we could use the Bayes-Derm formula.
Now for those of you who truly value this video, if you want to show your appreciation
one of the best ways you can do so is by subscribing to this channel.
And it really doesn't take too long, just click on that red button at the bottom of
the screen and that's it.
By the way if you decide to do so don't forget to turn on or click on that notification
bell.
Now for those of you who want to support my channel, here's the link to my Patreon page.
So when you get a chance, check out the links in the description section below this video
because I'm going to post some other resources that you might find helpful.
So let's get back to the video.
A particular study showed that 12% of men will likely develop prostate cancer at some
point in their lives.
A man with prostate cancer has a 95% chance of a positive test result from a medical
screening exam.
A man without prostate cancer has a 6% chance of getting a false positive test result.
What is the probability that a man has cancer given that he has a positive test result?
Go ahead and try this problem.
Feel free to take a minute if you need to.
So let's write down what we know.
The probability that a man has cancer, I'm going to write PFC, is 12% which is .12 as
a decimal.
Now the second sentence says that a man with prostate cancer has a 95% chance of a positive
test result.
So given that the person has cancer, the probability that he will get a positive result or positive
test result is 95% or .95.
Now what about the third sentence?
A man without prostate cancer has a 6% chance of getting a false positive test result.
So the probability of getting a positive test result given that the person does not
have prostate cancer is 6% or .06.
So what is the probability that the person has cancer given that he has a positive test
result?
That's what we need to find.
So let's write the equation for that using Bayes-Derm.
So this is going to be the reverse conditional probability which is the probability of getting
a positive test result given that the person has cancer times the probability that the
person has cancer divided by the probability that the person has a positive test result.
Now we have these two values already but we don't have this one.
How can we find it?
In this case it's going to be very helpful to make a tree diagram.
So 12% of the population will have prostate cancer based on this particular study.
That means that 88% which is 100-12 or .88 will not have cancer.
Now out of those who have cancer 95% of them will have a positive test result which means
the other 5% will have a negative test result.
Now out of those who do not have cancer 6% will have a positive test result which means
the other 94% will have a negative test result.
So using this tree diagram how can we determine the probability that the person will have
a positive test result?
The probability that a person will have a positive test result depends on two events.
That is the probability that the person has cancer and they will have a positive test
result or which will be represented by the addition symbol.
The probability that the person does not have cancer and has a positive test result.
Those are the two options.
So the probability that the person has cancer and has a positive test result is the product
of these two values where they will have cancer and have a positive test result.
So it's basically .12 times .95.
The probability that the person does not have cancer and has a positive test result
is the product of these two values.
So it's .88 times .06.
.12 times .95 plus .88 times .06.
That's equal to .1668.
Now I'm running out of space so I'm going to have to delete a few things.
Hopefully you wrote that down because I'm going to refer to it later.
If not you can always rewind the video.
Now let's plug in the numbers into this formula.
So the probability of getting a positive test given that the person has cancer that's .95.
The probability that the person has prostate cancer is 12% and the probability that the
men or amen will have a positive test result is going to be .1668 or 16.68%.
So it's .95 times .12 divided by .1668.
And so you should get .68345.
So there's approximately a 68.3% chance that the person will have cancer given that they
have a positive test result.
So what is the probability that the person does not have cancer even though they have
a positive test result?
That's going to be 100 minus this number.
That is 100% minus 68.3% or 1 minus .683 which is .317.
So there's approximately a 31.7% chance that even though the person has a positive test
result that they do not have cancer.
So sometimes even if you get a positive test result doesn't mean that you have that condition.
There's always a risk factor.
But the answer that we're looking for in this problem is this number 68.3%.
Now there's another way in which we can get that answer.
Let's talk about how we can do it.
So let's say that there's 10,000 people in a city.
And based on a survey, 12% of those individuals have cancer.
So we're going to use the same percentages.
10,000 times .12 is 1200.
And the other 88% do not have cancer.
So 10,000 times .88 is 8,800.
Now of those who do have cancer, we know that 95% of them will get a positive test result.
So 95% of 1200 or 1200 times .95, that's 1140.
So the other 5% that's 1200 times .05 will get a negative test result.
And so that's 60.
Now of those who do not have cancer, we know that 6% of that population will get a positive
test result.
So 8,800 times .06, that's 528.
The other 94% will get a negative test result when they don't have cancer.
So 8,800 times .94, that's 8,272.
So now let's see if we can use this information to get the same answer.
So let me clear away a few things.
So the probability that a person has cancer given that the person has a positive test
result is going to be, well, let's break it up into two parts.
Based on the number of people that we chose, it doesn't matter if you chose 10,000 or 100,000.
Because we're dealing for a ratio, it's still going to be the same.
Out of this group of 10,000 people, how many have a positive test result?
The amount of people that have a positive test result is the sum of those two numbers.
It's 1140 plus 528.
Now out of those who have a positive test result, how many of them have cancer?
It's only this number.
That's the number who have cancer and have a positive test result.
So that's 1140.
So let's go ahead and add 1140 plus 528.
So that's 1668.
So 1140 divided by 1668 gives us .683.
So we can see why the answer is the same.
There's a 68.3% chance that the person will have cancer given that they have a positive
test result.
So now you see two ways in which you can get the answer.
Using a tree diagram or using the formula associated with Bayes-Derm.
Thanks for watching.
