So, good evening, everybody.
This is Oxford Quantum Information speaking.
We are here today to listen to a talk by Carol Marletta on the locality of quantum theory
and a lot of bomb effect.
Yeah, but before starting, I'm sorry, let me say a few words just like to give an outlook
of what we are doing here.
So we are on the fourth week of treating the term and we already have three events.
We had a flash stocks where young researchers from the University of Oxford, they have been
telling us about the research in the field of quantum computing.
We also had a journal club where our very own Anthony Thompson, he's probably actually
listening to us right now.
He told us about, he guided us through the paper of Renata Renar with his news paradox
and people say that that was one of the most clear explanations they've heard.
So probably it's definitely worth checking out.
And also we had a talk by Professor Raspur Guzik, who is an expert in quantum vibrational
algorithms and applications of quantum computers to quantum chemistry.
And also he's doing a lot of other things and he retires a lot of things.
And this week, Wednesday, so probably we have all the recordings on Facebook and maybe
you can check what have happened so far.
Later we'll have, on the seventh week, I guess, maybe eight, we'll have a questions and answer
sessions by Scott with Scott Aronson, who is one of the probably leading people in the
computer science part of quantum computing.
We'll have a talk by Chris Monroe, who is probably will be one of the people who will
build the actual quantum computer on trapped ions.
And we'll have one more journal club.
Also on the next week, we have a quantum coding workshop where Ben Yadribev, he's a second
year D-FIL in the Department of Physics.
He'll be teaching people how to use IBM Python package to code real quantum computers.
So please check the description in our, on our page and join if you want to learn how
to code quantum computers.
In general, like if you have any questions, proposals, anything, just reach us, reach
us, send us a message, any talks, because like my problem was when I got interested
in quantum computing, I had anybody around to talk to.
And our society, in my opinion, is not so bad opportunity to, to, to get acquainted
with the people who are sharing the same ideals and the same passion.
Yes.
And now probably to the top.
So unfortunately, I have been studying telecommunications during my undergrad, and I didn't
have cool courses on quantum field theory or general relativity.
And that's why I admire theoretical physics so much.
That's why I'm so glad that Karen Maleta is giving us a talk today.
And a few formal words is that she has obtained, like, you know, like on all these talks, some
big guys, some chairs, they say, all right, I can say, no, you don't want to.
Okay.
Yeah.
They say like this words that Karen has obtained here, bachelor and master degree in physical
engineering from the polytechnic D Torino, or if it's pronounced correct, yeah.
Also, she has her D'Fila mathematics from the mathematical Institute of Oxford.
And her research interests include theory of computation, foundations of physics,
condensed matter of physics and quantum biology.
That's why what the college website says.
But what thrills me the most is that she has been working with David Deutsch on
the constructor theory, or I don't know, probably it's better to say that David
Deutsch was working with Karen Maleta on constructor theory.
And as far as I get it, constructed theory is some possible replacement for quantum
mechanics, which can be more fundamental than the quantum theory.
I may be wrong.
Okay.
All right.
So if I'm correctly.
And so if you ever wanted to listen to a talk of a person who is on the forefront of
modern physics, then you can couldn't find better opportunity than today.
So Karen.
Yeah.
Great.
Thank you so much for this introduction.
This was very nice.
And I'm very happy also to see that the society is doing so well.
It's, I think it's, it's really exciting that all of these things are going on.
And I thought I'd talk about something that is, of course, very controversial and also
touches a bit on a number of things that I think quantum information has clarified
a lot for us.
So I think it will, I thought this was been nice for the quantum information
society to hear about.
And I would like to share my screen so you guys can see, I prepared some slides so
maybe I can go into, into that mode.
But it says that the host has disabled share.
Have I?
Yes.
That's what it says.
Oh, really?
I'm sorry.
So I, oh, no, don't worry.
Don't worry.
I can also.
Have I disabled it?
You can't share, you can't share the screen.
That's what it says here.
Oh, Lord.
Maybe if anybody knows how to fix this in the room, please write us a message to a chat
or to a question and answer because I can't, I can't read it.
So I'm sorry.
Don't worry.
Is there any setting button that you can fiddle with?
Because it says host disabled attendee screen sharing.
So I think some is suggesting that there is.
All right, so let me try to maybe make you.
All right.
I'm sorry that was absolutely unexpected because last time we didn't have problems.
No, okay, that was not the best.
All right.
Now it doesn't work yet.
Yeah, yeah, I will make you a host.
Okay.
Yep.
You have your mic off.
Great.
This is shared.
I'm going to now go into the presentation mode.
And collapse this.
Okay, can everyone see me and also something see the screen and hear me fine.
Should I just go ahead?
I can.
And yeah, we'll wait for answers.
Okay.
Let me know when I can go and then.
All right.
Great.
Okay, so having solved this unpredictable event problem, whatever we can.
So I can briefly start introducing the topic.
I think the reason why I chose this topic is because I have worked a lot on.
Both the idea of locality as a principle of physics.
So I thought during my research about these, the issue of whether, you know, our universal and fundamental description of the reality are actually local.
Also, because recently I, I entered sort of long, long discussion with, with other people were interested in quantum theory about the harm effect, which, as some of you may know, is supposed to be one of the cases where the non locality of quantum theory pops up most dramatically.
So I think I'll just go through a little bit of an introduction about locality and then I'll zoom in into this topic of, of the AB effect.
So the, the first thing I would like to clarify is what I mean by by locality because of course there are different notions of locality and I think in in quantum theory encounter, at least two or more.
So when I talk about locality, I refer to this thing that's called sometimes the principle of local realism, which means that when you have a composite system like this one represented here, indicated by this arrow, where you have two subsystems A and B.
I would like to be able to have a realistic description of the system where you can describe the full factual situation of a with a descriptor little a and the full factual situation of B with a descriptor little B.
And also locality is the fact that if you apply a transformation that only involves a let's say only little a can change, but be cannot.
The fact that if you do something over the a region, the other regions in the universe are not affected.
And they're not affected in an absolute term, not just as far as their observable features are concerned, because if we go into this one.
We're talking about a weaker property which is not local realism, but it's the no signaling principle. The no signaling principle is something that has to do with the stuff that can be observed so if you do a transformation on a only let's say,
theory is no signaling if the observable feature of be don't change as a result, but something else which you can't observe let's say just by looking at be may change.
Now, the reason why I made distinction between these two things is that quantum theory is a theory that satisfies no signaling, but sometimes it said not to satisfy local realism.
Another thing I want to discuss in the in the next slide so if you consider the no signaling property of course quantum series no signaling we're all happy about this, because if you, if you look at, you know, if you describe your quantum system a with its its local
reduced density operator row a and the system be with its reduced density operator row B, then, because of this nice short proof that is in this line over here.
So if you have a joint state row a be and you do a unitary transformation or a CP map if you like the only involves a because of the properties of unitary T or of CP maps in general you can say that the local descriptor that the local density
describes be only is unchanged. So quantum theory satisfied no signaling we're all happy about it. However, there is this residual problem that if you take the tensor product or the order pair row a row B of the reduced density operators.
If you don't get a description that is complete for the full system, because sometimes you could have an entangled state, which cannot be described as like, as a tensor product of these two density operators.
So, hence the question, does quantum theory satisfy also local realism.
So I think the consensus. Well, that there has been a tradition within even quantum information and and actually this states back of course to twice and then to the founding fathers of quantum theory that says that actually quantum theory is not local
realistic and the chief example of course is is is of something local is the case of let's say two entangled particles.
Like a state like this one where a and B are entangled.
And now if you apply a transformation like this Z operator I'm thinking of these as cubits, and you flip the value of the bit of the qubit a.
Well, what happens is that the full state changes. So you can say that only the state, the state describing a has changed.
And you can't really ascribe the descriptor that that fully describes the state of a and the state of B, because this is an entangled state.
And so even if entangled systems completely satisfying no signaling.
There is still this problem that they present whereby if you apply a local transformation on one of the subsystems as entangled it looks like you're changing the global state of both systems.
So it seems to clash with the idea of locality or realism.
I mean, of course, this is an old idea so I think this this was made popular by by, I mean it was pointed out at first I think by by Einstein for those can roles and in a paper.
And, you know, if you go on Wikipedia and you look at what quantum locality supposed to mean.
It's a phenomenon by which the measurement statistics of some states or multipart at quantum system don't admit an interpretation in terms of local or local realistic theory.
And if you take Einstein Podolsky-Rosen's view, as well as the view of lots of quantum theory people.
This is actually true so quantum theory satisfies no signaling but it doesn't admit a local realistic model.
You could say I mean no signaling after all is all about observable features and that's all we care about in physics isn't I mean isn't it.
And I think it's not because, as I said here, the, the other universal theory that we have which is GR is actually a theory that is local realistic.
If you had quantum theories being a non local realistic theory then you would have this problem of reconciling these two theories, and it would look like a reconciliation is almost impossible.
So in a way, this is like a blow to the view that you can actually have a consistent way of putting the two theories together.
So it's important actually to understand if quantum theory can after all admit a local and realistic description, sorry, formulation.
So my thesis, there's the stuff the controversial stuff that I want to say which is I think not so controversial in certain circles is that if you take quantum series seriously I'll say what I mean by that.
So non locality actually disappears so this idea that quantum series not not a local basic theory is just not true.
And, and there is a price to pay for that and I'll explain what that is in a moment and and so so what do I mean by taking quantum theory seriously.
So the first point is that you switch to a view where your elements of reality are not real value stochastic variables. So they are not the real value stochastic variables that describe your your measurement outcomes.
But your elements of reality are q numbers. So they are quantum numbers, not see numbers and and so they, they are more exotic than, let's say what you would use in classical physics.
And the other point of course is that unitary quantum theory applies to everything in the universe, or I should say in the multiverse, including observers, even microscopic ones.
There is the coherence and we don't see quantum effects at certain scales, most, I mean, in most, in most cases, but quantum theory does not have inconsistencies when it's applied to such objects.
And therefore, to understand where it's local and realistic you have to really take it at face value and consider it in its full power, even as applicable to these systems.
And I think quantum information, actually naturally leads to both points, especially to point two, because it's customary in quantum information to regard a measurement process as just another unitary which you can think of as a controlled gates or controlled not or
generalized control note.
Now, to see why quantum theory is local realistic you have to switch to the Isenberg picture. And so this picture is extremely unpopular among, I think, quantum info people.
Some few people who use it a lot. One of them is Daniel Gottesman who pioneered it in its way of expressing error correcting codes.
And also, it's been revisited by Deutsche and Haydn more recently in relation to locality. So the stuff I'm going to say now is something that was pointed out by Deutsche and Haydn.
And I think it's also implicit in the traditional quantum field theory because even though the Isenberg picture is not very popular in quantum information, because it's very cumbersome in a way.
It is very popular for quantum field theorists. And it's got some benefits. It's not great for calculations.
I mean the Schrodinger picture is more and more immediate.
But it's nice because it shows explicitly in what sense quantum theory is local realistic.
I think that you just have to go back to considering a composite system of two qubits or two systems so A is now a qubit and B is not a qubit and you're considering two qubits.
So you describe this composite system as specified completely by sets of descriptors that you can identify with the generators of the algebra or observers of A and B separately.
Let's say a triplet for qubits of operators to describe A and another triplet that describes B and these are so QAX, QAY, QAZ.
Each of these can be represented with four by four matrix, which can be written like this, for example, with the poly matrices.
Importantly, you have the QA and QB commute because they represent separate systems. So I think that's one assumption that is taken to indicate the fact that A and B are two separate subsystems.
Now, if you go by this way of describing A and B, you can see that the dynamical evolution is given by some unitary which acts on the full system and evolves separately the descriptors of A and the descriptors of B.
Then in order to extract the observable things out to these Q numbers, you use a fixed constant of motion, which is the Asenberg state, which is the initial state of the system, which you fix at the start.
And the observable features, let's say time t, can always be written as a function of this constant. So you can write it like what I did here.
Now, the interesting fact that comes out of unitarity is that you can actually track the evolution of the product of the descriptors at one time by looking at how each of the two descriptors for A and B separately evolve.
So there is this nice separability feature which comes out of the Asenberg picture, which doesn't exist in the case of the Schrodinger picture.
And note that this is true even in the case where you have entangled systems.
And this is why in this picture is so nice and clean to see that actually quantum theory is local and realistic.
But I think Deutsch and Haydn pointed out nicely in that paper. So the, you know, let's go back to our criterion for local realism.
You want to know how do transformations that act on, let's say A only affect the descriptors of B. And the theory is local realistic if the descriptors of B are not changed.
And of course they are not changed because the definition for a unitary to act only on A is that it's a function of the descriptors of A only.
And so when you look at what it does to the descriptors of B, because they commute it doesn't do anything to them.
I have this in one line that that actually quantum theory does satisfy local realistic criterion, assuming that the descriptors of the subsystems are Q numbers.
And this is again true, even when a and B are entangled and you can generalize this proof also not for unitary but for CP maps so it's very general.
I think quantum field theories have known is all along it's just that somehow the terminology of non locality which is very popular in quantum info community has been developed by somewhat disregarding this fact.
And it's very misleading if you think about it.
Let me just kind of clarify something, because probably someone is worried about Bell's theorem and, you know, the fact that, you know, how does this claim that I just made that quantum theory is after all local realistic with the descriptors being Q numbers,
square with the fact that, you know, we know about Bell non locality. And this is why I'm saying that the terminology is misleading so I have just to remind you the reported here a bit of, you know, an example of a bell like inequality where you have
an observable here which is like a witness of entanglement and if the expected value of the observable exceeds a certain number in this case it's two.
Then bells theorem says that whatever system composite system you're describing cannot be described by local real valued stochastic theory.
It has been taken as meaning that actually quantum theory is not local realistic, but this is not quite right. So, the reason why it is not correct is that it is conclusion this regards the fact that you can still have local realism, just you have to drop this idea that the local descriptors are real
and I've reported here this nice near San Juan except where, you know, the conclusion from bells inequalities that the world is not local realistic.
And, and somehow, what I'm saying is that this statement has to be understood as meaning that what bells theorems rules out is just local real valued models of quantum theory.
And there are local realistic models which have quantum numbers as descriptors, and this is obvious in the eyes of the picture.
And so, whenever you violate belly and qualities in the lab you are just reinstate in the fact that quantum series quantum theory, and that the local descriptors of your systems actually q valued numbers.
So, this is actually quite nice. It's quite nice because it's a bit like the idea of, of, of, well, of any kind of new and groundbreaking theory.
But they, they, such theories make us think in ways that are very counterintuitive, because it's very, it's very hard to imagine of q numbers descriptors for your local systems.
But once you do, then you have this nice payoff that your theories local and realistic and everything.
Now, there are, let's say two, I would say no residual, I mean residual non localities in the literature so if you buy this stuff that I just told you.
So if you buy if you kind of bind to the idea of thinking of your, of your, you know the atoms that compose yourself as also being described by q number value things, which are local and realistic etc.
Then you still have two problems so there are still two things that are considered as having no locality which is not the type that I just described now, at least on the surface.
One kind is the one that appears in the iron of mom effect.
The other one is the one that appears in fermionic quantum field theory, because the descriptors that you use in that theory pertaining to different subsystems don't commute.
And this violates one of the assumptions that I had in the earlier slides. And I think there's a lot to say about this. This, but I will now focus on the iron of mom effect, mainly.
I'll go back to fermions in the conclusions.
So, let me explain the context of the AB effect.
So the AB effect tries to falsify the idea that all quantum phases are acquired locally.
Locally means this in this context so you have here a magzander interferometer and there's some kind of charge particle for example that's going to propose across these two paths.
And suppose there are different values of a field at x1 and x0.
This will generate a relative phase between the two branches, which is detectable upon closing the loop.
Now, of course, you can use quantum field theory to also tell you that actually the phase is not just detectable upon closing the loop.
In principle, you can detect it by doing local tomography on the particle at any point along the two paths so the phase is actually locally and gradually acquired along these two paths and you can prove this by putting some shifters and various other things that you can do for example with
photons but you can do analogous things with with charged particles and other particles depending on what kind of experiment you're performing.
The AB effect is supposed to be an exception to this rule, and this is why it was supposed to be a proof of non locality in a different sense from what I said earlier.
So in the AB effect you have just remind you briefly.
You have like a solenoid which is located at one point.
It's an ideal solenoid so it's kind of sticking out of the page.
And a particle, let's say an electron, which is charged is is split in interferometer so as to go into branches around the solenoid and then the interromance is closed.
And what happens is that despite the fact that there's no field at the point where the electron is moving.
You do detect a phase shift at the end of the way when you're closing interferometer, and this phase shift is is proportional to the flux of the magnetic field through this section.
Now, why is this problematic because as our mom pointed out the, well, there's no really there's no Lawrence force as it were on the on the on the electron or the charge particle when it's kind of traveling along this path.
And so it looks like the action of the solenoid is felt at a distance by the electron so that that is quite weird.
If you want to use action at a distance you can also use a different model which, let's say results to the, to the vector potential which is this a, which is related to the B field with the curve.
But the point is that in field theory, the vector potential isn't a an observable quantity by itself, the observable things are the fields.
And so it looks like, you know, although you can actually formally write the phase difference along the path this will be a function of a, and the standard argument goes that this is a gauge dependent quantity and can be observed.
But these phases popping up magically at the end of the interferometer even though along the path there wasn't there was nothing there.
And this is, of course, not not a local thing it's it's it's and it's kind of clashes with the with the accounts that we have for all other phases.
To challenge it, I mean this is a very interesting bit of history, by the way, because I don't know if and bomb produced this paper in 1959.
And they, they kind of use it as a way of saying how significant the vector potential is actually in in electromagnetism.
And at this day there is a huge controversy as to what the whole effect actually means and how to model it.
And, like, huge number of papers have been written about it. But I want to focus on those that that are worried about the locality issue and and one breakthrough happened in 2012.
And by the man who had been interested in this issue for a long time came up with an interesting model to explain the phase.
And this model is a model where the phase is actually due to the interaction of not of the vector potential of the solenoid on the electron at the point of the electron.
And the field of the electron at the point of the solenoid so he writes down.
Let's say an interaction which is involves the magnetic field generated by the electron and the magnetic field of the solenoid at the point of the solenoid, because elsewhere it's zero.
And he shows that by appropriate integration of this formula, you can actually get the right phase that when you close the loop.
It's kind of nice so the phase is actually in this interpretation is somewhat proportional to the interaction energy that you can write describing interaction between the solenoid and the electron at the point of the solenoid.
It's interesting. And this was pointing out by by another thesis called Kang is that in this interpretation this model, the phases actually well defined, unlike in the other model, which uses the vector potential is it's well defined along the path of the of the electron
So there is a nice well defined value for each of the points of the path that the electron is following.
So the idea is that this sounds like almost like a refutation of the non locality of the AB phase, except that there is a problem so the problem is this that in the semi classical model that vitamin has
the interaction between the field of the electron and the field of the solenoid happens at the solenoid point. Why because there isn't classically any field at the electrons point that's actually the problem that we had at the start.
So the way he describes this is that the phases somewhat gradually constructed but it's not clear where it is along the path, whether it's actually available on the electron or whether it's somewhat non locally shared between the electron and the solenoid.
Of course, it must be on the electron but the model that my mind uses cannot describe this because, and I go back to this idea of taking quantum theory seriously, because it's not a fully quantum model.
In order to see that the electron really carries the phase along the path and that the phases gradually acquired and if you were to measure the electron let's say at this point, you'd be able to extract this relative phase.
You have to model the whole thing quantum mechanically which means that you have to quantize the field as well.
I think this is what Lotko and I have been doing.
So, I won't bore you with the details but basically the gist of the explanation is that you can write a nice second quantize Hamiltonian for the electron, the solenoid and the photon field which connects as you were the solenoid and the electron.
You know your elements of reality are the Q numbers of the field, even though classically there's no field at the point where the electron is.
There are Q valued entities that can mediate the interaction between the solenoid and the electron.
And so this in this account with the full quantum model, everything is local. And most importantly, you can actually, and this is the first point in this slide, you can actually measure in principle, the relative phase between the two branches of the
each point along the path.
And this is very cool because this suggests a possible way of performing a new experiment along the lines of like local tomography let's say, where you can extract the partial AB phase.
And if you were to do that you would be able to vindicate this idea that the AB phase is actually locally acquired.
This is very exciting and I think the somehow well it's exciting because although it proves something that to, let's say quantum field theories might look self evident, because I think no doubt they think that all the descriptions they have must be local.
I would somehow clarify this mess about non locality that has been introduced by some interpretations of the AB effect.
Having said that, in the quantum description, the vector potential is very important because we can't write the Hamiltonian without a quantized vector potential so the original point of a Haranova bomb still stands.
This actually made it even more significant. Once you look into the quantum version of the of the model to to explain everything locally.
Okay, let me just make a separate statement about fermions I promise I would go back to this.
Okay, because I'm collaborating with me set up with, with kind of very keen on on fermions so I think I, I'm not sure if he's here but just in case.
So, there is an interesting fear and it was published, it was kind of published in in 2017 by Sheer Prasad and Paul Ramon Robichaud, which says something very intriguing.
I think that all theories that are, they have deterministic dynamics and, namely a unitary one to one dynamics, and that satisfy no signaling like quantum theory must also have a model which is local realistic in the sense that I said.
The translation of this formal statement is that, basically all unitary quantum theories that have a no signaling shooting a picture must also have a local realistic.
Q valued expression using something like the Heisenberg picture version of them.
And the conjecture here is that this residual problem with no locality that happens with fermions can be solved in principle because that's what the theorem says because the harmonic quantum theory is not signaling of course and it's one to one so it's
got a kind of deterministic dynamics.
So, you must admit a model which is local realistic and uses Q numbers. It's just that the Q numbers are not the ones that we're using currently so they're not necessarily expressed in terms of annihilation and creation operators and I think this is some nice work in progress that I'm doing with Whitney Seto and so you know,
kind of watch the space. So hopefully this will be so soon.
The conclusions are that quantum locality is a myth. In a sense, in this, this is clear if you take quantum theory seriously. And I think those who use the terminology of Bellman locality or quantum locality are referring to the fact that you cannot describe
the quantum theory with a local hidden variable model. So with local real value stochastic theories, which is fine. Everyone agrees with that.
But it's a bit misleading at best. And those who actually think that quantum theories on local. Well, they must be wrong because, as we, we've seen that is not true.
The second point is that because quantum theory, which is a universal theory of reality satisfies locality in this sense, we can take locality as a fundamental principle to construct future theories of physics, the go beyond quantum theory so it's a good kind of guideline.
And also, under this at least as far as locality is concerned gr and quantum theory are not in contradiction. So that's kind of reassuring.
And going back to the theme of the talk, which is taking quantum theory seriously, I think I've experienced myself the benefits of this kind of take on things.
So, the thing is to switch the view or queue numbers are the elements of the local elements of reality, as opposed to real valued outcomes of measurements and the second point is to accept the quantum theory applies to everything in the universe,
primarily including observers and microscopic objects, etc, etc.
And if you adopt this view, you got a lot of benefits. So I've listed some of them here is like, you know, taking some kind of nice medicine that makes you feel better.
So the first thing is that you will observe is that you will stop obsessing about things like the measurement problem and about quantum locality. Hopefully I've argued about no locality now and I'm happy to discuss the stuff about measurement problem later.
You might actually end up trying to do crazy things, but the crazy things that actually advance the science a lot so they, you will stop doing experiments about just bell inequalities which now we have violated really well so we are sure that they are violated at least you know not sure but
we've, we've, we've had a number of such relations and think we'd be nice to do something new. So for example, you could end up trying to superpose large masses and large biological systems, such as bacteria, some colleagues of mine have done that.
Cats, and, and maybe even humans.
So that's just a nice thought experiment along these lines and maybe at some point we'll be able to do that.
And finally, you will just see the classical and quantum computing are not completely separate, but actually they're just two phases of the same local information theoretic structure that pervades the universe.
And it will also support will be the same information theoretic structure that will support.
The new theory of physics that will supersede both quantum theory and ngr.
So as a last thought.
Of course, I mean one of the objections is something like, but I don't see q numbers so I don't feel like I'm in a superposition so why should I actually embrace this view of the universe.
And I want to reply to this objection which is really nice quote by Frank, which is this and I'll read it for you.
Have you ever seen Earth rotate on its axis. I have. I see it every day. When I see the Earth rotation expose the unmoving sun at dawn and cover the unmoving sun from my view at dusk.
Common language, however, says that the sun sets and rises.
Everyone believed that this was so until Copernicus and Galileo taught us to see nature through the laws of physics.
We're going to see that measurements of the electron spin frequencies through the laws of quantum mechanics, which apply not only to electrons, but also to the physicists who measure these spins.
And with this, I'll close the presentation I'm very happy to take questions and I thank you for your attention.
Thank you very much care for the talk, it was like mind exploding mind road in the whatever you call this so if you have any questions, please write them to the sessions of questions and answers, and maybe to chat, I think,
I have a question already. Yes, great.
What are these like, like, I'm, I understand all the, this nice concept of q numbers that they make the theory local but like, what are they how can I kind of not measure I don't want to say measure but how I can measure them how can.
Yes, I think.
So, so I think the.
It's hard to say what they are like because as soon as you ask that question then you're thinking, how can I actually picture them in my head. I guess the, the answer has to be along the same lines as you would do for, let's say, space time right.
And then we think of, of, of relativity and the way it describes the fundamental things in the universe. And we think of a curse space time and the way it works, etc.
This is very distant from like the intuition that we have, but it still works. So, they are objects which we can't completely access through measurement.
Just like we can't really access completely through measurement the whole space time.
We can at best do some local measurements and infer something about the curvature and so on.
And likewise in this case.
I think the best way of understanding q numbers is really to go in this idea of the multiverse so, you know, whatever the wheat and several other people including David, David Wallace and other other physicists have described.
But so in a way you only have an imperfect description of these things because you can only describe them as far as you know through the indirect observations that you make when you perform interference experiments.
So we kind of catch glimpses of these things.
And we can, let's say we can say that they are the best things that we can use at the moment to describe in a local way what's going on in a quantum interference experiment.
My understanding and also I think there are some people who are working with David, for example, some I think he's tuned in now that.
So there is a lot of, I mean there's a lot of work to do in order to have a complete nice picture of what the q numbers really are so I think your question is very nice because kind of talks about a research project in a sense.
But this is probably my expectation is that this will be fully clarified when we have a new tier of quantum gravity so we'll have to wait until then.
But I think, I think somehow I understand that that your point is that these these things are very exotic and maybe not so friendly to to imagine.
But I would say, it seems to me that they are not less friendly than you know they seem to be as as unfriendly as well as as let's say other things that gr uses to describe the the universe.
And yet with gr we are okay but we're not quite okay with q numbers.
I think this is partly because this is to do with information theoretic structure and so on.
But it requires a bit of kind of imagination but I think it kind of works out nicely and if that's the price to pay for locality I'm very happy to pay that.
So the question is, if it's valid to describe physical systems like with the things you cannot measure.
Well I understand that like it leads to the to consistency and what we expect to turn. But yeah, we have another question from chat.
So if you can asks, do you think the principle of locality will be shown to be deducible from even deeper principles, perhaps from those of construction theory, or might a different theory be required.
Okay, that's a really cool question.
And high log and by the way, and the.
So I think the.
Locality is one of the things that we assume so I think it's, it's not going to be from principles of constructed theory.
I, I think in one way of thinking of locality at least of locality of interactions is that it kind of rests on a further assumption which is the assumption that we can divide the universe into subsystems.
If you don't have subsystems, then you don't even have, you know, you can't formulate locality because there isn't such a thing as a local descriptor or something.
So I think the, I mean, let's say it is not a principle that implies locality but one of the assumptions, or the more fundamental actions that it rests on is the fact that we can subdivide the universe into subsystems.
That's a very important assumption for anything that you want to do in physics, whether experimental or theoretical.
We have another question from Anthony Thompson, our beautiful presenter from the Journal Club and he asks, please can you explain how using q numbers lets us stop worrying about the measurement problem.
I mean, this requires a long, like a very long discussion that I'm happy to have offline, like, and also I think there are lots of this has been discussed a lot by, I mean, the, the, the ultimate discussion of this in this book by David Wallace.
I recommend it if you're interested in this kind of stuff but basically I think the, the, it's an indirect way in the sense that I think the measurement thing is measurement problem is really solved by the other bit of taking quantum theory seriously which is just to treat any measurement
interaction as a unitary transformation.
If you do that, then everything is consistent in the sense that you describe your, you know, the scene that performs the observation as just another quantum system.
In the same way as you can describe consistently a controlled note between two qubits, you can describe a measurement interaction that takes place between, you know, myself and a photon with me looking at the photon and checking where it is.
All of this carries through and is nicely and beautiful and consistent and there is no.
There is no contradiction or problem with the fact that you're performing measurements and somehow this is nice because whenever you do that you are.
So you get rid of this artificial division between microscopic measurement systems and the stuff that's being measured which is quantum.
And somehow time and again in most of the stuff that I described today, even in the case of the AB effect, whenever you add this artificial distinction between something being classical in the AB effect is the field and something being strictly quantum.
You may reach various kinds of contradictions or problems, because whenever something that's quantum couples something classical.
It's somewhat infects it with the quantumness.
So if you if you start with the view that the stuff that's classical is classical and can become quantum, you, you end up in some contradictions and the measurement problem is just one of these.
I have one more question.
So, Friedrich Bertani asks, so like to all who are listening to us, I will read this question and then probably you can see it but then you'll see it.
Thank you for the nice talk. I don't understand how you can use different set of elements for theories that describe a same system.
If you use a few numbers to quantum theory why don't use them to GR by doing so would you are really saying hope it makes sense. You can read it.
Yes, I think I think the, the problem is that so.
So, GR has a formal structure where the standard quantization procedures don't seem to work and one of the reasons why that happens is that the equations are nonlinear.
So that's one of the formal reasons why it's been said that it's hard to find the queue number description of the full of, I mean, of the whole of GR.
What you can do though is to do some approximations.
And in those approximations you can indeed describe the gravitational field is made of gravitons which are a bit like photons.
And in that case you can think of all of these quantum numbers as being your descriptors and everything is fine.
However, it's not quantum gravity yet because it doesn't capture the full of GR, the whole of GR and I think the tension there is.
I think there's a conceptual tension. I think it seems to me, although I'm not an expert on this, of course, that the problem is that we have only been trying to apply to GR known quantization procedures or variance of those.
But the fact that we haven't managed to find a way of doing it properly doesn't mean that there isn't one.
So, you know, I'm hoping that some some of you maybe might come up with that that would be very nice.
And another question. I'm sorry I can't make everybody see this question so I'll just read them.
Nicholas Petropoulos asks, Hi, I want to ask that do you have an opinion about if the parallel worlds worlds are physically real in many world interpretation I guess. Thank you.
I think the summing the.
So this is the realm of interpretations of quantum mechanics and the.
I mean, of course, you know, you can explain the patterns that we observe in the experiments in various ways and there are even some collapse models that that can move away even from the unitarity of quantum theory that can, let's say, explain more or less what we see.
But if you stick to certain features like locality, like this idea that quantum theory is universal so it applies to everything and so on.
Then, I think the manual description is almost inescapable in the sense that it's just natural to interpret these Q numbers and the way they work and they kind of
move under unitary transformations as describing different branches of the wave function being transformed as they get entangled with as a system gets entangled with another and yet another and so on and so forth.
Yeah, I think I would say that they are real just like I think space time is real to some degree, although I, I mean, as you were saying earlier, you can't access the whole of space time, or you can't access the whole of this multiples.
But yeah, I mean, I think this is the conclusion that the interpret this type of interpretation leads to so yeah, I mean my opinion is that the branches of the multiples are out there and I am in one of them.
Yeah.
Oh, we have one more question from Christian some.
Could you explain exactly a Q numbers is in this context, and how do they arise in quantum measurement.
For example, in standard quantum mechanics if you measure the Z speed of an electron you get either real numbers one minus one, they can very corresponding to eigenvectors of the observable.
How would a Q number arise here.
The question is, is what is needed to describe the. So you can describe. So you can write down in the isomer picture.
The, the side interaction that leads to a measurement is. So, first of all, we have to assume it as a, you have to kind of accept the fact that this is a unitary transformation.
Right, so it's going to be. So you got something that's been measured.
And then there's another system be this kind of the thing that measures system a, and you can write it as the as a controlled operation let's say if there's a cubits you can think of a control not so that you know because quantum information society so let's go with cubits and
So that the interaction can be described in the Schrodinger picture as a copy like transformation.
So you got zero zero goes into zero zero and one zero goes into one one and all the others things in the basis, but you can also write it in the isomer picture and that that in that picture.
The unitary that performs the control not will transform the descriptors of your subsystems.
And so you start with QA and QB, which are your descriptors of QB and QB and then you apply this control not.
And what you see, and this is interesting because you see it only in the isomer picture is that the descriptors of the two cubits at a later time are a function of the descriptors of the cubits at an earlier time.
And they, the descriptors of the two subsystems have mixed.
And so this is the signature of the fact that a measurement has occurred or an entangling operation has occurred and the way they have been mixed and you can check it by doing the calculation is that
the descriptors of QB at a later time so after the CNOT has been applied, don't commute with the descriptors of QB at the earlier time.
Initially they did commute because we said that separate subsystems have to commute.
But if you apply the control not, then this guy QB a will contain in its descriptors, the elements of, of, of reality as you were of the, of the, of the, of QB B and vice versa.
So the measurement is nicely described in the form of mixing the descriptors from of QB and QB and in the descriptors of the two cubits at a later time.
And this is nice because it shows how, let's say information flows from one system being measured to the other system measuring it.
And it's completely symmetrical. So, so I think it's, it's a, it's a, the, the, the fact that you describe your systems Q numbers is completely compatible with the fact that you have measurement occurring.
So you can describe the measurement as being, you know, given by various outcomes so to describe the outcomes you have to use the Schrodinger picture, but that's fine because the two pages are consistent so
should I look at the, yeah.
Yeah, so I know if you have any other questions.
I think it looks like that we don't have any, I have a question like so where at what point like in your life you start believing in many world interpretations, for example, did you.
I think.
Well, I think it happened naturally as I was understanding quantum theory better so I was horribly confused at the end of my undergraduate degree, in the sense that I think most of the stuff that I was told was in the form of collapse theory.
So, you know, the idea that if you measure one cubit and it's entangled with something else it collapses in one of the states that are kind of connected with the outcome that you've just observed.
And, I mean, I really force myself into understanding, you know, believing that because I thought, you know, you know, the lecture is saying that sounds right.
But it didn't quite make sense because you know when you're going so of course you can try to make it make sense of it somehow in a contrite way.
A bit like when you're trying to fit the, you know, the think that the earth is the center of the universe and all the sun right so it's kind of that kind of theory that you can still make it work more or less but somehow it's very unnatural.
And so gradually later and when I started doing quantum computing, you use all of these unitary gates.
And I think as soon as you do that then you really are already thinking many walls, although maybe not explicitly so maybe are in denial of many walls at that point.
And I think later on it just kind of became not, I think it's the, I don't think it's, it's a completely unsatisfactory interpretation of quantum theory, it's got problems but seems to me that the problems it has are far fewer and
far less dramatic than what the other interpretations have so I think I, you know, it's like, I mean, I'd like to understand it better.
But I guess this is the best way of understanding quantum theory right now. So that's how I kind of ended up thinking about it like that.
So once we have talked about the manual theory we get more questions.
So, yeah, I need, I need to do that as, as would you say that Q numbers are the same level of awareness that quantum states, but once are the non-commuting operators represented by matrices, and the others are Hilbert space elements represented by vectors for pure states.
So, I'm sorry, I didn't get the question in this time, but yeah.
Yes, I guess. So, well, I mean, maybe one comment I can make which is along these lines is that I think it's perceptive to mention Hilbert spaces because one thing that, so one thing that might interest someone, depending on what kind of, you know, angle you are looking
from, the, is the fact that the isomer, so the isomer picture and the Schrodinger picture are kind of equivalent as far as measurements are concerned, of course, because the statistics are the statistics are the same.
But we already seen that in terms of locality they are a bit different. So in the sense that one is more explicitly local than the other.
And the other difference is that, going back to the question is that the, in the isomer picture you don't have to choose a representation so you can forget about Hilbert spaces.
And, and just look at the operators as being your, the, you know, the algebra of the operators as being the main thing.
In addition with, I mean, in addition to this map, which you have between this space of operators and the C numbers, which is given by the trace and the isomer state which is your constant.
It's useful because sometimes there are cases where, finding representations are is problematic. So I think there's a paper that that actually Vlatko found and kind of sent to me because he knows that I like Heisenberg, where DRock,
apparently it's one of the last paper, one of the last papers that this guy that DRock wrote. It's called kind of quantum theory without that quantum field theory without deadwoods.
And DRock is trying to say that certain representation problems with which happened in quantum field theory, to which he refers as deadwoods disappear if you switch to the isomer picture.
Although I don't understand the paper fully, I think the reason is that in the isomer picture he points out in the isomer picture you can do without representation without using Hilbert spaces.
And you can just use these three. So it's a kind of nice asymmetry. And maybe the question was kind of hinting at that.
One question from Nicholas Petropoulos. Have you heard of casual causal set theory. If I'm not mistaken, isn't there the point that locality and causality emerged at a higher level of some sets of points connected with some rules that impose causality and locality.
If that's true, how can we assume locality is fundamental. Thanks again.
So I don't know about that. But I think so it could be that there is
that there is a way of deriving locality from something else. So I am actually very happy if there is an axiom that, you know, physical principle from which you can derive the locality principle.
I mean, usually when you when you find that something that's physically meaningful can be used to derive something else.
You are maybe explaining this something else better. So in a way this would provide a better explanation for what locality is.
Although, because I'm not familiar with what, you know, with that I mean, I mean it sounds to me it's more mathematically inspired rather than physically inspired.
But maybe it's the scope to understand whether these axioms that they're using can be interpreted physically in some way. So it sounds cool.
Yep.
So maybe I think we would stop at this point, because maybe Kara has answered already too many questions.
Thank you very much for the talk. It for me it was a great pleasure and like I did learn a lot of new things.
Thank you for inviting me. I really enjoyed it.
Thank you for agreeing to give a talk.
As I said, I'm really pleased with the, it sounds like you're doing really well. The society is is very lively and it's a pleasure to see that is really cool.
Yeah.
Thanks for the amazing talk Nicholas Petropoulos says that guy was two questions. Thank you Nicholas for your question. So to everybody who is still here. I know Joe on our Facebook page.
Follow Kara one letters research. I don't know. Enjoy life and enjoy your Saturday evening.
Yeah, everybody have fun. Bye.
I think you should stop the webinar because now you should I close it. Yeah, you can just like have a nice day.
Take care.
