Dr. Mary Jane Rubinstein is a professor of religion and science in society at Wesleyan
University and is affiliated with the philosophy department and the feminist gender and sexuality
studies program there.
She holds a BA from Williams College, an M. Phil from Cambridge University, and a PhD
from Columbia University.
Her research unearths the philosophies and histories of religion and science, especially
in relation to cosmology, ecology, and space travel.
She is the author of Astro Topia, The Dangerous Religion of the Corporate Space Race, which
you'll be hearing, I think, some material from that book more or less this afternoon.
That book just came out from University of Chicago in 2022, and I highly recommend it.
I think it's one of the first works of yours that seems to me to make a more explicit connection
between thinking about space, cosmology, astronomy, and actually, I would say, ethics, but at
least the environment in a much more explicit way.
Pantheologies, excuse me, God's Worlds and Monsters, Columbia University Press 2018,
Worlds Without End, the lives, many lives of the universe, I'm sorry, the multiverse,
which is the book that just received the Iris Award this afternoon, if you missed that.
Congratulations.
And Strange Wonder, the closure of metaphysics in the opening of all Columbia University
Press 2009, which, for me, was a book that I came across when I also became very interested
in wonder and started writing about wonder, and then I came across, I think, first, an
article of yours, and then your book, and I thought, sure, you said like everything
that I wanted to say, which keeps happening, keeps happening with everything that I'm interested
in, I think, ah, well, Ruben Steiner, you did it.
She's also, and of course, she just won the 2022 Iris Award for her book that I mentioned
earlier from 2014, Worlds Without End, the many lives of the multiverse, so.
And she's also involved currently in a project called Sacred Space, Religion, and Cosmic
Exploration, which is a series, or involves a series of webinars with Lance Garabi, and
this is through the Interplanetary Initiative here at Arizona State University.
So please join me in welcoming our keynote speaker, Dr. Mary Jane Rubenstein, and we'll
have some time for questions and comments afterwards, but we will have to also clear
out of this room quickly to prepare for our evening festivities.
So welcome, Dr. Rubenstein.
Thank you so much, Lisa, and thank you to Lisa and to Amanda Nichols and to Evan Berry for
getting together this just beautiful gathering of lovely people.
I have never been to the ISS RNC, this is my first time here, and I am just taken by
the collegiality and warmth and generosity of everybody here, so I'm so grateful for
the community here and for the welcome that you've given me.
Thank you all so much.
Quick zero item, Jacob Boss and I seem to be wearing the same dress, our slides are,
have the same background, because what else, but so anyway, great slides look alike.
I'm sorry, Jacob, that I, that, you know, I hope that that's okay with you.
Okay, I'm going to start with a tune up.
I'd like to open by considering the title of our joint endeavor this weekend, After
Earth.
Each of us could endlessly turn this little stone of a prepositional phrase and reveal
in it all manner of meanings, but to me there are three that most readily announce themselves.
The first is the sense of after Earth as straightforwardly temporal.
There has been Earth and there either will or won't be something after it.
So I'll be talking today about plans to move some portion of humanity and human productions
off this planet and onto another, plans that will allegedly allow the species to embark
on an eternal cosmic future.
These are instances of after Earth in its most proddingly sequential sense.
It's the kind of thinking we find in the post-apocalyptic Will and Jaden Smith film that shares a title
with our conference or in Interstellar with its somber, destinal tagline, mankind was
born on Earth, it was never meant to die here.
The second sense of after Earth as it resounds in my particular ears is ontological, taking
its lead from Bill McKibbin's suggestion that what we are living on and as is no longer
Earth, rather than a self-regulating, broadly homeostatic, Gyanic symbiont, the planet has
become a convulsing set of mutually destabilizing systems that McKibbin calls Earth as if the
planet itself were groaning and wailing at us.
And third, you knew I'd do this, you can't be a continental dweeb and not do this, third
is the sense of being in pursuit of Earth.
And it's this sense I'd ultimately like to consider as a possible horizon.
Here's some hildegard to help us.
What if we thought of Earth as what we're after, as what we want, what we desire, what
we're trying for?
Thackeray uses the preposition in this sense when he speaks of an abiding tenderness in
the newcomer's most worthy titular kernel with that fidelity which was an instinct of
his nature, writes Thackeray.
The brave young man thought ever of his absent child and longed after him.
What if Earth were what we long after, what we care about as in she asked after the health
of my mother?
What if it's not speed or comfort or even love that we're after, but Earth itself?
In the human condition, Hannah Arendt reminds us that the word human is etymologically inextricable
from humus.
To be human is to be earthly, earthish, earthen.
In this particular sense, then, it's actually incoherent to speak of humans living in space.
Once we figure out how to build communities elsewhere, we will be post-human, post-humus
or rendered more optimistically by my colleague Lance Garave, astro sapien.
If we ever actually move to the moon or Mars, we will, along this interpretation, be a different
species.
We will no longer be human.
And in fact, Elena Roche argued earlier this afternoon that we're already no longer human.
We're already something else.
Then again, to cite Eleanor Craig's riff on Sylvia Winter, we have in an important sense
never been human.
After all, the imperial culture that has defined humanity in its own image has been so ruthlessly
inhumane that the concept collapses under its own colonial freight.
Ben again again, as Winter herself insists, the dehumanized have always invented new ways
of being human that transform the terms of that term.
In particular, by refusing humanity's frenetic self-distinction from the animal-vegetable
mineral world, along with the frenetic Abrahamic distinction between this world and divinity.
In this sense, we might think of being after the human and being after Earth as entangled
projects, and here I'm indebted to Carol Wayne White, for whom becoming human would
also mean becoming more than human, which is to say both earthen and sacred, and as such
totally bound up with the more than human world that constitutes us, and that we in
turn both create and destroy.
All of these senses of after Earth can be found uncannily composted in the funeral
litany of the Anglican Book of Common Prayer, whose familiar ashes-to-ashes dust-to-dust
is preceded by the phrase Earth to Earth, a rare orthodox admission that the Earth is
our Alpha and Omega.
We come both from it and to it, which is to say we're both after it and after it.
This afternoon evening I'll be focusing on the first temporal, arguably least interesting
sense I have just sketched of after Earth, in the hopes of opening onto the last aspirational
sense of it.
I'll spend most of my time unveiling the new workings of what Amber Lowe theorized yesterday
as the master's clock, that is the unrelenting teleology of settler colonialism that's now
urging us to go grab new land and exploit after Earth.
It's a shocking instance, I'll use this term again of what Alfred North Whitehead called
the fallacy of misplaced concreteness, namely the notion that living after Earth means abandoning
it by boarding rocket ships and building new homes in underground Martian bunkers and
orbital space colonies.
Especially for the theatrically inclined, it's a fascinating story.
Honestly, if I were feeling more playful, I'd suggest we turn the whole thing into a comedy
of errors, call it the fallacy of misplaced concrete, and run it in a Gilbert and Sullivan
theater.
The problem is, I can't find this particular story funny for too long, because regardless
of whether Elon Musk ever makes it to Mars, or Jeff Bezos actually builds a paradise between
the moon and New York City, they and their astroprenerial cohort can do a monstrous amount
of ecological damage to and beyond the Earth in the meantime.
The key then, will be to expose the temporal fallacy of the messianic edge of new space,
and to turn the sequential otherworldly after Earth into a passionate thisworldly one.
And let me apologize for Sarah McFarland-Taylor and my spending this much energy on Elon
Musk today.
As you will see, our papers start from very similar places, diverge along totally different
sources.
Sarah's sources are just stunning, and thank you so much for them, and arrive at the same
conclusion.
So this only means to me that we must be right.
So thank you again, Sarah, for your beautiful meticulous and fun paper this morning.
Part one.
On October 23rd, 2020, one day after the final presidential debate, and seven months into
an epidemiological nightmare that had closed schools, crippled local businesses, killed
hundreds of thousands of Americans, and made most parents into psychopaths, the GOP tweeted
a final distillation of its campaign platform.
Prez Trump is fighting for you, it exclaimed.
Here are some of his priorities for a second term.
First, establish permanent manned presence on the moon.
Second, send the first manned mission to Mars.
After the moon and Mars came infrastructure and Wi-Fi.
And then, in a follow-up tweet, the GOP promised a COVID vaccine, medical supplies, and pharmaceuticals.
But they clearly wanted the moon and Mars out front.
Who wants to worry about respirators when you can dream about rockets?
You might recall that during his first hundred days in office, President Biden signed 60
executive orders, almost half of which were direct reversals of Trump-era policies.
This administration disagrees with that one on almost everything except outer space.
In fact, the only major Trump-era objectives the Biden administration has retained are first,
the creation of a space force to wage orbital warfare, and second, the plan to settle the
moon and Mars through a new mission they're calling Artemis, after the Greek goddess of
the moon, the twin sister of Apollo.
Why do we need to settle the moon and Mars?
In Biden's non-referential words, because America can do big things, we can see possibilities
no one has seen before.
We can go places no one has ever gone before.
The message was, frankly, clearer in the Trump administration, which insisted that it is America's
duty to spread its influence throughout the universe.
As Trump declared in his last State of the Union address, in reaffirming our heritage
as a free nation, we must remember that America has always been a frontier nation.
Now we must embrace the next frontier, America's manifest destiny in the stars.
Most of us are numb at this point to the extension of frontier language into space, but like
any dead metaphor, this one conceals far more than it reveals.
We're all indebted to Catherine Newell for having tracked the metaphor of space, the
final frontier.
To the 1952 special issue of Collier's magazine, entitled Man Will Conquer Space Soon, the
lead article written by former Nazi rocket scientist Verne von Braun was called Crossing
the Last Frontier.
In the short years following his amnesty through the CIA's then-secret Operation Paper Clip,
von Braun had become convinced it was America's destiny to extend human civilization into
outer space for the sake of freedom, democracy, and get this eternal salvation.
A little known detail that Catherine reveals about von Braun is that during his denazification
on American soil, he became a born-again Christian, who believed it was incumbent upon American
earthlings to spread the gospel to what he called man's oldest and last frontier, the
heavens themselves.
Space travel, as von Braun saw it and as Trump recently reaffirmed, is a vertical extension
of manifest destiny, just as God allegedly endorsed and even demanded the westward expansion
of mainly white-skinned European-descended Americans in the 19th century.
God is calling Americans in the 20th and 21st centuries to conquer a new frontier, an infinite
frontier in outer space.
Okay, so in February of 2020, Trump says we're going back to the moon and then to Mars because
space is the next frontier and America's manifest destiny is in the stars.
Of course, the language of divinely authorized conquest is nothing new in the American space
program.
The only thing that's unprecedented in this contemporary space race is the extent to
which private industry is involved in this godly conquest.
And for this development, we must thank not Donald Trump, but his ordinarily more palatable
predecessor, Barack Obama.
The key date here is February 1, 2010, when the Obama administration released the 2011
budget for NASA that ended the space shuttle program and reallocated funds to the so-called
new space industries.
It's time, Obama's advisors had written, to consider turning this transport service over
to the commercial sector.
You know, to make rocket ships as mass produced as cars and buses and speedboats and airplanes,
the problem, of course, was funding.
Who would invest in a company dedicated to flying supplies up to the International Space
Station?
What would be in it for the shareholders?
The situation for the cosmic prospector seemed grim until November of 2015, when Congress
passed a startlingly bipartisan bill called the Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness
Act, which promises, among other things, that any U.S. citizen who recovers a rock or mineral
or quantum of water in space is allowed to own, use, and sell it.
Huzzah, said the investors.
We're saved, said the space mining firms that seem to spring out of a thousand simultaneous
know-heres.
After all, if a corporation is a person, a citizen, even, in U.S. law, then its hypothetical
extractions and uses and sales will be protected under this law.
Elated, the CEO of Moon Express, a lunar mining outfit that collaborates closely with NASA,
went so far as to call the CSLCA the aeronautic equivalent of the Homestead Act.
Space.
Finally, another frontier for restless white folks.
This economically giddy corporate proliferation has brought us into the era known as new space.
To an already dense field of political, military, technological, and religious reasons to get
America back to space as soon as possible, new space adds the speed and intensity of
unregulated capitalist economics.
And the excitement over this new gold rush in space transcends party lines, unable to
agree on literally anything else.
Our elected officials on the left, center, right, and alt-right snuggle in together to
hand outer space over to these cosmic conquistadors, these astropreneurs whom I've come to think
of as particularly toxic techno-messiahs.
And so Sarah was sketching the three roles of the saint and the messiah and the ... help
me?
The what?
Yes.
Thank you.
And I'm going down the messianic route right here.
To be sure, the astropreneurs don't seem particularly religious.
They lack the rousing scriptural appeals of Mike Pence, who assured us that God was
calling America to conquer the heavens.
They can't even muster the civil religiousness of Trump's manifest destiny or Biden's vague
spirit of America.
What they offer instead are promises to make life fun again, to cleanse us of the guilt
of fossil fuels, and above all, to save humanity from eternal death.
How will they accomplish such lofty goals?
By converting the cosmos itself into capital and building a new Jerusalem on the infinite
frontier of outer space.
The world is coming to an end, the messiah cries, but trust in me and I'll bring you
to a new world where you'll finally be free.
Free from death, free from earth, free from guilt and gravity, at least most of it, and
free above all from earthly regulation.
In the meantime, China's got a rover on Mars, a satellite on the far side of the moon, and
a brand new space station in low earth orbit.
Richard Branson is selling 200,000 dollar tourist tickets on his notoriously unreliable
space plane.
Space mining firms have collected billions of dollars before they've even got their
probes on an asteroid.
A failed Israeli mission has dumped dehydrated tardigrades on the lunar surface.
Rwanda has bought the rights to launch 300,000 satellites of its own.
The U.S. has created a new branch of the military to pulverize its enemies from the heavens,
and some astronautic startup says it's going to build a ferris wheel-shaped space hotel
in orbit and name it after, wait for it, Werner von Braun.
How did we get here?
What is going on?
And is there anything, you will stay at the von Braun space hotel, like that is the last
plate?
Is there anything anyone can do about it?
I first realized something was up when Elon Musk launched a car into orbit.
It was January of 2018, and SpaceX was looking to test its Falcon heavy rocket, woo the U.S.
military, and make sure everybody was watching.
So rather than display the rocket's carrying capacity with, say, slabs of concrete or steel,
Musk decided to strap a blazing red Tesla Roadster to its back.
You will recognize this slide from Sarah's presentation.
A perfectly good, even exquisite car.
$100,000 worth of chrome, leather, steel, glass, state-of-the-art navigation software,
green technology, and human labor hurled uselessly into orbit, not around the Earth, but around
the sun.
It was an act of immense bravado, extraordinary waste, and literally cosmic presumptuousness
Now along with eight planets and some dwarves, moons, and asteroids, there is a tricked-out
convertible circling our solar orb, driven to the end of days by a mannequin in a spacesuit
called Starman.
Musk named his Sisyphean Astro Bot after the alien messiah of David Bowie's 1972 Ziggy
Stardust album.
Bowie's song, Life on Mars, accompanied the rocket launch that flung the Roadster toward
the stars, and his space oddity still loops endlessly on the car's solar-powered JVC speakers.
Starman's glove compartment is stuffed with multimedia versions of Douglas Adams' Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy and Isaac Asimov's Foundation trilogy, and the Falcon-heavy rocket itself
is named after the millennium Falcon of Star Wars.
Musk, you might say, is a geek's geek.
His aesthetic, composed by a nostalgia for the future of his teenage past, complete with
rockets, spacesuits, Martian colonies, glam rock, and a free-market promise of infinite
possibility.
Musk is also an inveterate showman.
Back in 2003, he was having a hard time getting NASA to take SpaceX and its newly fabricated
Falcon 1 seriously.
He drove the seven-story rocket on an enormous flatbed truck from Boca Chica, Texas, to Washington,
D.C., and parked it on the street outside the headquarters of the Federal Aviation Administration.
In the two decades since then, Musk has continued to manufacture all manner of mind-blowing
spectacles, Twitter-storm launches, dramatic explosions, tickets sold to billionaires for
trips on unbuilt ships, and a manifesto about his intention to save humanity by getting the
hell off this doomed planet Earth.
Meanwhile, on the other side of Texas, Jeff Bezos has been making a lot less noise.
In the early 2000s, while Musk was dragging NASA, the Air Force, Boeing, and Lockheed Martin
into high-profile antitrust suits, Bezos was quietly buying up ranches.
Under the auspices of improvised corporations, Bezos cobbled together over 300,000 acres of
West Texan land so he could test his rockets without anybody noticing.
Musk had bought the land, too, but he makes so much noise that the Rangers at Mother Neff
State Park now warn their visitors that if something sounds like the end of the world,
it's probably not. At least not yet.
The men are both magicians, but of really different sorts.
Musk pulls rabbits out of hats while Bezos makes the coin disappear behind your ear.
While Musk is shouting, look mom! Wait, that's not it! Bezos hides in his room to perfect the trick.
Both billionaires are building reusable, affordable, state-of-the-art rockets,
but Musk raced to the launches while Bezos worked on the landings.
Elon's had us looking up at the exploding skies while Jeff has kept us staring at our own damn
laps, one clicking the lint rollers and cake pans and dog sweaters that finance his more cosmic
endeavors. As Bezos finally explained a couple of years ago, quote,
every time you buy shoes on Amazon, you're helping Blue Origin. I appreciate it very much,
and suddenly I hate my shoes. Bezos himself articulated the methodological distinction
between Blue Origin and SpaceX in a 2004 letter to his then-tiny aerospace staff.
Be the tortoise, he told them, and not the hare. His motto for the company is
gradatim ferociter, or step-by-step ferociously, a grittier Latinate rendition of slow and steady
wins the race. The phrase is inscribed on banners beneath the company's coat of arms.
It's got a coat of arms, which features two turtles standing on top of a globe reaching
from North America to a gilded solar system. Crowning the image is a cruciform sun.
Anchoring it is a winged hourglass with all the sands run out, and the whole thing looks kind
of like a 15th century cosmographed walked into a Harry Potter fanzine.
More nerd than geek, Bezos reads everything in print, considers even the most outlandish
alternatives before making up his mind, and demands that ideas be pitched to him in full
paragraph form. As we all know, he's a book's guy. In addition to ESOP, his references include
JR, Tolkien, Isaac, Asimov, Jules Verne, E&M Banks, Neil Stevenson, and William Gibson.
Now and then he even mentions a wrinkle in time, the only work by a woman to make the
astropreneurial canon. But when it comes to space, Bezos' biggest influence is Star Trek.
While Musk is off actualizing George Lucas with his exploding falcons and epic soundtracks,
Bezos is cultivating the more genteel gestalt of the star ship Enterprise. As the Atlantic's
Franklin Feuer reports, Bezos initially wanted to call Amazon MakeItSo.com as an homage to Captain
Jean-Luc Picard, whom he now uncannily resembles. Bezos named his dog Kamala in honor of the
empathic metamorph you may remember from Krio's Prime. And as you may have heard about a year
ago, he boldly took William Shatner, where no 90-year-old actor had gone before. Shatner came
back terrified. Let's talk about that later. The question you might be asking is why? What are
these billionaires up to in space? It is old news to you by now. Elon Musk wants us to go to Mars.
In fact, he explained in a 2016 manifesto, it's been his goal all along making humans a
multi-planetary species by setting up a self-sustaining city on the red planet.
To anyone who will listen, Musk explains that Earth is a ticking time bomb. Sooner or later,
something will destroy humanity, whether it be an asteroid, nuclear war, or AI robots gone rogue.
Sooner or later, we're going to have to find somewhere else to live. And given the literally
infernal conditions of Venus, it's like 900 degrees Fahrenheit there, Mars is our best chance.
Catherine explained this morning, the roots of this logic, this coming disaster logic,
are also in Werner von Braun. Of course, five billion years from now,
the sun will explode into a red giant and engulf Earth and Mars in a fiery apocalypse.
So if we want humanity to endure forever, we're eventually going to have to make it to another
solar system. But we'll never be able to live anywhere else unless we start close to home
and soon before a giant asteroid or Alexa 5.0 wipes out the whole species.
At times, Musk seems to realize how much he sounds like that guy on the street with a cardboard
sign for tending the end of the world. Both disavowing and adopting the role of lunatic
prophet, Musk writes, I do not have an immediate doomsday prophecy, but eventually there will be
some doomsday event. With apocalypse on the horizon, our first option is to just let disaster
extinguish us as it did the dinosaurs. An option Musk finds so intolerable,
he never even entertains it. The alternative, he says, is to become a space-bearing civilization
and a multi-planetary species, which I hope you would agree is the right way to go. So Mars it is.
The challenge will be making the enterprise affordable-ish. At the moment, Musk shows by
means of a perfectly bizarre Venn diagram, the price to Mars is infinite, leaving the set of
people who want to go to Mars completely distinct from the set of people who can afford to go to Mars.
Using conventional technology, Musk estimates that the price for a round-trip ticket to the
red planet could drop from infinity to $10 billion a person. But once his rockets attain full
reusability and efficiency, Musk predicts he'll be able to lower the cost to $200,000,
the median cost of a house in the United States. At that price, in his words, almost anyone could go
to Mars. All they need to do is save up a bit, sell their house, and pack a very small bag.
Anyone who doesn't have a house to sell can always get sponsored by an employer and pay it off with a
few years of labor as an indentured servant, I swear to the gods he has said this. When it comes
to advertising his new colony, Musk alternates between appealing to aspirational homesteaders
and revving up post-adolescent pub crawlers. On the one hand, he admits Mars is going to be seriously
hard work. Under current conditions, it's impossible to breathe or even just be on the planet without
a spacesuit. Since Mars has so little atmosphere, it would turn all the water in the human body to
steam and kill it instantaneously. Even with a spacesuit, there's so much radiation on Mars
that it will likely cause the colonists severe health problems. So as Musk concedes from time to
time, Mars will be like the Orhan Trail on a really bad day. There's a good chance you'll die, he says.
It's going to be tough going.
On the other hand, and this is the part Musk tends to dwell on,
the Martian Trail is going to be pretty cool. The trip itself will be like an astronaut club med.
A hundred people aboard one 400 foot BFR or big effing rocket for a seven month trip that Musk
insists will never feel cramped or boring. There will be zero gravity games Musk is really into
bouncing around. Plus movies, lecture halls, cabins, and our restaurant. It will be really fun to go,
Musk enthusiasts. You're going to have a great time. Nowhere in these descriptions does Musk explain
who will be staffing the restaurants, cleaning the cabins, or wiping the space vomit off the
gleaming walls of the BFR. Nor does he say who will be giving the lectures. Will it be you?
Will it be me? Extolling the virtues of Sylvia Winter and Robin Wall Kimmerer on a six month
rocket to Mars? As for the planet itself, Musk promises that it would be quite fun to be on Mars
because you would have gravity that's about 37% of that of Earth. So you would be able to lift
many things and bound around. Sure, the air is primarily carbon dioxide, but the same stuff that's
so toxic to humans will make it easy to grow plants, quote, just by compressing the atmosphere,
unquote. Faced with the problem of what he calls the radiation thing, Musk says inexplicably that
it's not too big of a deal. And although he understands that Mars is a little cold, the
average temperature is negative 80 degrees Fahrenheit, which is to say over 100 degrees
below freezing. He assures his future colonists that we can warm it up. How exactly do you warm
up a frozen planet? You stick it in the microwave, hit the airspace above the ice caps with some
hydrogen bombs, and you'll jumpstart the global warming process, liberate tons of water and move
the Martian colony that much closer to autonomy. To be sure, most scientists think this is an
absolutely ridiculous plan. The director of the Russian space agency Roscosmos has estimated
it would take more than 10,000 missiles to carry out the nuke Mars. 10,000 Musk's response on Twitter,
no problem. If you're furrowing your brow at this fantasy of planetary hacking,
you're not alone. As astrobiologist Lucienne Walkowitz reminds us, we don't have a great
track record of controlling geological processes on the planet we've already got. How can we hope to
make a habitat out of Mars when we can't even preserve the habitability of Earth? It would seem
that recalibrating the biosystems of an already oxygenated, temperate, blue-green orb would be
a far easier task than bringing a planetary dust storm to life. When asked why he is choosing to
save humanity by sending us to Mars rather than by addressing injustice, poverty, and climate
change on Earth, Musk will often laugh and say, please forgive the direct quotation, fuck Earth.
Earth is done. Earth is history. Earth is so last eon. Considering the coral reefs, wet lands,
and clean skies that SpaceX has polluted and destroyed, and considering Musk's own advancement
of artificial intelligence, one could even accuse him of worsening the disaster to intensify the
need for salvation, of making the planet genuinely uninhabitable so that we will indeed need to leave
it for an after-Earth Martian utopia. Unlike the more classic utopians, Plato, Moore, Marx, and Engels,
Musk doesn't give us a clear idea of what his ideal society looks like. What he offers instead are
abstract promises of freedom from Earth, from international regulation, from gravity, and even
from death, at least at the level of the species. He hasn't hammered out the details because the
details would destroy the perfection, but it's going to be awesome on Mars. Part four. Jeff Bezos
isn't so sure. To my friends who want to move to Mars one day, Bezos reports, I say, why don't you go
live in Antarctica first for three years and then see what you think? Because Antarctica is a garden
paradise compared to Mars. We have sent probes to every planet in the solar system, says Bezos,
and believe me, Earth is the best one. There are waterfalls and beaches and palm trees and
fantastic cities and restaurants, and you're not going to get that anywhere but Earth for a really,
really long time. So if Musk is happy to leave Earth in the dust, Bezos is set on saving it.
If Musk named his SpaceX after the place he'd like to go, Bezos named Blue Origin after the
place he'll always be from, this gem of a planet called Earth. How then will Bezos restore and
preserve the blueness of our origin, the beauty of our Earth, by getting us off the planet? The
problem for Bezos is energy. We're using too much of it. Given an expanding and modernizing human
population, global industrial humanity will reach some absolute limits within the next century.
There's simply not enough fuel, whether from the ground, the wind, or even the sun as it's
accessible on Earth, to power a whole planet's worth of first-rate hospitals, bleeding-edge
electronics, megachurches, superstores, slaughterhouses, and industrial farms. We need more energy,
so we've got to go to space. So the old Marxist adage is true. It's easier to imagine the end
of the world than the end of capitalism, rather than proposing an alternative to the extraction
of resources, the relentless pursuit of profit, and the wasteful cruelty of factory farming.
Rather than use the funds he calls his Amazon winnings to win back the actual Amazon,
Bezos is spending all that money and time exporting the whole ecosystem into space.
Here's the way it'll work. Rather than checking out all the way to Mars, which is too far,
Bezos proposes we construct a series of bases on the Moon. We install solar panels on every base,
gaining access to far more solar energy than we could ever harness on Earth. We mine the Moon
for water, whose elements can be split and recombined into rocket fuel. Using far less energy than we
need at Cape Canaveral, we power many missions to mine asteroids for heavy and rare Earth metals,
at which point we begin to construct miles-long, free-floating habitations between the Earth
and the Moon. Yes, you've heard that right, giant space pods. The idea comes from Gerard O'Neill,
the Princeton physicist who began proposing in the mid-19th century that all heavy industry
and much of the human population be moved into space. Mines and factories would occupy asteroids
and the Moon, while residents, recreation and commerce would take place in giant cylindrical
tubes rotating to simulate gravity and positioned at Lagrange points to maintain a steady orbit.
Having attended O'Neill's lectures in college, Bezos remains a devotee.
This is Maui on its best day all year long, he says. No rain, no storms, no earthquakes.
In our climate-controlled Edens, we'd have everything we love on Earth, like air,
tree, birds and beaches, but nothing we hate. O'Neill, infamously promised,
we'd finally be free of mosquitoes. And in the meantime, Mother Earth would get a long overdue nap.
With all heavy industry and a good deal of humanity relocated off-planet,
the Earth could be zoned for light industry, some residents and recreation. In short, Earth
would become a planetary park, a great vacation spot, a lovely place to go to college.
Meanwhile, out in space, humans would get to play as many video games, have as many kids,
and eat as much red meat as they want, powered by limitless energy. According to Bezos' calculations,
an O'Neill-hacked solar system could in principle support one trillion human beings.
That's a thousand Mozart's, he marvels. A thousand Einstein's. What a cool civilization that would be.
It seems a cheap but necessary shot to point out that by this dopey logic,
we would also gain a thousand Hitler's and a thousand Stalin's. But Bezos is leaving it
to the next generation to work out the details. How are we going to build O'Neill colonies,
out of what materials, under what sort of political systems? Bezos has no idea. He's here to build
the infrastructure so that the big thinkers of the future can hammer out the details.
In short, Bezos will establish the extraterrestrial roads and bridges so that the future dreamers
can figure out what to do with them. Bezos will pave the way for future Bezos' and Zuckerberg's,
and even future Musk's, once they've had enough of those radioactive dust storms on Mars.
So these are our two post-terrestrial utopias. Fuck Earth and Occupy Mars versus Save Earth
by drilling the universe. Of course, both of these visions are a long way off.
So far, no one's been to Mars. No one's mined an asteroid or built a rotating space cylinder,
and it's been half a century since anybody walked on the moon. But in the meantime,
the new space nicks are already making a total mess. Musk has filled his allotted altitude in
low Earth orbit with so many Starlink satellites that he's edging into the territory allocated
to Amazon. Astronomers and space ecologists keep warning that between dead satellites,
live satellites, paint chips, lost tools, shrapnel, old cameras, and the International
Space Station, there's just too much stuff up there. At speeds of 18,000 miles per hour,
the collision of anything with anything else is disastrous, and despite our steady ability to
produce this deadly litter, we have absolutely no way to clean it up. The most promising idea so far,
which failed spectacularly the one time it was tested, is that we might be able to snag some
passing garbage with a harpoon. A harpoon. It's like wailing, technology. The scene in space is
total chaos, and yet Bezos, Musk, and a growing cadre of smaller-time astropreneurs continue
unfazed, promising thousands more satellites, suborbital tourism, orbital tourism, private
space stations, space hotels, and gazillion-dollar asteroids, all as multifarious means to our
beautiful future in space. The road to Utopia is paved this time with careening space junk and
towering egos, swearing till they're blue in the face that they're doing it for all humanity.
Part five. There are six parts, by the way. You're like, how many damn parts are in there?
Part five. It's a logic as familiar as Neil Armstrong's moonwalk. One small step for a man
is supposed to have amounted to one giant leap for mankind. But the Apollo missions ended up
doing very little for poor black indigenous and immigrant people in Armstrong's own country,
not to mention the entirety of mankind. Similarly, the escalating pursuit of profit in space
will leave non-investors even farther behind than they already are. As the New Republic's
Clive Thompson predicts, the big winners in space will likely be the big winners on Earth.
After all, a corporation's chief obligations are to its wealthy shareholders,
not to its workers or even its clients, let alone the whole species. And yet the corporations keep
feeding us these mystifying promises to benefit humanity, assuring us in the words of science
writer Martin Robbins that when we go into space, we will all magically become nice.
Under these conditions, though, it's just so unlikely. Do we really expect that the
billionaires who can't find any cause worth supporting on Earth will finally redistribute
their wealth once they get deeper into the final frontier? Do we really expect that the notoriously
inhumane industries of mining, manufacturing, and global retail will suddenly establish
decent working conditions on literally uninhabitable planets and asteroids,
where a person's employer controls her access not only to healthcare and food now, but to air?
And what about all the ecological damage these companies are doing in the meantime on Earth?
What happens to our environment when a single rocket scorches the land it leaves behind,
drops its boosters in low Earth orbit or dumps them in the sea, and deposits millions of pounds
of rocket fuel into the atmosphere? What happens to the residents of Boca Chica, Texas,
whom SpaceX has displaced from their suddenly toxic homes, including the humans,
who now can't afford to live anywhere else because nobody wants to buy their houses,
and the wildlife that has increasingly nowhere to go? In what sense is this space adventure
benefiting all humanity? If these galactic messiahs kill off most of us in the process,
along with the only biosphere that allows us actually to be, then what exactly are they saving?
The operative fallacy here, to which Jacob introduced us yesterday, is known as long-termism.
Popular among Silicon Valley types, the long-termer conviction
is that the galactic immortality of the species is more important than the current well-being
of any given community. Hunger, poverty, racism, warfare,
hurricanes, floods, pandemics, genocides, and extinctions might seem like enormous concerns,
but ultimately they're just the ups and downs of the evolution of the species.
As techno-philosopher Nick Bostrom assures us, from the perspective of humanity as a whole,
even the worst of these catastrophes are mere ripples on the great sea of life.
So the key is to rise above the everyday struggles of particular humans and focus instead on the
long-term existence of the species. I'll give away the punchline and say that in addition to
being a dreadful reading of Hegel, long-termism is a high-tech version of what Malcolm X called
pie and the sky and heaven and the hereafter. Sick of the suffering black Americans continued
to undergo for the sake of an unjust law and order, Malcolm blamed America's racist social
system on the Christian teaching that earthly suffering would be rewarded in the afterlife.
To his mind, the doctrine of heaven maintained an even glorified oppression,
convincing black Americans that it was useless or even ungodly to overthrow their oppressors.
From the perspective of eternal bliss, poverty, racism, and even enslavement would seem like
nothing at all mere ripples on the great sea of life. Similarly, the space-hungry billionaires
tell the poor, the refugees, the sick imprisoned, endangered, and extinct to hold out for heaven
on the asteroid belt. There is a murderous numerology at work here, which sets the 8 billion
people currently on the planet, 700 million of whom live in extreme poverty, against, say, the 10
to the 23rd people who might exist if we manage to someday to colonize the Virgo supercluster.
You see, 10 to the 23 is numerically more, a whole lot more than 8 billion or 700 million.
Therefore, the long-termers insist that our energies be directed toward the hypothetical humans
rather than the actual ones. In fact, they caution, actual humans might not actually be
actual at all. They could be computer simulations. I'm not making it up. The idea, as you know,
has been around in one form or another since Descartes' meditations, but it came raging back
in 1999 with a matrix and in the Gamergeek philosophy of Bostrom, who argues that if it
is possible, even in principle, to create a conscious simulation, then we are almost certainly
living in such a simulation. In the meantime, the futurist economist Robin Hansen reasons
that if we are living in a simulation, we should behave as brashly and boldly as possible so that
our simulators remain sufficiently entertained to keep us plugged in. Assuming that we are living
in a simulation should have the overall effect, says Hansen, of making us more present-oriented
and more selfish than we might otherwise be. Your motivation to save for retirement, he reasons,
or to help the poor in Ethiopia might be muted by realizing that in your simulation,
you will never retire and there is no Ethiopia. I won't drive you mad with the details of these
scenarios, which are mind-boggling at best and diabolical at worst. I bring them up only as a
means of filling out the intellectual biography of our most energetic space utopian, whose deep
dive into long-termism has produced in him a conviction that we are most likely living in
a computer simulation. Our consciousness is probably the creation of super-intelligent beings
running a super-advanced version of Minecraft and the rest of the universe is just a virtual
backdrop to our trivial pursuits. Or it's always possible that we're not so much simulated as
manufactured. If it's not a simulation, Musk speculates, then maybe we're in a lab and there's
some advanced alien civilization that's just watching how we develop out of curiosity like
mold in a Petri dish. But whether we're mold spores or Mario and Luigi, the quest is clear,
to stay alive by going forth, increasing and multiplying. And here's saying, if the world
around us is just a quantum computation or an alien Petri dish, then who cares about coral
reefs and wetlands? If they're really important, the simulators will make more. And if they don't
make more, then the herons and the frogs and sea turtles will have been a necessary trade-off to get
humanity up to the next virtual level on Mars. It's at this point that the desperate among us
might seek out those poets and prophets who can see through the absurdities of our current situation.
Those poets and prophets who, rather than giving us the same world on another planet,
can actually imagine other ways of being. Part six and part the last.
In the ones who walk away from Omelas, science fiction author Ursula Le Guin describes a
gleaming utopian city. The streets are bright and colorful, the parks are healthy and plentiful,
the people marry the music gay, the animals well cared for, the sun and rain in perfect balance,
and the technology sufficient to everyone's comfort within the bounds of mutual care. For
example, there are very fast little trains, she says, and double-decked trams, but no cars or
helicopters. The only hitch is that the joy of this city is sustained by the unrelenting suffering
of a single child, naked, sporadically fed and locked in a basement with old mops and dirt floors.
They all know it is there, the narrator explains, all the people of Omelas. Some of them have come
to see it, others are content merely to know it's there. They all know that it has to be there,
that their friendships, the beauty of their city, the tenderness of their friendships,
the health of their children, the wisdom of their scholars, the skill of their makers,
even the abundance of their harvest and the kindly weathers of their skies depend wholly
on this child's abominable misery. In a brief preface to the story,
Le Guin traces its central conceit back to the American psychologist William James,
who offered it as a thought experiment. What if millions of people could be kept permanently
happy on the one simple condition that a certain lost soul on the far off edge of things should
lead a life of lonely torment? James finds this prospect unbearable. None of us, he insists,
would accept such a bargain. In fact, the very knowledge of the torment of that one soul would
ruin the happiness of all of our millions, wouldn't it? Dear old William James says, or so Le Guin,
so mild, so naively gentlemanly, look how he says us, she marvels, assuming all his readers are as
decent as himself. But of course we're not. What Le Guin's narration allows us to realize
is not only that some people are happy to balance their happiness on the suffering of others,
like the omelons and their sacrificial child, but that most of us in the overdeveloped world are
as well. Most of the wealthy residents of these overdeveloped nations are delighted to find bargain
clothes made by children in basement sweatshops. Most of us are happy to travel to resort towns,
whose residents are denied access to their own beaches. Most of us love fresh fruit even though
it's been grown and picked under unbearable conditions, flown on jets that pollute the airways,
driven on trucks that kill whatever tries to cross the road, and carefully stacked by people who
can't afford to buy it. This is the way capitalism works. The happiness of some is sustained by the
suffering of everyone else. The only difference between us and the omelons is that we don't really
want to know any of this, and of course that the suffering children on whom we rely are horrifically
more numerous than one. Le Guin's story ends with a tribute to the ones who walk away. Those few
omelons who realize that their happiness is not worth the suffering of even one child and who walk
alone into the darkness. The place they go towards is a place even less imaginable to most of us than
the city of happiness, the narrator confesses. I cannot describe it at all. It's possible that
it does not exist, but they seem to know where they're going, the ones who walk away from omelons.
And Le Guin's implied question is whether you, the reader, are able to see it too.
Can you imagine a society that doesn't depend on the misery of others, a kingdom of God that's at
hand rather than hovering in some cosmic hellscape? Can you see it clearly enough to believe it,
and can you believe it enough to start walking there? Can you walk away from this hatred of the
earth and its creatures? Can I? But where would we go? You might ask. Given the global and now
outer spatial reach of corporate capital, there is no away left, at least not one to which any of
us has physical access. Where could we possibly go to live otherwise? And even if we could find
such an elsewhere, what about that poor, naked, suffering child? How would our walking away
from omelons do anything to change omelons? Couldn't we be accused, like the rich guys,
of blasting away from our world rather than caring enough to fix it? These are perhaps some of the
questions Afrofuturist sci-fi author N.K. Jemisin had in mind when she wrote her narrative response
to Le Guin, entitled The Ones Who Stay and Fight. In the resplendent city of Amhelat, the people
are well fed, healthy, and even enjoy us. They hail from diverse backgrounds, speak multiple
languages, and enact laws that ensure the safety and comfort of all citizens. And so this is Amhelat,
the narrator explains, a city whose inhabitants simply care for one another. Throughout the story,
the narrator pauses to address our likely skepticism. How could a society possibly be this
functional, this communally minded, this joyous? Surely there's a hitch. Of course there's a hitch.
And much like Le Guin's omelas, the hitch of Jemisin's Amhelat involves a child, a single child,
whose father has discovered transmissions from the benighted hellscape of the reader's own world,
our earth, and who has begun to learn from earthly media and to spread the idea so commonplace here
that some people are less important than others. This poison threatens the society of Amhelat
so fundamentally that a panel of reluctant social workers finds the child's father, kills him,
and then turns to face his enraged, grieving, ideologically ruined daughter. And just as the
reader braces for more violence, one of the social workers, quote, crouches and takes the child's
hand. What, the narrator exclaims, what surprises you? Did you think this would end with the cold
eyed slaughter of a child? There are other options. And this is Amhelat, friend, where even a pitiful
disease child matters. There are other options, not somewhere out there, but in the middle of the
mess we're in. Finding them and living them out would be the work of the ones who stay and fight.
In other words, the ones who stay are actually the makers of other worlds.
Meanwhile, the escape artists refuse to see that the world might be otherwise. It's the ones who
stay who end up making other worlds, while the ones who blast away preserve the very world they're
escaping by refusing to see other options. I point out this ironic alignment, not in order to raise
objections to Le Guin, to whom I am desperately indebted, but to point out the deeply conservative
nature of the Astro Topians. The rocket men want to leave the earth because they want to keep the
world the way it is. So they seek more land and resources to plunder in space. Meanwhile, the
hungry, colonized, black, indigenous working class, earth loving and peace seeking among us, are filled
with what Afrofuturist jazz genius Sun Ra called the burning need for something else. Not the same
system in some cosmic future, but a radically different system right now and right here.
As the Americanist Jane of Brown writes in Black Utopias, we must jump into the break,
the cut, into an entirely different paradigm. Le Guin herself issued a similar imperative
when she received the 2014 National Book Foundation Medal for distinguished contribution to American
letters. Hard times are coming, Le Guin said, two years before the election of Donald Trump.
When we'll be wanting the voices of writers who can see alternatives to how we live now.
According to Le Guin, it is authors of speculative fiction, science fiction and fantasy
who can see through our fear-stricken society and its obsessive technologies to other ways of being
and even imagine real grounds for hope. Other ways of being as in Jemisin's Amhalat,
whose residents can all have homes if they want them. A city where every soul matters. A city whose
inhabitants simply care for one another. It's that sort of world she imagines and it's that sort of
earth that I'm after. Thanks.
Thank you.
We have until 5.45 for some Q and A. So hold your hand up if you would like to ask a question or
make a comment and Amanda will bring you a mic.
I once had a, of all your thinking, I uh usually at the beginning of class you know to warm things
up I'll ask is the students have any announcements are there any things you want us to come support
are you you know are you gonna go hit bats and balls are you gonna sing are you gonna whatever
what can we come give announcements and they they had they had no announcements and they
looked totally miserable so I knew I couldn't just start class you know that look when you
look out at your students you're like damn what am I gonna do with these kids like they're just
they're miserable today and so it's like does anybody want to dance and one of my students
god bless Wesleyan University was like I'll dance really he's like yeah what you got and I was like
he asked me to put on A Day in the Life by the Beatles this this baby who was born in like 2014
I put on a day in the life and that kid stands up and just dances for five straight minutes
and then the song ends and he sits down and the class is like yeah like what nobody got up to dance
with the poor guy but like they were all really into it they were really into somebody else dancing
okay hi that's another question you're gonna you're gonna dance Alexis
so I'm curious to the extent to which you think that it's uh these these like Elon Musk and people
who have these kind of plans to go to Mars and things the extent to which they're trying to
save themselves or what or they actually believe this or whether they're trying to get us to believe
it right because the idea is that if if it's if it's something they're actually trying to do it
seems like it's philanthropy right because it's something they're not going to be able to see
because it's so often the future even if they do do work and so the question becomes is it just
something like that we will stop being concerned about about the way in which our planet is being
destroyed and we're all being harmed because we're because now we we trust Elon Musk will help us
something like that in the end and he doesn't really believe that he can do this but that he's
trying to get so do you think that's what's going on or do you think that I mean it's hard to say
with motivation or that there's that they actually legitimately or convince themselves that this is
possible or what do you think's going with their motivation okay so for what it's worth I think
they're both earnest I think that I think they both believe what they say it may not be true it
may be that they're you know like truly diabolical geniuses be like I'm gonna say this but I'm really
just gonna make a lot of money like I think that they both think that this is the way to ensure the
long-term survival of the human species all this having been said I think that their visions are
different their motivations are different and this question of selfishness versus selflessness is a
little bit different um Jeff Bezos talks about um wanting he says you know look we could stop using
so much energy but that would be really boring and I want my great great grandchildren to be using
more energy than I do and the only way my great grandchildren can use more energy than me is if
we go into outer space so he's concerned for his lineage he's not necessarily concerned for himself
I don't he doesn't think he's going to survive this but he's concerned for his lineage and for the
kinds of people he he wants there to be more guys like him him and Mark Zuckerberg he there those
are those are the big you know and his and his grandchildren right and the way to do this is
to ensure that they can have as much energy as they want to in outer space but he's he's not
going to get there so in that sense yeah he's like um I don't know he's like Vanderbilt and the rail
roads or something like that like he's building the infrastructure and he's like go be a great nation
without me um Musk is a little more complicated um he's he think he says he wants to die on Mars
I don't know if he really thinks he'll actually get to Mars but whether or not he can he's so
taken by this Bostrom simulation argument that we need to get to Mars in order again to assure the
long-term survival of the species in order to keep us going long enough to figure out a way
ourselves to simulate consciousness right whether we're already simulated or we're not already
simulated we need to figure out a way to do it ourselves because once we can do it
then we can bring back Elon Musk after he's dead um so he's obsessed with bringing back the great
men of the past and he wants to be one of those who can be just like downloaded into any piece of
body um in the in the Virgo supercluster or something like that so there does seem to be a
little more but but either way I don't think we gain a lot by saying that they're not um they're
not being honest with us or something I think I think that they are and then the question is
whether and just like you know we those of us who again teach religion we teach about charismatic
profits all the time and I think most of them are fully convinced in the truth of what they're
saying that doesn't mean it's a good religious movement right that doesn't mean you want to
move to that particular commune but yeah thank you that was absolutely fabulous thanks so I
want to ask you a question about Peter Isherwell he's the fictional uh billionaire guru in the
movie don't look up are you familiar I started watching it so uh I will ask the question in
such a way that you do not need to have seen the film thank you right the this figure in the film
stands in as a sort of doppelganger for Musk or uh Bezos or to a lesser degree Steve Jobs right
sort of obsessed with their own impact on the grand arc of human history so in that movie it
the the character shows up as sort of an obvious critique so maybe I'm a bit of a naive is this
the one who's like is it bad to make a lot of money should we not be really rich is that guy
that's one of the acolytes who's persuaded by this character's uh race to mine asteroids right so
the question is sort of like why don't we see through these persons right why don't we recognize
Musk as a Barnum and Bailey circus actor and that's a perhaps a naive question for a scholar of
religion to ask right why don't we see false prophets for what they are but really the question
is what kinds of counter narratives do you see I think Citing Le Guin and Jemisin here at the end
is a great way to do that but I'd love to hear you sort of think out loud about sort of like what
kinds of opposing narratives help uh call into question the the kinds of power and influence
these individuals have yeah great thank you um okay so why don't we see these false prophets for
who they will clearly some people do like the folks who made don't look up because it's clear
what the tone of movie is even though I haven't seen the whole thing right um and clearly some
people don't write the folks Sarah was introducing us to who are like the hardcore muskvites or
musketeers or muskowitz's or whatever right they they um they are they they want this vision
they're excited by this vision I think in park space is really cool um I open this this book um
this astrotopia book by thinking about my own fascination with space right I'm I'm in the middle
of you know we're thinking about this critique of all of these these figures trying to colonize the
cosmos um and and I look around my my five year old's bedroom and I realize that like all of his
stuff has like little stars and cosmos on them and little galaxies and I'm like oh wow I'm obsessed
with space like what do I want from space right um space is really cool the idea of you know living
in a new society elsewhere is um is is is attractive has been attractive since the doctrine of
terranilias that Whitney bowman exposes so beautifully as the product of a particularly
bad reading of genesis right um so you know I understand why they're so excited they're excited
because musk says at some point like there has to be good news at some point like we got we gotta
give kids something to believe in people like some there has to be a future for them and so this is a
promise of a future like you you want a future if you're a person and so that's you know that's
possible and and it's and it's cool um my own students for what it's worth when we study this
material together hate first of all they hate Jeff Bezos even more than they hate Elon musk
which is really interesting to me I have a little soft spot for Bezos because he's such a nerd
you know like he's always citing things got footnotes things like that but um they absolutely
load Jeff Bezos um they increasingly dislike Elon musk since the twitter business um that not
withstanding they um they dislike them but they think they they can't see around the logic they're
like yeah I I don't know what else we're gonna do I guess I'm gonna go live in an orbital space colony
there's a there's another jemisin short story in this uh how long until black future month
the same volume called cloud dragon skies and in this it's it's every um there's a there's a major
apocalyptic event and everybody on earth is given the option either to move to the asteroid belt on
some kind of rotating space colony and have as much stuff as they want they can have energy they can
have you know I don't know like veggie burgers whatever like you you don't you have all that's
all the stuff that we have on the asteroid belt or she says uh you could have earth and nothing
I mean just no technology no power no and at that point she says the people who stayed
all of the rabbis and the llamas and the teachers came forward to remind people how actually to
live on the earth and how to sustain themselves and you know the folks who wanted to be more
comfortable move to the asteroid belt so ask my students all right where do you go right do you
what do you want do you want the asteroid belt not like a rotating shopping mall but with like
everything you have um or do you want the earth and nothing and with the exception of one student
they were all like shit I gotta move to the asteroid belt and they didn't feel good about it
right they weren't like yes Elon they're not that kind of my students at least they're not that kind
they're not and they hate Jeff but they're just like I I can't so and it was at that point that I
was like it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism how is it easier
to imagine living without air than without your phone like how is that but I see it I see it I'm
not making fun of this logic I understand what they mean they're like you could never convince
people to give up their stuff so you're gonna have to take them off the earth so I think that that's
there yeah there's a convincing that the logic is convincing I think in a lot of ways that the
the messiahs themselves are not counter narratives okay um so right this branch of feminist afro
futurist indigenous futurist there's a great indigenous future futurist volume by grace Dillon
that sort of coins the genre of indigenous futurism it's 2012 it's called walking the clouds
and indigenous futurism is an explicit um conversation with afro futurism and uh there
there you know gives ways of deploying traditional ecological knowledges um particularly from native
american and native australian and original australian communities um to imagine different
ways of being in the future and the thing is like we so so the human community has already done this
right the human human community all over the place has ways of living on the earth as the earth
without destroying the earth right um it just it's just not this one like not this particular one
that I grew up in that right um so um certainly indigenous and afro futurist futurist literatures
I think are hugely helpful here um but also like Pope Francis has like a different kind of story
about how we're supposed to live in relation to the earth and calling all of the creatures around
us brother and sister and caring for them and abolishing capitalism in order to care for the
poor and this intertwining of um you know the the disaster of poverty and the disaster of warfare
and the disaster of ecocide um so I think that these teachers are all around us um even in you
know even at the head of the the the christian body that colonized the whole earth like at this
point he's like yeah this isn't a good way of living um so they're there and I think the question
is just how we how we listen to them and how we how we do things otherwise but it's not like we
don't have the imagination for it
hi I was wondering if you had any guidelines for distinguishing between um genuine other
wisest genuine other ways of being and the fantasies that sustain the ways that we live now
as it strikes me that people who go to the resorts towns are wanting something other than the corporate
world that they're living in and so the imagination of this other world this resort town is part of
what sustains the system that lets them continuing to work and there's a lot of times really subtle
ways that's still functioning even within our attempt to imagine and otherwise we're sometimes
sustaining what we already have so are there guidelines for distinguishing between those
two can they be distinguished um thank you so much for that um I think I don't know that these are
universe these are not universal guidelines these are my guidelines for the way that I went so things
that I I will call efforts to think of genuine other wisest versus um efforts just to you know
continue as we are and you're absolutely right that the um you know resort culture of white lotus
for example is like an escape from the crazy rat race that sustains the rat race this is victor
turner this is liminality this is your two-day weekend in order to keep working as hard as you
can on the five-day so that's the same system um the question is whether there's a different system
and the thing that I tend to be looking out for um is uh societies that care for its and this
societies that care for its inhabitants it's just very straightforward like all of them
like all of them um especially the ones who are poor especially the ones who don't have access to
the people who have resources I was um uh I how do I frame this um I live in a town in Connecticut
it's a central Connecticut town that's like kind of it's not on a rail line it's kind of nowhere
in particular it was terribly planned there's a highway along the river like it's a sad um
post urban town that is trying so hard to bring itself out of the economic ruin of the 1970s
when all the factories pulled out and all that right you know you know the New England story
um and uh there is uh there are a lot of different kinds of folks who live there
people of all sorts of different economic backgrounds all sorts of mental health
abilities and capacities um and I I was in a position of having to be in conversation with
a police officer in the town who said you know there are a lot of crazy people here in Middletown
because the problem is that whenever anybody's picked up anywhere between Hartford and New Haven
this we're talking about like a 50 mile radius he's like the cops always say to them go to Middletown
because you'll get taken care of there um because there's a community health center where people
can get free health care there's food there's a soup kitchen there's an actively working right um
and he was sort of disgusted by it he's like so therefore our town is a mess and my first thought
was like holy crap that's like the first thing I've heard in a really long time that sounds like
like a gesture toward this kind of society there's a place where you can go if you don't have a home
and you can get health care like really there's a town and I live in it and people make fun of
this town because it's so weird and like badly planned but um so I think that's that's the kind
of thing that I'm looking for I'm looking for a a society whose inhabitants care for one another
um and and this includes of course the the more than human world um Catherine where is Catherine
Catherine because this beautiful um uh uh exegesis of another Le Guin story Newton's sleep in Destin
for the stars um and I'm indebted to you forever for pointing out this amazing story of these um
of this millenarian movement that uh goes to live basically in an O'Neill cylinder um and they
they take the the best and brightest among them and they take the the ones who like passed all
the tests and they end up with an almost entirely white crew um almost entirely able-bodied all
of the women have to be under 40 so that they're you know decently fertile and all right um so
there's this you know eugenics project built into the um and what happens is well I don't want to
give it away but they've left the rest of the created world behind right like even Noah took one
two of every animal um these imagine that when we imagine these space colonies we're not we don't
even think about like taking two elephants with us and taking two giraffes and making sure that we
have this kind of um like biodiverse species so um so this this would also include a deep attention
to the way that we're totally constituted by um vegetables and animals and you know not just the
not just ourselves so anyway those are things I'm looking for but it's not a good it's not a good
heuristic I understand that it's just like this is what rings my bell I'm looking for justice or
something like that yeah hi hi yes this is maybe a little tricky tricky maybe a little sensitive
so we'll just see if it goes anywhere that's fine but um it's it's interesting to me you've
honed in on some of the identities of these kind of billionaire um space profits as it as it were
mainly that they're they're rich white men and it also occurs to me that Elon Musk is autistic
and a connection that I will draw is that Oliver Sacks who I'm sure you wrote wrote a book called
an anthropologist on Mars and that comment was literally in reference to a spouse I believe
living in the in the context of an autistic spouse and felt like an anthropologist on Mars
in relating to this person and so maybe that's just an interesting coincidence but I wonder if
you care to speculate if or how or if it matters at all how that might relate to some of Musk's
visions and and sort of relationships with earth and space just a thought gosh I wish I knew how
to answer this question I don't but I um this this produced um I can just tell a story um which is
in um in my classroom the first time I taught this um this particular question produced um the
one of the hardest classroom situations I've ever been in um because a a student who was about to
graduate to go work for Elon Musk and SpaceX um got very upset um about the students in the class
who were criticizing Musk um he started um sort of tearing up and he said you know it's not fair
of you to accuse him of being in all these privileged positions after all he's autistic and
you know he's so he is he is disabled and he's um and we need to be you know kinder to him and more
understanding um and uh and it took the students a while to recover um and another of them said
yeah but but look at the damage that he's doing um to all these sorts of beings and all these
and he his SpaceX had just been um audited for um sexism and for abuses like labor abuses and all
the time um so I don't know how to um I certainly don't know how to connect um his uh his autism
to his sort of seeing the world differently um I think it's really cool to think about um Greta
Thunberg the um the ecological activist who talks herself about who gives an account herself and
says look I my autism allows me not to force me not to close myself off from the world and makes
me open up to it such that like the destruction of our earth is hurting me physically um I would
need to hear him talk about that to know how he experiences that um but I certainly don't think
and I don't think this is where you were going but I certainly don't think um that it's a that um
that his having you know neurodiversity is a is a reason to um sort of allow him to escape critique
or or anything like that um so because there there are all sorts of things you can do with
neurodiversity you can do good things or you can do bad things um but anyway I would like yeah I
don't I haven't I haven't I don't know if you've heard of him sort of account for his kind of
cosmic vision and his neurological situation but have you have you heard anything like that
but yeah yeah thank you so much yeah
he has self perpetuated the the narrative that he is has Asperger's um but there is no
definitive diagnosis and in the videos you see of him being very gregarious very he cultivates
this after a period of time and so there's a lot of debate as to how much of this is him performing
this identity of the brilliant genius uh Asperger's and how much of it is actually real thanks so we
actually have a question from online from Kadas who is live streaming from Toronto we live in the
future now it's amazing hi hello kagdas and tio anyway um he's he's written in he says if you
can ask really quick for me here it is is there a difference between musk and those folks and all
those data scientists that are now part of nerd theology and aren't those people replaceable
while nerd theology is not oh my gosh can anybody in this room or can can we get more I don't know
what nerd theology is kagdas kagdas I thought all theology was nerd theology
why did I get into this line of work um I am so sorry would you my friend please be
in contact with me by email and I'd love to talk more about this um you can find me very easily
just throw me an email and let's talk about it thank you so much for the question I'm so sorry
not to know um what that what that is but I want to know more thanks
hi thank you so much um this is brilliant and um thought provoking in so many ways um
and I get my question is um I hadn't occurred to me that um where musk has kind of multiple reasons
for needing to leave earth and contrast with bezos who condenses it down to one thing
and namely energy um out of all the multiple things that human beings need um do you have
a sense for why why he what what's his logic maybe two questions what is what is the reason
that he gives for narrowing it down to just the energy issue and what sense do you maybe make
of it like you know do you have a sense for why he would narrow that okay um so let me ask the
question behind it to answer the question that's behind it too which is um musk never talks about
dependence on energy on fossil fuels on polluting the skies um he doesn't talk about ecology at all
ecological collapse is not one of his coming disasters it's an asteroid or it's robots
or it's like so he just never addresses climate change bezos absolutely addresses climate change
and he but he wants to have a single a single problem so that it that one problem can be addressed
so it's not a multifarious problem because then that's gonna so he has to consolidate it into one
problem one could imagine his consolidating in it into um the relentless pursuit of profit for
example which necessitates extractivism which necessitates overproduction which necessitates
it necessitates inequality and you know he doesn't want to do that because that's precisely the
system that he wants us to perpetuate um so he he goes for a problem that has in his eyes a very
clear solution which is the energy problem he's also relying on the work of oniel who's working
in the 70s who's responding to an energy crisis and so for oniel the energy crisis was the crisis
this was this this sort of coalesced all of our other problems under the reliance on energy so
i think these are some some of the reasons he goes for that thanks
hello hi um i'd like to invite you to expand more on the note on which you close the presentation
which is the word care and what you mean by care if i can invite that word to travel we began with
the absence of care we arrive at care in the book you name some figures who can keep the care and
mlk the barricades dorthy day as opposed to others who don't keep the care some people have it they
had it yesterday they have it today they might have it in the future but what is it great
um i'm trying to decide there's always that moment where you're like do i go for heidegger
or do i not go for heidegger um because going for heidegger can be so helpful but then you've
got heidegger and then you have to deal with him and then you're like why is heidegger here um
but there's a sense there's a sense from heidegger um with whom i have a very tortured relationship
and whom i'm sure will make it up to all of us in the afterlife his idiocy um in the face of his
extreme brilliance um that for heidegger um care is uh dwelling with that's how he defines it like a
commitment to dwelling with to remaining with so what i make of uh mk jemisin's community is this
is a city in which the inhabitants that that what the care which is marked for her by things like
everybody can have a house if they want to if they'd rather sleep outside you don't put spikes on
benches so that they can't sleep you make sure that the bridges are swept so that people if they
want to sleep there can sleep there right um everybody has money everybody has enough food
everybody like these are the sort of markers of care um but it seems to me that you only get to
those markers if you are committed to living with like living together not living in a different
place not living in a wealthier enclave not living with a um so i would i would i would say
that um and again this is like this is like my my my my little caredar um starts beeping
when i see um practices that um are put into place when people are committed to dwelling
with one another living with one another and treating one another um as though everybody is
just as important as anybody else is that do we're gonna take one final question from over here
okay um hi hi thank you for your brilliant and horrifying presentation and especially for uh
helping the pill go down easier with your great sense of humor um it seems to me that most religions
have to do with the promise of divine rescue from this world this one has a new twist especially with
musk that we're going to somehow go off to some other galaxy and these folks pretend to be really
sciency right but uh what we know is that the universe is expanding and i've never heard a credible
scientist suggest that anything like these folks are suggesting is anything but fanciful
do they ever get pushed and um by uh scientists who say you're you're literally not on planet earth
intellectually on this stuff and here's the problem with obama and oh and first of all let me let me
go back to the um religion and other worldliness and i'm totally indebted to your work on green
religions and earthy religions and um jz smith has this distinction between what he calls utopian
religions and lockative religions that utopian religions tell us that our real home is somewhere
else and lockative religions say this is where we come from this is where our ancestors are this is
and these are of course the traditions that you're interested in right um so this in my in my um
sort of informal catalog is a is an extreme and again a sort of plotting version of a utopian
religion just in this very sort of concrete bad white heady in form um okay uh now i've lost track
of the other of the big question the big question was about remind me oh the scientist science yes
what does science say okay so here's the thing this is what scientists say scientists say this guy is
nuts this man is is absolutely off his rocker we can't newt mars we can't
but i'm not gonna get i i a geologist i'm a planetary scientist i love mars and i want to
know about rocks on mars and i want to understand what they are and where they came from and what
it says about is there like some little bayata hiding in a rock somewhere on mars that means i
need missions to mars and nasa isn't funding those freaking missions and i know if i'm a
planetary scientist because this is what my planetary scientists friends say that if they
ever get to mars it's gonna be on one of elan musk's rockets right if they even just get like a
robotic lander on mars right so increasingly science our scientists are epistemologically
dependent upon the corporate sector of the space race and as one of my friends said she was like i
hate this guy but if he can get me to mars okay like how else am i nasa hasn't done it
like what have they been doing for so this is the problem it doesn't matter that he's intellectually
debunked he's getting the stuff in the sky right and then and then this is the same issue and then
depending on your political orientation um whether you care about the moon or mars you might debunk
him scientifically but you're like yeah but we got to get to the moon because it's because china
and that's all it ever is there's there's no indication of like what it's just
because china um and so therefore no matter what you we know we can we can dismiss his long-term
visions but like he's he's gonna make a lander that lands on the moon and he's gonna help us make
the gateway that allows us to rotate anywhere we want on the moon to navigate anywhere we want
on the moon we were not going to be able to get a decent military position without this kind of
reusable affordable space technology he's the one who's giving it to us who cares that he's a crazy
who cares that he's a crazy person we need we need him yeah and on that note please join me once
more in thanking mary jane
