So, what is it that I have against Nano?
What is my problem with the Nano text editor?
People really want me to answer this question.
This is something that has been constantly asked over the years of me doing this YouTube
channel.
For one thing, I spend a lot of time covering really extensible text editors like Vim and
Emacs, and I really never talk about Nano.
When I do talk about Nano, I'll be honest, I don't necessarily talk about Nano in a
good light, right?
A lot of people are like, hey, man, what is it?
What is it that you have against Nano?
Why do you hate Nano so much?
Where does all this built-in dislike for Nano come from?
And I'm just going to go ahead and say this, these people that imagine that I hate Nano,
they're not imagining it.
I really do hate Nano as a text editor.
Now, that being said, there's nothing wrong with you using Nano as your text editor.
If you want to use Nano, keep using it.
You use the software.
You want to use.
I use the software that I want to use.
We all make these personal choices as far as the software we choose to use.
And if Nano is working for you, keep using it.
For me, I'm going to go ahead and tell you, I've got some things against Nano that really
bugged the hell out of me.
Probably my biggest issue with Nano is with any text editor, whether it be Nano, Vim,
Emacs, it really doesn't matter, to get the most out of any text editor, you really need
to learn all the built-in functionality of that editor.
You need to learn all the already assigned key bindings to that editor, right, to get
the most out of it, to learn how to really navigate around a document quickly and make
those edits, you know, much faster to really speed up that process.
You need to learn the key bindings and Nano has a lot of key bindings already assigned
to it.
Many of you Nano users actually don't realize just how many key bindings there are in Nano.
There's an extensive list of key bindings available to you.
Matter of fact, I should actually link to like a Nano cheat sheet of all the key bindings
that are built into it.
There's a lot, right?
So, there's a learning curve to Nano, just like there is with Vim, just like there is
in Emacs, you have a lot of learning to do up front.
You need to learn all those key bindings.
You need to get used to all those key presses, those strokes, right, and here's the thing,
with Nano, that learning curve to learn all that stuff, it's not worth it because Nano
at the end of the day, there's only so powerful, there's only so much you can do with a very
basic plain text editor like Nano, where with Vim and Emacs, yes, there's a huge learning
curve.
You got to learn all these key bindings, you got to learn the plugin system, you may have
to learn how to write in Vim script or Lua or Emacs list if you're using Emacs, you're
going to have to learn some stuff, but it's worth it in the end because of what those editors
ultimately can do, what they can become with you being knowledgeable and how they're scripted
and, you know, with Nano, there's a learning curve to Nano and that learning curve just
isn't worth it.
Also with Nano, just like with Vim and Emacs, there's some basic plugin functionality available,
you know, there's a few Nano plugins, there's a config file, you've got your Nano or C
file, right, that you can play around with, you know, change some settings, but at the
end of the day, there's only so much extending of Nano you can do.
The sky is the limit with Vim and Emacs as far as extensions and what you can turn those
text editors into Emacs can practically become a full IDE, hell, Emacs can practically become
its own desktop environment, you can extend it to that kind of capability, where Nano
at the end of the day is really just a very basic plain text editor.
There's not a lot of plugins out there, there's just a few, you can only do so much with the
config file, even turning on things like basic syntax highlighting and things like that,
you know, it's just not great.
Yeah, it doesn't have the kind of capabilities that both Vim and Emacs, for example, have.
So really, that's my only gripe is when I get into Nano and try to do anything in Nano,
it's got these weird set of key bindings that are not standard, it's a complete different
set of key bindings than you would use in something like Vim or in Emacs or even plain
text editors like G-Editor, Nano has its own weird set of key bindings that you have to
learn, it's just not worth it.
That's really my complaint is it's uncomfortable to use and I don't want to learn it, I don't
want to waste time learning it just because at the end of the day, I just don't think
that that is time well spent.
For me, Nano is not a in-game text editor, that's not ultimately where you want to end
up as far as your text editing software of choice.
I think where you want to end up is something like Vim or Emacs.
What Nano is really good for and what I might would use Nano on occasion for is if I need
to make a quick edit, a really quick, simple edit to a config file on my system or a machine
I remote into, SSH into a machine and maybe Nano is the only editor on that server and
I don't want to install another editor on that server just to make a really quick five
second edit to one config file, I'll just use Nano for that.
Why not?
I can make it work for something really simple, if it's a situation where I don't have to
spend a significant amount of time in an editor, Nano is fine for those tasks.
But where Nano really falls apart is if you're going to do a ton of writing, a ton of programming,
a ton of scripting, creative writing, whatever it happens to be, you're writing your latest
novel.
Nano is definitely not the best tool for a job like that.
That is where tools like Vim and Emacs and those really extensible text editors, that's
where they shine because they have so much more functionality available for you for whatever
task you're doing.
You've got all these thousands of plugins available to help you programmers and developers
or you creative writers or whatever it happens to be that you need that text editor for,
they can make that happen where Nano at the end of the day is just a very basic piece
of software.
And where some of my obvious dislike of Nano comes into play, you guys sometimes see it
on camera.
I spent so many years using Vim and Emacs, I find Nano, it's so damn frustrating when
I end up in Nano in a virtual machine, if I'm checking out a Linux distribution and Nano
is the only editor on it or whatever it happens to be.
If I end up in Nano for some reason, then I have to try to figure out the key bindings
for Nano.
And again, Nano's got this weird set of key bindings that nothing else uses.
It's a complete set of key bindings unlike any other program you've ever used.
And that's part of my hatred of Nano.
I have nothing against GNU, Nano, the text editor, again, you guys that want to use it,
you can for me every time I end up in it.
That frustration builds because I'm a fish out of water, at the end of the day, I'm
just not used to it and that's the problem.
A good analogy is when I end up in Nano compared to Vim or Emacs, when I'm in Nano, it's almost
like I'm typing with both of my hands tied behind my back.
That's how clunky and slow and frustrating I find Nano.
So I hope that answers some of your guys' questions as far as what I have against Nano.
Some of you guys are even asking questions like, what do I have against Nano users?
I've got nothing against Nano users.
I don't care what piece of software you choose to use.
Just like you really shouldn't care what piece of software I choose to use.
You need to worry about yourself.
If you're worried about what other people are doing, you've got some issues to work
out.
Any sane and rational person really isn't concerned about what somebody else is doing
with their life.
So I have no problems with Nano users and when I talk about Nano in a negative light,
I'm not talking about people using Nano.
Some people think when I say a piece of software is not right for me, I dislike a piece of
software, whatever it happens to be, that I'm somehow taking a shot at the people that
use that piece of software and like using that piece of software, that's not the case
at all.
I'm just speaking my personal opinion and many of you guys want my opinions on this
stuff.
So I'm happy to give them, like on this video, I'm very straightforward and honest.
I just don't like Nano and it's not, you know, that you shouldn't like Nano.
Nano is just not the right tool for me for 99% of what I do with my text editing.
Peace guys.
