Well this year has been strange as far as weather down here in Louisiana. We've
had some severe weather during the spring, during the summer, during the fall,
and it's getting kind of crazy here in the winter too. I don't know. It's like
the world is coming to an end, right? All this climate change or whatever. It's
for real, I guess. But anyway, today I wanted to talk to you guys about evolving
as a Linux user. Because sometimes people ask me how I ended up on things like
Arch Linux or Vim or Emacs or how did I get into the terminal and things like
that. And now one of the things with Linux, there's typically two types of
users. There's those that they just want to install something quick and easy and
use it as is. They never want to look under the hood and figure out how it
works. And then there's the other group of Linux users that is the tinkers. They
do want to know how everything works. They want to take things apart and put it
back together again. And because, you know, Linux is full of these nerds that
like to tear things down and build it again. And that's why so many of us
gravitate toward, I guess, not user-friendly distributions like Arch
Linux and the hundreds of distros based on Arch Linux or Gen2 and the various
distributions based on Gen2 and things like that Slackware. And, you know, that's
okay if you're not there yet. I think a lot of people, when they first come to
Linux, they install Ubuntu or Linux Mint. And then, you know, they, I guess, feel
intimidated by those that have gotten past the point of needing to use
something like Ubuntu or Linux Mint. And it's not, it's really not about
elitism or arrogance or anything like that. Many of us use Arch Linux. It's
because for what we do, using Arch or an Arch based Linux distribution is much,
much easier for us than using something like Ubuntu or Linux Mint or OpenSUSA.
Why is that? Well, when you're new, you're not going to be doing a lot of crazy
things, right? Like compiling your own software, doing extreme customizations of
your desktop or window manager and things like that. Typically, you just want
something that's really easy and quick to install and looks good out of the box.
And then you're not going to touch it, you know, when you're a brand new user. And
that's okay. Once you get more advanced, though, you really want to build your own
system, right? And it becomes very limiting when you use something like Ubuntu or
Mint, you know, as opposed to something like Arch Linux, because let's take Ubuntu,
for example. Ubuntu comes with its own very customized GNOME desktop environment.
And if you want to hack on it a little bit and change things, it's tough. Ubuntu
makes it really tough. Also, their desktop and the suite of applications,
everything is really tightly integrated together. And sometimes you can't separate
those pieces, because like the Ubuntu desktop is really almost like a meta
package, a collection of things. And sometimes it's really hard to separate
some of the stuff you don't want on the system from the stuff you do, because
just the way these user friendly distributions are built, they package
things in such a way. It's really, again, it's designed for the brand new user.
But for those of us that want to do more than just the real basics, Ubuntu
is hard. It's frustrating to use. I mean, it's, I save so much time using
Arch based distributions compared to Ubuntu, because unlike Ubuntu and Mint
and SUSE, you know, Arch Linux has no, they don't have a dog in the fight as
far as what they do with their desktop environments. If you want a desktop
environment or a window manager, you install the one you choose, it's not
going to be themed or customized in any way, unless you do it. And a lot of new
users think, well, that's crazy. I've got to put in all this work once I install
this window manager desktop environment. Yeah. But you know, that's, that's
what some of us signed up for. Plus, you only really have to do it one time. You
set up your window manager the way you want, save the configs. And you always
have your own configs after that. It's always your desktop environment. If
you will, that you always reinstall. There's no reason to, to go to something
like Ubuntu and have to fight Ubuntu trying to take things apart and put it
back together the way you want. And that's one of the real things about
Arch Linux. That's why the Arch philosophy, they talk about Arch Linux
being simple, right? Arch Linux, the Arch philosophy is all about simplicity.
And a lot of people think, well, that's Arch is not simple because it's not
user friendly. Well, simple doesn't mean user friendly. Simple means everything
is simple by design, right? All the pieces have been separated, you know,
until they're smallest components, basically, and you pick and choose the
parts you want, and you build that thing the way you want to make it look. I
think another reason that Arch Linux is great is because it's rolling release,
right? Rolling release has really caught on. When I started in Linux, you know,
12, 13 years ago, as far as desktop use, rolling releases were seen as kind of a
niche. Nobody took them seriously. Nobody thought they were quote stable. You
didn't see people running them on a server ever like that was unheard of. And
really, people are starting to come around to the idea of rolling releases
being the better model as opposed to static release distributions. I think
Arch Linux has really changed the game there. I think there's a reason why
you're seeing Ubuntu. Ubuntu's popularity is starting to seriously decline.
People don't talk about it as much. I don't talk about it that often. Really,
unless Ubuntu has a big release, I don't talk about it much on the YouTube
channel. Why? There's really not much to say about it. That's not, that's not
where all the innovation is happening these days. That's not where the action
is. The action is really these days, Arch, right? Arch dominates the desktop
Linux world, all the Arch based distributions. Manjaro is exploding in
popularity. Arco Linux is exploding in popularity. Mainstream Arch, even though
it's a command line, is exploding in popularity. There is a ton of people
giving Arch Linux a serious try that otherwise wouldn't have, say, five and
definitely 10 years ago. Some of the other benefits of Arch Linux, you know,
why it has gained ground over things like Ubuntu and Debian and Mint is their
pragmatic stance as far as the repository of software. You know, Arch Linux
does not mind putting proprietary software in its repositories. They, they
are not free software only purists. Now, I'm a free software zealot, but even I
as a free software zealot don't mind them having proprietary software
available for their users in their repositories. What I hate is Linux
distributions that install proprietary software out of the box on those
distributions, you know, and basically they're trying to force proprietary
software on their users. I don't like that, but I don't mind proprietary
software being in the repos available for those that need it and want to use it
because not everybody cares about the free software movement. I get that. So I
actually like the pragmatic stance that Arch Linux takes in that regard. And again,
I think that helps with Arch Linux becoming so popular is the fact that
there's so much software available on Arch Linux that is tougher to get even
on things like Ubuntu. There's, there's stuff that I install that, you know, I
have no problems installing on Arch Linux because I know I can find it in the
Arch repositories or in the AUR, the Arch user repository, or with Arch Linux, you
also have flatpacks, snaps, app images available if you want to use them. And
that's the other thing. They're not forced on you either. With Ubuntu, snap is
pre-installed, you're expected to use snaps. With Linux Mint, they have flatpack
installed and you're expected to use flatpacks. Well, with Arch Linux, nothing
is installed. If you want to use snaps, install it and set it up, you're free to
do so. Same thing with flatpack. If you want to use flatpack, install it, use it,
you're free to do so, but they don't care if you use it. They don't care if you
don't use it. And I think that's the better model. I think, again, I think we're
starting to see this real shift in desktop Linux where really what used to
be in a Ubuntu-dominated game is really now dominated by Arch Linux. And I love
it. I love it because Arch Linux, of course, is a community distribution too.
It's not corporate backed. There's no company really calling the shots. It's
all about us, the community building something great. And I think it's a
model that works. Anyway, that's enough of me rambling and walking around here
in the snow. I don't even know what in the hell I was gonna talk about when I
turned on the camera. I just started walking around and talking. I hope some
of this incoherent mess that I said makes sense at least when I put it on
YouTube. If it doesn't, I do apologize, but you got to understand it's about 20
degrees right now, and I am freezing my balls off. Alright guys, peace.
