Before I get into this video, I wanted to give another of my famous disclaimers.
While most of the information in this video comes from recent research within the field
of geometric algebra, many of the ideas have existed for a good amount of time already.
Some have been around for over a hundred years.
Furthermore, as the ideas in this video are not originally mine, I've linked to some papers
in the description. I've also included the BiVector.net Discord link because the authors
of those papers are members, actually one of them runs the discord, and they are often
online to help. If you haven't seen geometric algebra or exterior algebra before, and if
you want to rigorously grasp the concepts of this video, then I really recommend that you
learn it or about it before continuing. I have some series on the subject, although they are
a bit old. For a quick crash course, I recommend Suji's channel. The link will also be in the
description and hopefully as a card right now. But even if you have no background in geometric
algebra, I think you could still learn something by watching this video. Oh, and make sure to give
this video a thumbs up if you enjoy it. Also, subscribe, do it. Do what I dare you.
There will be three sections to this video. Vectors are hyperplanes, what is a reflection,
and the invariant decomposition theorem. This video will be presenting ideas in the language
of plane-based geometric algebra, which has conceptual differences when compared to vanilla
geometric algebra. If you're not familiar with this approach, then I recommend that you watch
the first two sections of this video. If you are, then feel free to skip to the last section,
although if you do already know plane-based geometric algebra, then I'd assume you already
know what the invariant decomposition theorem is. But without further ado, let's get into it.
You might be asking yourself, what is a hyperplane? Well, look at a plane in three-dimensional space.
It's just a flat two-dimensional surface. So in three dimensions, a plane is a flat
three minus one-dimensional object. The natural generalization of this is that a hyperplane is
a flat object of one dimension less than the space it inhabits. I asked Google's AI to generate an
image of a hyperplane, and it gave me this abomination, which just looks like the profile photo of a
conspiracy theorist. So as a better visualization, compare these two images. I would give a
visualization of a three-dimensional hyperplane in four-dimensional space, but unfortunately it
turns out that that is beyond human cognition. Sorry. But looking at these images, notice that
the intersection of the two-dimensional plane with the xy-plane in the three-dimensional space
forms a one-dimensional hyperplane, also called a line, in the two-dimensional space, of course.
This idea of intersection is very important to the approach this video teaches.
But what do vectors have to do with this? The idea is, in principle, very simple.
Instead of representing a point or direction, a vector represents an individual hyperplane.
In three dimensions, this looks like three orthogonal planes. The red plane is the unit
vector in the x direction, the green plane is for the y direction, and the blue plane is for the z
direction. I've included the notation of e1, e2, and e3, because that is how basis vectors are
traditionally labeled in geometric algebra. For the rest of this video, I will use that notation.
What if we were to consider the intersections formed by these planes?
Then we would have three separate lines. For those wondering about the line's coloring,
I've colored the lines according to the plane to which they are orthogonal.
e1, 2 is orthogonal to the e3 plane, e2, 3 is orthogonal to the e1 plane, and e3, 1 is orthogonal
to the e2 plane. This illustrates a geometric and mathematical duality in three-dimensional space.
Actually, in any dimensional space, there is a duality akin to the one on screen,
so it's not unique to three dimensions. The images here demonstrate the geometric
duality, and the math to the right demonstrates the mathematical duality. For those unfamiliar with
geometric algebra, the product between e1, e2, and e3 is identical to the imaginary number i,
and it is traditional to denote it i. Now, we know what the products between
basis vectors represent, and that they represent intersections of geometric objects,
so what is the product between e1, e2, and e3 that is used in the mathematical dualities?
This product is just the intersection of all three lines and represents the origin of the space.
Therefore, one benefit of using vectors to represent hyperplanes is that there is an
explicit introduction of an origin into the mathematics representing geometric space.
This is not something that happens in the traditional interpretation of vectors,
so origins are assumed to exist, but are typically only assumed implicitly.
Having shown that vectors represent planes in three-dimensional space, I would like to
emphasize that this works in arbitrary dimensions. To motivate this, here are equivalent results in
two-dimensional space. Defining a reflection formally is somewhat abstract. A reflection
is an involuntary mapping from some space to itself that is an isometry with an invariant
hyperplane. Hopefully, you know what this means. Just kidding, I'll explain it.
The first nerd term is involuntary mapping, which means a map that is its own inverse,
or rather a mapping that when applied twice does nothing at all. The second term that's
important is isometry, which means to preserve angles and distance. The third and final term
is invariant, which means something that stays the exact same after performing the mapping.
Since it is an invariant hyperplane, a reflection is associated with some hyperplane that is the
same before and after the reflection. So when non-nerds speak, a reflection is some transformation
of an object in space that, when applied once, does not change the shape of the object and has
some associated hyperplane that stays in place and when applied twice does nothing.
This is easiest to demonstrate in two dimensions with a line and some shape.
Here we have a line and a triangle. Reflecting once gives a mirror image of the triangle on the
other side of the line. Note that this line, which is being used to reflect the triangle,
is itself the invariant hyperplane. Reflecting a second time then undoes the original reflection.
Now let's do some algebra. Recall from earlier that vectors can be used to represent hyperplanes
and that for each reflection there is a corresponding hyperplane. Therefore,
vectors represent reflections. That's all well and good, but what does this mean?
How would one actually perform a reflection using a vector that represents a hyperplane?
This is where the knowledge of geometric algebra comes in handy as a very brief introduction.
Reflections in hyperplanes are given by this sandwich equation. It is traditional to deal
with normalized hyperplanes, where u squared equals positive one. In general, you can also
use hyperplanes that square to negative one, but that's not very important here,
so we will only work with positive-squaring hyperplanes.
This factor depends upon the grade of the object being reflected
and determines whether the object has its orientation inverted during the reflection
or not. As we're covering reflections in hyperplanes, we're only considering vectors.
Vectors are grade one, so the reflection in a hyperplane has a negative sign out front.
I also reckon that some simply-at-concrete examples will help with understanding,
so let's look at the basis vectors or basis hyperplanes in three-dimensional space.
Reflecting E1 in itself returns negative E1, which means that what was on one side of E1
suddenly is on the other side of E1, which makes sense. It's a reflection. Practically speaking,
E1 can be thought of as having an extrinsic orientation which inverts itself when E1 is
reflected in itself. Generally, any hyperplane reflected in itself will invert itself,
but for the hyperplanes orthogonal to E1, these are the hyperplanes E2 and E3,
they are unaffected by the reflection in E1. Let's see this visually.
When the hyperplane E1 in three dimensions is viewed from the side, it just looks like a line.
The extrinsic orientation of the E1 hyperplane is drawn as the
orange arrows, thus when E1 reflects in itself, the arrows and thus the orientation flip to the
other side. This is what the negative sign in the reflection equation means. Now let's see what E2
and E3 do when reflecting E1. While looking at E1 from the side, E2 looks like the line going
perpendicular to E1, and E3 just looks like the plane itself. The arrows of E2 denote the
orientation of E2, and the crosses in E3 represent its orientation as arrows going into the screen.
Reflecting this space in E1, the arrows and crosses respectively of E2 and E3 stay in the same
direction. This is why there is no negative sign in these reflections. The orientation of a hyperplane
is preserved when reflected in a hyperplane that is orthogonal. This is all the information that is
required to understand reflections in hyperplanes, so we are now ready to see how all motion comes
from such reflections. Before giving this decomposition theorem, there's another jargony word to know.
This term is the K reflection. A K reflection is simply the product of K individual hyperplanes,
and it is written as big U sub K. It is referred to as a reflection because it is the chaining of
many reflections under the same sandwich product. Knowing this, the invariant decomposition
theorem states, a K reflection can be decomposed into exactly K over 2 ceiling commuting factors
when K is even. There are K over 2 floor commuting factors that are products of two
hyperplanes, and when K is odd, there exists also a leftover hyperplane reflection.
Now I know the question you're all dying to ask. What does this theorem say in math form? Well,
here it is. If R is the number of such factors, then U sub K can be factored into A sub R,
A sub R minus 1, and so on. When K is odd, there is the leftover hyperplane U sub leftover.
These factors all commute, as denoted by the AJAL equals AL AJ. Physically, this means that you
can perform any combination of reflections and still get the same result. In three-dimensional
space, the invariant decomposition theorem is equivalent to a well-known theorem in geometry,
the Mozy-Schade theorem. Every three-dimensional rigid body motion can be decomposed into a
translation along a line, followed by, or preceded by, a rotation around the same line.
This short video from the Laplace Wiki demonstrates the Mozy-Schade theorem.
But, I'm sure some of you still have a question.
How are these motions equivalent to reflections in hyperplanes?
Let's look at a two-dimensional example. Imagine two hyperplanes U1 and U2 with some
angle theta between them. Suppose there is some object P in the space. It can be reflected in U1,
and then this object can be reflected in U2. Well, this composition of two reflections actually
just describes a rotation by two theta. As those of you familiar with spinners,
this is very related and provides an excellent visualization tool. I'm considering making a
video on it in the future, but we'll see. Also, for those familiar with geometric algebra,
it's clear that this is the rotation through the expansion of the geometric product of these two
hyperplanes. A similar line of reasoning can be shown for a translation. Instead of angles,
we have a distance d. Note that the total translation covers twice the distance,
just like the rotation before covered twice the angle. From a first glance, it seems that
there could be spinorial quantities related to translation. And maybe I'll cover that in a
future video. Who knows? But both the example of rotation and translation in two-dimensional
space were a preparation for viewing the Mosey-Schottet theorem in terms of reflections. So,
let me show you a visualization. Here is a situation I rendered using a geometric algebra render
that my current employer developed with my help. For letting me use this in a video for the public,
thank you, Mr. Boss. Very cool. The red planes represent the two planes of reflection that
generate a translation in three-dimensional space along the x-axis. The green plane represents
the E2 plane, and the blue plane represents the E3 plane. Together, they generate a rotation about
the x-axis. Therefore, reflections in these hyper planes describe the motion in the Mosey-Schottet
theorem, demonstrating that indeed any form of motion is just a composition of reflections.
Tying this back to the invariant decomposition theorem, the invariant decomposition of this
motion is given by the double reflection of U1 and U2 along with E2 and E3. As you can see,
they are commuting factors like the theorem stated.
Now, the results given in this video were explained using geometric algebra,
but specifically something called projective geometric algebra, which allows for geometric
entities to exist at points separate from the origin. But don't let this fool you,
the hyperplane-based interpretation works for spacetime too. Oh, and conformal geometric algebra.
And oh yeah, also regular old vanilla geometric algebra. In fact, the association of vectors
with hyper planes works in general geometric algebras. If you don't know what this means or
implies, don't worry too much about it. It's a niche but growing field. But for those of you
who know what I'm talking about, I urge you to explore the possibilities. If you have any ideas,
feel free to reach out. You can find my contact information easily, and I'm also available on
the BiVector Discord server. As a recap, this video showed that vectors are hyperplanes,
that reflections can be performed using hyperplanes and thus using those vectors,
and that composing reflections generates motion.
I hope this video is informative and helped give insight into the beauty of geometry and the
potential of geometric algebra as an abstract mathematical representation of this geometry.
If you enjoyed this video, please show that to the YouTube gods by liking and subscribing
for similar content in the future. Feel free to comment and ask questions,
or to just talk in the comment section. But remember, keep it civil. Bye.
