You wonder what you'll find with an open mind.
You may be surprised.
Yeah!
You gotta get away from this illusion.
For the sake of the world, this delusion.
It's gotta, gotta, gotta go.
Yeah!
Hey everybody, welcome to the Atheist Experience.
I'm your host, Russell Glasser, and with me today, I am honored to be joined by Dr. Richard Carrier.
Hello.
The author of On the Historicity of Jesus and Homer Hitler Bible Christ, among a lot of things.
And here on this side is Chris Johnson, author and filmmaker of A Better Life.
A hundred atheists speak out on joy and meaning in a world without God.
We're, we're here doing the show live today after the Bat Cruise,
which means that just like every time this year, we've got a huge studio audience.
Let's hear it.
Wow.
Today is Sunday, September 28th, 2014,
where we are live calling public access Atheist television show based in Austin, Texas,
dedicated to promoting positive atheism and the separation of church and state.
We're available through live streaming at ustream.tv.
The official Atheist experience website is www.atheist-experience.com.
You can provide feedback by commenting on the official show blog,
freethoughtblogs.com, slash AXP, or you can email us at tvatatheist-community.org.
If you enjoy the show today, please check out our related podcast, The Nonprofits,
which airs the first and third Wednesday of every month.
And as usual, the cast and crew of the Atheist experience is going to be getting together
after the show at El Arroyo at 1624 West Fifth Street.
We'll be arriving at around 6 p.m.
Now, all those people you just heard, a bunch of them are going,
so it's going to be pretty crowded.
Just fair warning.
So that's it for the announcements,
and I'm going to kick it over to Richard,
who's going to tell us a few things, maybe from the lecture we heard yesterday
and about his work.
Yeah, right.
Well, my latest book is on the historicity of Jesus and the significance of this,
and I talked about it yesterday,
was this idea that Jesus never really existed as a historical person
has been kicked around for about 100 years,
and in the last 20 years, a lot of amateur books and websites and things have come out.
It even, like, was a featured topic in Religious, the movie.
But the problem is that there's a lot of misinformation, a lot of bad scholarship,
but there's also a lot of good stuff in there as well, and it's all sort of mixed up.
And no one had really gone through the trouble of clearing away all the bad stuff,
doing all the good stuff, doing thorough research on it all,
and then presenting it in a manner that would pass peer review at an academic press.
And so my book is actually the first book arguing that there was no Jesus,
that it was actually a mythical person that was made up,
or at least the Jesus of Galilee was made up.
It's the first one to be published by a university, the University of Sheffield,
and to have passed extensive peer review within the field.
And so it's going to get more attention from scholars in the field,
and since it doesn't have all of the bogus stuff in it that other things have had,
it's actually the first really good case that I think might start to rattle the cages of biblical studies.
And I guess maybe we can talk more about that if people call in and want to know more about it.
But that's just the gist.
Sure, yeah. With both Richard and Chris here talking about their topics,
this would be a great day to talk about something they know about.
But we'll be happy to get the usual kind of calls too. Anything else?
No, that's it, actually.
Oh, well, I suppose I should mention for those who don't know,
my PhD is in ancient history from Columbia University,
history of philosophy, religion, and science in the Greco-Roman era.
So that's my main field of expertise for those who are interested in calling in on that subject.
Okay. Chris, how are you doing?
Well, I'm good. I'm thrilled to be here.
And I worked on a project called A Better Life.
A hundred atheists speak out and join, meaning in a world without God.
I'm working on the film version right now as well, putting that together.
Basically, I wanted to change the way we talk about atheism
and talk about atheism from a positive perspective.
Instead of talking about what we are reeling against,
talk about what we love, what we're passionate about, what we value.
So I worked on a book, put that together, and now I'm putting together a film.
And I actually brought a clip along to show you a little bit about what I'm doing.
All right, let's hear it.
It's coming.
I'm hearing unhappy noises from the studio.
Live public access, everybody.
It'll happen.
Life is like its own reward.
You know, this idea that some people have that atheists must be nihilists
who have no purpose, and they're all dull or all the time,
and, oh, this life has no meaning and purpose, and why don't we just end it all?
I just, I cannot grasp that.
The more I've understood about how the universe works, the more that all,
the more joy, rather than it going, oh, it's just clockwork.
The sun's there, and we go around it every year and all that stuff.
No, I think that's amazing.
That is extraordinary how that's happening.
Since we are made of the same stuff, the same molecules that were created,
you know, in the explosions of the stars,
and we ourselves have evolved this incredible ability to contemplate our place in the universe,
we are a way for the cosmos to know itself.
Thank you.
You have instant, profound meaning in your life.
You happen to be alive right now.
You should really make the most of it.
So you have about 300 months to live with passion, to live with vividness,
to live trying to do something, make something, trying to create some significance.
People love things that they find beautiful,
and it can be a very expensive thing and an exquisite thing,
or it can just be as simple as, I used to have that when I was a child,
and I can't believe I've seen this now in the thrift store.
I haven't thought of this thing in, you know, 30 years.
And then there's my dogs.
Then there's the dog.
We love our dogs.
Thanks, Chris.
Thank you.
So we're going to go straight to calls now.
Nobody has any objections.
We're going to be starting with a local caller from, it's Christian from Cedar Park, Texas.
Hello.
Hi, Christian.
Hey, how's it going?
Good. How are you?
I'm pretty good.
I had a question for you guys, and I think it relates a little bit to Mr. Johnson
and his kind of the theme of his movie, too, a little bit.
Okay.
And that is, if somebody is religious and they have a predisposition towards religion,
then it seems like that even if they, excuse me.
Go on.
Even if they have a, I'm going to get a little echo.
Oh.
Sorry.
They're working on it.
Okay.
So even if I had doubts about whether there was an actual God or a Supreme being,
then I still might want to keep being religious just for any of the multiple aspects that come from being religious.
And in that sense, and this doesn't really describe me right now.
I mean, I have faith for the time being, and I believe.
But I did go through other periods where I was, you know, pretty much agnostic and atheist.
But I didn't feel, I just always felt like there was something missing.
I'm getting a pretty fierce echo.
But just work through it.
I'm sorry.
Okay.
So, you know, I like the ritual of religion, and I like the worship part of it, even if
it's just, you know, if you're singing the phrases of creation, ultimately, you know,
just the idea of hymns, just kind of the emotional tone of them.
And I like, even when I was young, I liked church and religion more than what I wanted.
So you're saying basically that you're still firm in your faith right now,
but you're wondering if somebody who was losing their faith would ought to feel a benefit from continuing to go through the motions
and rituals of religion just to get the sort of comfort and fellowship that it involves.
Is that what you're saying?
Yeah, if they find it fulfilling, then...
Well, he was asking you, Chris.
You've talked to a lot of people who have been through the deconversion process.
Do you have a perspective on this?
I would just say that you don't necessarily have to stop singing religious music.
If you like the music, you can still sing music, even if it has a religious basis.
One thing that is nice, though, that, you know, the secular community really is coming together more so than it used to.
So you can get that fellowship and that community from atheists.
I mean, we spent yesterday on the Bat Cruise, and it was great hanging out with all these wonderful people and meeting people and talking.
I mean, you get that same sense of community and friendship from atheists,
and I think you can get that from a secular community just as much as a religious one.
Well, there's also...
Wait, what is it, Richard?
Well, there's also Sunday Assembly, which isn't my thing, but some people love that.
I mean, it's kind of like a hymn-based, ecstatic religious experience,
except it's not religious, it's for atheists and non-believers.
If you just Google Sunday Assembly, you can probably find websites and see where those things are going around.
It's kind of like, you know, it's like a little tent event that goes around the country.
And they want to create more of these things.
And they do serve a segment of the community that want that part of...
They just can't believe anymore in the ideology or the particular teachings of the religion,
but love that particular experience of church, of the singing and that particular kind of thing.
So they've created a sort of secular version of this.
So people who are into that, that might be the thing for you, I don't know.
Well, I think that it's also kind of the fact that religion addresses this aspect of us that is somewhat primitive
and, you know, some of it's lost in the past,
but it forms in kind of a state of innocence that innocence...
I'm going to have to be the curmudgeon at this table and disagree with that.
I don't think... by innocence I don't agree.
Innocence of causing harm to people.
Right, but no, but I mean...
Religion didn't just form spontaneously, as I see it.
It grew organically out of a bunch of social conventions.
And even today, most people wind up with the religion that comes from their parents or their culture or whatever.
Absolutely.
So it depends.
Well, let me rephrase what I meant by innocence.
I mean, there's a sophistication of thought that develops as you learn about science and psychology, etc.
In the same way that when you're a child, you can perceive things a certain way,
but once you learn a certain amount, you kind of lose the ability to go back to that perception.
But are you getting at, like, the idea of the sense of awe and wonder that you can get at the universe?
Well, I'm just saying that...
I don't think that you can go to an atheist gathering for fellowship and get the same thing
that you can get going to a 500-year-old cathedral and being with people
who are actually, you know, fully engaging in the original way.
But I've been to a 500-year-old cathedral and still gotten that sense of awe and wonder,
and it had nothing to do with God.
It had to do with the architecture, it had to do with the space,
it had to do, most of all, with the history that's part of that.
Absolutely.
So I don't think it has anything to do with, you know, God or religion.
What I would say to your point is that every experience is unique
and a lot of different experiences can be moving in a way.
You know, the feeling you get from going to a 500-year-old cathedral
is not the same feeling that you get when you go to the Louvre
and you look at these amazing paintings that people have worked on.
And I think by denying the existence of God,
we're not invalidating that there's some really great religious art
and architecture and music.
And you're right that you can continue to participate in those things
and appreciate them, but at the same time,
there's not the feeling that you're required to focus on that one type of thing
as the only thing that can elevate you in your life.
Oh, sure.
Well, I would add also that a lot of that, of course, is marketing campaign, right?
I mean, churches, they don't just want you to come there and sing.
They want you to vote a certain way, they want you to have certain values,
they want you to treat gay people a certain way,
or they want you to treat women a certain way.
They have certain ideology they're trying to sell.
And so you're going to be socially pressured to adopt that ideology.
I know a lot of people that have left the church simply because
they no longer agreed with the values
and the congregation simply wouldn't let them be themselves.
They would constantly try to pressure them to just toe the party line.
And I think that's the main problem with that.
And you'd have to have a church like the Unitarian Universalist Church
which is accepting of all different kinds of beliefs
and they don't pressure you quite the same way.
But then maybe you won't find, I mean, they don't have 500-year-old cathedrals
in the Unitarian Church.
They weren't funded as well.
Well, you'd be surprised.
Historians have often some good land and some good churches,
but they're often more modern.
Well, what I mean to say is that the point I'm making when I'm talking about cathedrals and such
is that something is built up, it's a culture is built up around worship
and relating to God and daily activities and ways to carry out the religious life.
And like whoever said before, I turn my TV off so that I'm not looking at you guys.
Whoever said it, it grows organically.
And that's kind of what I mean by that.
Yeah, but what I'm saying is that is not unique to religion.
People form all sorts of different cultures and call it all sorts of different things.
I mean, they form football cultures and gaming cultures.
They form fraternity cultures at their college.
And those fill different roles.
People have lots of social groups in their adult life.
I didn't mean to say that it was exclusive in any way.
What I'm saying is it's all those things that have been tied together in religion.
And maybe because you were raised with that religion or because you found it attractive.
Yeah, a lot of it really comes from your upbringing.
I wasn't ready for religious and I don't miss it.
And it's not just religion.
Absolutely.
Like we said before, it's history.
It's culture.
It's all wrapped up in many of those different things.
You can't just say it's only religion.
It's a bunch of different things wrapped together.
And you can take those parts and appreciate those different parts without having to buy into the religion.
Sure.
Or you might also buy into the religion.
You could.
Lots of people do from what I've heard.
And on issues of believing in God and that kind of thing, it seems that even religious people I know,
it seems that everybody I know has some type of doubt or goes in and out of periods of certainty.
That's very common.
You have no idea how heartened I am to hear that.
Oh sure.
No, but it is true, yeah.
But so...
Yeah, I mean Mother Teresa had doubts.
That may not be any reason to leave the religion if you find it fulfilling that alone.
But the reason to leave religion is that it might actually not be true.
And it might be misleading.
And it might actually be harmful in certain aspects.
And I think that there is no reason to jettison the bad part...
To jettison all the good parts along with getting rid of the unnecessary thing of unquestioningly worshiping this infinite being
and taking at face value something that people in authority tell you all your life.
But those are what I see as the negative sides of religion.
But also I don't believe in God.
So I don't think that at the bottom level there is a basis for it.
Right.
But I'm saying being that there are people besides you who may be at different places along that spectrum
then, you know, again, what they decide is harmful and what they decide is true or not true is going to be different.
So even if somebody has major doubts about the metaphysical God, they may still go on with being religious.
Right, they may.
I think we're in agreement.
And I think that you can also, but the one other thing that I was pointing to at the beginning is
you can, some people have a religious attitude towards nature.
Yeah.
And so since God supposedly is, existence comes from God or he's the source of existence, then there's kind of an overlap there.
If you believe in God.
No, I'm saying in the concept.
There's an overlap in the concept.
There can be.
And so in that sense, it may naturally go towards what you, what was worshiping God may naturally go towards an appreciation or a love or a worship of nature.
Yeah, there are all kinds of things you can channel that energy into that aren't explicitly religious.
But I think you can do it a religious way.
I think we're going to move on to other callers now.
All right.
Thanks for calling, Christian.
Sure.
Good talking to you.
Bye.
I have a look in Austin.
Are you there?
Yeah.
Hi, what's up?
Yeah, thanks for taking my call.
I've been an atheist for, I think, three to four years.
I was born in India.
I was a Hindu all my life.
I think in the last five years, I've become an atheist.
Before that, I was a non religious Hindu.
I believe in spirituality.
I have a scientific background.
I went to the best scientific schools in India and US.
So I have no, I have no questions or doubts about being an atheist and the stuff we believe in.
I believe in facts and truth.
I believe in seeing what I believe.
The only thing I miss when I was not atheist is emotional void.
When I was not atheist, when I was going through bad times, I thought I had a God I would believe in.
Maybe it was a placebo effect.
Maybe it was magic or something I believed in.
But I think that is the biggest thing which is missing from your show because you talk about facts and how the Bible is wrong and how everything else is wrong.
But I do not think you're answering the question that if as atheists we go through bad times, we can talk to our families.
We can talk to our wives and sons.
And it does not have the same effect like it did before.
You spend so little time on that and I think that is a big reason which makes believers not become atheists or make atheists become believers.
So if you have really bad times in your life and you used to have supernatural power before you believed in and now you don't.
I mean you can be strong and you can be confident but how do you deal with that?
For myself, all of that I replace with good friends, determination and self-confidence.
With those three things I know that I can use reason, I can use my community, I can use the facts we've established to try and make my situation better.
And if I can't then I have those good friends that I can commiserate with and share that experience with.
And then I have my own experience of life that I can share that experience with just with myself and that respect.
And that works for me and I know it works for a lot of other people but I can't really speak necessarily to the experience of others that might be in different situations than myself.
I would just say that I think you raise a good point in a way that life is sometimes very difficult and working on a project about our life was not trying to say that everything is hunky-dory all the time and we're all happy.
Life can be very difficult and there are times where we need other people and you can believe something that's false that's comforting.
I mean you could make up something that's very comforting.
You know I could make up that I have a million dollars and that would be very comforting to me and my bank account.
But it wouldn't be true and ultimately probably wouldn't be very helpful.
And so I think looking at it realistically and thinking what, you know, this is a difficult time, how can I overcome this?
And finding real answers, friends, family, relationships, things like that, people you can count on who are actually there as opposed to praying to a God who's not there would probably be better.
But you're right that it is scary sometimes and I think we have to realize that life can be scary and that's part of the experience of it, right?
But there are ways to get through it and get through it together with other people.
The slogan, you know, that hands that help are better than lips that pray.
People that are in certain specific dire circumstances can actually find people in the same similar circumstances, band together and find a way to solve this problem or fight it or become activists and get involved.
And then you can feel like if you can't solve your problem you might be able to help make the world better so that other people don't end up in whatever situation.
Whether this is curing cancer or escaping a drug addiction or whatever it is that you're dealing with or, you know, if it's losing loved ones and all kinds of things like this.
There are lots of people who are having the same experiences that you can join and together with and bond with and work together with to actually fix it or make it better in some fashion.
And I think that you can get a lot of, you can feel really good about that, that you've made the world a better place, that you've tried to make the world a better place.
And you weren't alone. You had other people who are in the same situation but also willing to bond together and fight together and work together to make these changes.
That's all we have, really. I mean, to be honest, that's the truth of the world.
So we shouldn't not avail ourselves of that. That's the one thing that does exist that we can create.
And so we are kind of obligated really to do that if we want something better.
I don't think I can add anything to those.
Yeah, I think I get your point but I'm hurting a lot on this one.
So I'm talking to my family, my friends, but I missed the fake magic which I had with thought.
I'm really sorry to hear that. Have you, I see you're here in Austin. Have you tried, I mean, have you been to any of our meetings?
No, I just joined a group a few weeks back.
Well, I hope to see you. And I mean, I don't have any magic solutions to your problems.
But, you know, I'd like a chance to sit down with you sometime and talk about this more, especially since I don't know as much about ex-Hindus as I do about a lot of other ex-religious types.
Okay, thank you so much gentlemen.
Alright, thanks for calling and, you know, good luck.
Bye.
Gary in Columbus, Mississippi?
Gary?
Yes, I'm here.
Hi, how are you?
I'm doing great. How are you doing?
I'm well.
Nice to talk to you for the first time, Russell.
Nice to talk to you too.
You're a Matt Schuve. Well, I say you're a Matt. I've watched that experience about five years.
Thank you.
I really enjoy the show. I'm square in the Bible belt here in Columbus, Mississippi.
I don't recognize the other two guys with you at all.
Well, these are our guests from, they just gave some lectures on the Bat Cruise. Richard Carrier here is a historian and Chris Johnson.
Well, Richard Carrier, yeah, I know of him.
There you go.
Awesome.
I just recognized him.
That's who I am, yeah.
And Chris Johnson is a photographer and a filmmaker.
Hello, Chris. Nice to meet you.
Hello.
I didn't really have a question. I really just want to make a statement if I could to your viewers.
Okay.
I would like for your younger viewers, I know you've had many younger viewers, especially with this one guy that called in about, he was a teacher, a scientist teacher,
and he had several of his students, eighth grade students, calling in and, or not calling in, just viewing the show.
But, and he was upset about that. And I want to tell them just a word to the younger folks.
Don't be afraid to lose your fear that religion has instilled in you as a young person.
Right.
Well, I agree with you.
Don't feel free to lose your religion. It's okay. Don't feel fear from that.
Okay.
You know, it, you know, you might be cheered here that a lot of young people won't need that message because the younger you get in demographics, the more likely it is that people just don't believe in God these days.
I know Russell and I love that.
Yes.
In fact, I love the fact that most people who are in universities right now are less religious.
I actually have an electrical engineering degree.
Less religious. There's still majority religious.
And it seems the more educated a person is, the less likely they are to be religious.
Well, that is true.
It is true, but don't get complacent. You know, as my friend Matt Dillahunty likes to say, just because you've solved the easiest question in the world doesn't make you a genius.
That is so ultimately true.
Right. So thanks for that message, though.
For the time and I know that most of the viewers want to see religious colors.
All right. Well, thanks for calling.
Thank you for taking my call.
I'll see you.
Mario in Tucson, Arizona.
Hi.
How are you?
I'm good.
So I was wondering, I don't really have a lot of Christian friends.
I mean, well, fundamentalists, I suppose, or apologists that kind of like run my ideas fast.
Contradictions I find within the Bible.
And so I was wondering if you could possibly play like devil advocate in this situation.
Angels advocate.
So one person in particular, Matthew 1231 says, and so I tell you every kind of sin and flander can be forgiven, but blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.
And so this is like the only unforgivable sin, which I find ridiculous, but doesn't I just want to know what your thoughts were on that.
Maybe if you could give an apologist statement and maybe explain where born again Christians think that they can find salvation.
I don't have a strong opinion on that.
You guys.
Yeah, I wouldn't know how to answer the second question.
I mean, the issue about blasphemy is that under Jewish law at the time, blasphemy just meant uttering the actual name of God in a non-reverent way.
So blasphemy against the Holy Spirit is almost an unintelligible statement in the context of ancient Judaism.
So we're not really sure what that statement really meant and what particular issue the Christians who wrote that passage were trying to address.
Almost certainly Jesus never said those words.
That was the invention of the later Christian community.
They were dealing with some sort of issue in their community that we don't know about because we don't have the documentation of what kind of problems they were dealing with in their church.
But someone just inserted that line in Jesus's mouth in the gospel to just have him advocate whatever position they were trying to advocate.
We don't really know what it was because we don't have the context for it.
Yeah, I mean, the only thing I'd say to this and questions like this in general is that there is no the Christian answer because with 33,000 different branches of Christianity and a lot of other religions in the world,
ultimately all this stuff is at best loosely based on this book that was assembled over a few centuries.
And so if you read up a little bit on the history of how fundamentalism came to be such a uniquely American tradition, you'll find that people are basically constructing their own theologies as they go along.
And anytime that you branch out, you know, anytime that you have a disagreement with your parent organization, a lot of times what will happen is you just branch out into a new sect of Christianity.
Right.
You know, I don't want to, like, make you go hunting down fundamentalist churches or anything and ask them.
But really, I think the problem with asking us is that we don't take any of it seriously.
And there would be a different answer depending on who you ask and what you've decided to believe in their own minds.
Okay, I suppose it's also furthermore asks that or supposes that God is not all powerful because he cannot forgive unconditionally, whereas as people people can so if someone gets like hits my dog and gets away with it, you know, driving,
I could come to forgive that person without them ever needing to ask for it.
And so this then supposes that I can do more than God, right?
Yeah, yeah.
That's a spot on statement.
There's a lot of ways you can use that argument.
I mean, whenever you're trying to use the argument from evil, they'll always come back with trying all these excuses for why God can't fix the world.
And you go, but I would fix the world if I had God's powers.
And therefore, what am I nicer than God?
Is that even possible?
You are nicer than God.
Thank you.
I've seen you in action.
I can't argue with that.
But yeah, you're absolutely right.
If there's things that we can actually do that God cannot do, that does mean we have powers that God does not have.
And that refutes the whole concept of omnipotence.
Thanks, guys, for your input.
All right.
Thanks for calling.
Bye.
We've got Jennifer from here in Austin.
Hello.
Hi, Jennifer.
Hi.
I have two questions.
And the first one is, it seems like a lot of times when you talk to atheists, they start from the premise that personal experience has been established to be unreliable.
But we rely on personal experience all the time.
Like in courtroom, the value of eyewitness testimony, that's the fundamental evidence.
The jury can take it and believe it or not believe it, but the value of personal testimony, not hearsay, what someone else has told you has been their experience.
But what you experienced yourself, the value of putting it forward, is still considered primary.
And it's a foundational principle of the U.S.
And we also rely on personal experience all the time.
Like if you're going to do something like climb the Himalayas and you've never done it, you read about people who have done that before and they say, you know, that whatever else to I experienced this.
You don't know, but you believe them.
You take precautions or you prepare based on what they experienced.
And so it seems like the value of personal experience has not been proven to be unreliable.
And then the second question is that it seems like something can be understood or it can't.
It's understandable or it's not.
And like Catholics start from the premise that the nature of reality can't be understood.
It's not understandable.
And atheists seem to start from the premise that, you know, reality is a process that could be understood.
But if it could, why don't we understand any more than we did like 2,000 years ago?
We have theory, you know, the theory of the Big Bang, but when you look at what complexity theorists say,
they say that there's still a lot of leaps that have to be made in thinking to make the concepts work.
You know, like it's not established. We still don't fully understand it.
And so if the nature of reality is understandable, why don't we understand more about it today than we did say 2,000 years ago?
Well, let's take that one at a time.
I probably should have interrupted you before going on to the second one.
Personal experience. Is it reliable?
Well, you have to realize it's not binary. It's not like all personal experience is reliable or no personal experience is reliable.
It's not like you're choosing to, you know, deny all experience or accept all experience. That's not how it works.
Personal experience has a certain probability of being reliable.
And what you're looking at is when the particular claim the person is making is going to have an intrinsic prior probability.
So if they're saying, you know, aliens abducted them or they're saying they saw a horde of demons attack them in their room or something like that,
we know from past experience that that usually turns out to be hallucinatory or not true.
And so for a personal experience to overcome that, we need a lot more evidence than that.
We need a superbly good personal experience or we need a lot of it from a lot of different sources, a lot of different witnesses,
or we need physical evidence.
You're talking about like standards of evidence that professional historians would take into account.
Oh, absolutely. Yeah. This is what I do in the book. It's Bayesian reasoning where you have to weigh the different possibilities.
So certain kinds of testimonies are unreliable or obviously unreliable because they make improbable claims.
And so for those claims to be upheld, you need more than just someone claiming it.
I mean, like what about, you know, people who wrote Gospels who said, you know, they wrote it after they say Jesus died and they say, you know, they witnessed it.
Oh, but they don't.
They were closer in time.
Yeah. None of the Gospels were written by anyone who says they saw any of the stuff they wrote down.
In fact, they don't even tell us who they are or how they know anything that they haven't.
They don't tell us their sources. They don't tell us their methods, which is very weird.
I mean, 50 years in the big scheme of things is not that much time.
And so actually it is. I made this point.
I just want to say I'm so excited to get this call with Richard.
I made this point.
It's a lot less than, you know, 1,550 years.
Well, let's talk about Roswell, New Mexico.
In 1947, this Air Force officer found some sticks and tinfoil in the desert and he claimed it was debris from a flying saucer.
Within just 30 to 40 years.
And this is in the 20th century with universal literacy, newspapers, photographs, the whole deal.
Within just 30 to 40 years, an entire legend had built up about the government discovering an entire intact flying saucer
that they recovered alien bodies from and performed autopsies on.
That's just 30 to 40 years.
So it's the exact same timeline that we're looking at with the Gospels.
Legends can spring up really fast.
It's starting from a not an eyewitness account.
Well, yeah, it is actually.
No, he said he found something.
Well, from what you said, he said he found something.
Yeah, it was published in the newspaper.
Yeah, it was in the newspaper with photographs of the debris that he found from 1947.
But you didn't say he said he saw the ship's sound.
No, no, that was what people were telling just 30 to 40 years later.
And so when we look at the Gospels, we don't know where these people were getting their stories.
They're not eyewitnesses themselves.
They don't claim to know any eyewitnesses.
They don't even tell us what their sources are.
Well, why are they written as a description?
I mean, it's written as an eyewitness description.
It actually isn't.
It's like Jesus was on the cross, then he asked for a drink.
Oh, no, no.
Oh, you know what?
I highly recommend that you can do some more research on this.
For example, the crucifixion account is almost entirely based on clips from the Psalms.
They just took passages.
If I had time, I could dig out an example from my book.
But the language is like first person.
I mean, I've read it.
Yeah, but the language is biblical.
We can look at eyewitness accounts.
We have, for example, Lucian of Samosata wrote an account of him encountering a new religion in what's now Turkey.
It's called Alexander the Quack Prophet.
You could probably find examples of it online, but that's what an eyewitness account looks like.
The Gospels aren't written like that at all.
If you look at Caesar's Civil War, he writes it in third person, but it's still an eyewitness account.
And again, it's written very differently than what we see in the Gospels.
The Gospels look a lot like mythology.
We have a lot of examples of other religions that were coming up with documents that are written in the same kind of voice.
And there were, in fact, about 40 different Gospels.
And we know about 10 to 12 of them that we have mostly intact or largely intact.
And we know a lot of those have to be false, and yet they read a lot like the Gospels we have in the New Testament.
So it was actually very common to fabricate narratives in the form that we see in the Gospels in the New Testament.
But I know from personally reading the Gospels that it sounds like a first person account.
Oh, we'll see.
I think what you need to do is you have to understand these books were written 2,000 years ago in a different language, in a different culture.
So if you want to understand that...
So it was written in time.
No, but my point is you have to look at what literature was like back then.
So you can't judge it based on the standards of what you're used to reading today because what people write today is very different.
The styles they write, the way they choose words, the way they construct stories is entirely different today than it was 2,000 years ago.
Yeah, and to circle back to your original question about how reliable personal experience is,
I mean, you're telling us that you have this personal experience of having read the Gospels and just knowing by reading it,
like knowing and inherently understanding what's going on in there.
Even though there is this whole system of historians having read it and compared notes and comparing it to things that they already know.
Tell me whether something is written as a first person account or not.
I can judge that for myself.
I can read it and I could be like, this sounds like a third person.
I'll give you an example.
It sounds like an omniscient point of view.
This sounds like a first person.
I can make that judgment myself.
But they aren't, actually.
They aren't even written in first person by a standard literary theory.
So here's the Gospel of Mark, chapter 15, verse 24.
It reads, literally, they part his garments among them, casting lots upon them.
Now here's Psalm 22, verse 18.
They part my garments among them and cast lots upon them.
It's almost identical words to words.
But what are the psalms supposed to be like prophecy?
So if it were true.
Mark is writing in the third person, the psalms are writing in the first person.
The psalms were written hundreds of years before.
But if I had the prophecy and then it was experienced.
See, that's the thing, you can say that.
But they're using the exact word for word, exact same statement.
And it doesn't even say it's a filled prophecy.
To get back to the point, I was really asking a question.
But it's third person.
It's not first person.
It's just they part his garments among them.
I've watched a couple of your shows and people will call and they'll be like,
my mom said she saw a demon in a room or you know, my friend.
And then a lot of times the first responses.
Well, you know, I would say I wasn't there.
I don't have your experience and I can't tell whether that really happened or not.
But you said that this sort of thing goes in courts and I can guarantee you that if somebody came in as a witness in court and said,
and then I saw a demon rise up out of the earth,
it's really unlikely that the judge or jury would take that into account as a serious explanation for,
let's say a murder trial or embezzlement where somebody said,
suddenly this demon made all this money disappear for the company's account.
But the value of the experience for it to be judged by the fact finder,
whether it's a jury or a judge.
The value of the person saying it and then the listener interpreting it is primary.
Chris really sounds like he's got something to say.
I want to jump in here.
You talk about eyewitness testimony being so reliable and it's the ultimate piece of evidence in our court system
and that's just not true at all.
If you look at the reliability of eyewitness testimony, it is terrible.
You put a room full of people and you show them something and then ask them what they saw.
You'll get many different answers and people have been convicted wrongly based on people who were sure this is who they saw
and they were wrong and it's very, very easy to fool yourself to think you saw something.
If you don't remember clearly, your brain will just make up stuff to fill in the gaps
and we've demonstrated that thousands of times in different studies.
Eyewitness testimony is actually really, really unreliable.
One of the leading researchers on that.
It's true what you're saying.
You put people in a room and then it's like, what's the guy wearing his tie?
And three of them say yes and two of them say no.
But we still hold that as meaningful.
Well, we shouldn't.
Chris was just saying we don't.
We don't and that would be a bad thing for everybody so we shouldn't do that.
You have to wait.
I'm an attorney and I've taken a really unconventional route.
I took my studies extremely seriously looking at the purpose of the system
and the procedure that we've established.
People from all different backgrounds coming together and deciding this is what we're going to do.
This has meaning and this is useful.
Despite the errors, this is the most fair way we can assess what's going on
and we still have witnesses.
We still take in witness accounts and we still say all relevant witnesses can be in place.
You know, witnesses can lie.
Witnesses can be deceived.
Witnesses can misreport badly.
I mean, you must know this if you've been in court.
Certainly if you're a defense attorney, you must have actually used these arguments that I'm using myself
in defense of your client.
Well, the thing is that sometimes they are telling the truth.
Sometimes, yes.
It's a thing that's primary for the witness.
You say what they're thinking for the fact finder to be like,
well, I think your mom was lying.
Yeah, but it certainly depends at least as much on the nature of the testimony
as the content of the testimony itself.
I mean, if you, you know, if today you were to have somebody walk into court
and say I saw this guy die and three days later rise from the dead
or I saw a ghost show up in my house,
that would be one of the least likely things that you were going to accept in court
as relevant to the case.
Well, it depends on what the case was about, whether it would be right.
Really?
I don't think so, actually.
Wow.
Actually, by Supreme Court ruling, spectral evidence is not allowed.
Yeah, by 16th century ruling.
We don't know what's trying to be proved.
I mean, it would depend on what kind of case it was.
I mean, you're talking about a dread case where someone killed someone else
and, you know, they're saying what they experienced
and that's why they killed that person.
And it's like, was it intentional?
Was it not intentional?
Are they lying?
It depends on what's being proved.
So, I mean, to my second question, as far as, you know,
whether things, you know, everything is understandable or it's not.
I can answer that one because this is right in my field.
But you, please go ahead.
Do we understand more than we did 2,000 years ago?
My PhD's primary subject is history of science.
So, and I studied ancient science.
So I actually, a lot of what I've done is certainly in my dissertation
was compare what we knew scientifically about the world
in the first and second century AD
with what we know about the world today.
And it's mind-bogglingly vastly more understanding today than we had.
I mean, just bewildering how much more understanding we have today.
So much so that what we've thoroughly established
over the last, since the scientific revolution in the 17th century
in just the last few hundred years,
we've thoroughly established that the scientific method is so incredibly effective
that it can take our understanding of the world
and multiply it millions and millions of times.
I mean, which it has done so since 1600.
So we know, what does anything we know is that science works exceedingly well.
And the only thing that actually interferes with our advance,
that slows it down perhaps, is technological access to the data.
A lot of the things, the questions we can't answer today,
we only can't answer because we just don't have the particular machine
that can see the thing that we want to look at.
Or, you know, in particular ways, for example, brain science.
To really understand how the brain works,
we would need a functional brain scanner that can scan the brain as it works
down to the resolution of individual synaptic connections.
We just haven't developed that technology yet,
but within 50 or 60 years we may have scanners that can do that.
And that's just a technological obstacle.
The thing that I'm wondering, so like with that example you just gave,
we know that it is understandable, but we're not there yet.
Sure.
What Richard is saying, though, is that there are always more,
no, excuse me, I'm going to put you on hold.
I need to talk.
What Richard is saying is that we never have all the answers.
And it certainly isn't going to ever be the case that we're done looking for stuff
because, as humans, we like collecting more and more knowledge over time.
But to say that because we haven't obtained an infinite amount of knowledge,
we therefore have zero knowledge, or exactly the same knowledge as we did 100 years ago
when we lived maybe half as long on average.
When we didn't have immediate access to everything that was going on
around the globe through electronic communications.
When we didn't have as thorough a knowledge of human reproduction, for example,
or people still believed that the Earth, that the Sun goes around the Earth, right?
To say that we've accumulated all this knowledge, and yet we know exactly the same amount as we did 2,000 years ago,
is just untrue.
But when it comes to God, knowing where the God exists.
Well, that's actually a really good point.
With all the knowledge that we've been able to gain over all this time,
we've learned nothing new about God.
With the brain science example, we are aware that it's understandable,
but we don't have the talk technology yet.
But when it comes to the existence of God, we are no further along.
Yeah, to me that's an indication that there's no...
We've been looking with a fine-toothed comb and found nothing.
We've been trying as hard as we can, but to me that's an indication...
It may be that God exists, but it's not understandable.
Like, you can...
Or...
Let me add to this, if it's not understandable, then Catholicism is false, right?
No, that's the primary premise.
But if you can't understand God, then you can't actually have any true beliefs about God.
That doesn't make sense.
If you have a true belief about God, you're claiming to understand something about God,
and therefore God is not...
You don't have to understand something for it to exist.
For you to understand what it is that's true, yeah.
If you're going to make any statement that has any meaning that's true about God,
that means you understand something about God, and therefore God is understandable.
Well, then we go back to personal experience.
Really, the question is...
We don't think it's reliable.
Hey, Jennifer, we're running out of...
Thank you for your time.
Yeah, we're running out of time, but this is...
I mean, it's a great conversation, and I'd welcome you to call back anytime.
Okay, thank you.
Thanks, bye.
And I think we've got more for Chris to talk about.
Alan in Fort Morgan, Colorado.
Alan?
Hi, how's it going?
Hi, how are you?
We've got about three minutes of real showtime to fill, so make it quick.
All right.
Well, I don't know if this has been touched on because I kind of died in the show a little bit late,
but me, I'm an atheist.
I've been an atheist for about five, six years now,
and felt very relieved to get away from religion, things like that.
But the thing is, you know, when you guys are talking about things like finding happiness in life as an atheist,
one of the things that really brings me a lot of joy is my family.
However, they're very religious, and they don't quite like my position as an atheist,
so how do you reconcile being, you know, an atheist who sees a lot of joy in life
if the thing that gives you joy is such as family is contrary to your position?
Chris, I'm pretty sure you own this topic.
Yeah.
Sure, Richard doesn't want to take it.
No, no, this is Chris's for sure.
I mean, that can be really tough if you have a family that's not really accepting of your way of life.
I mean, it's like, you know, if you're gay and your family doesn't accept that, it's a very similar kind of thing.
I mean, just you can create your own community, you can create your own family in a way,
and you can still be a part of a family even if you disagree on a particular topic.
I mean, I don't think anyone agrees 100% with everything everyone in their family thinks,
so it's not like an all-or-nothing thing.
I think you can still have a relationship with your family.
I know many people who have relationships with very religious family members,
and they find ways of making it work, either just not talking about it
or sometimes hashing it out and talking about it,
coming to an understanding, you know, to agree to disagree kind of thing.
So it is possible, I think.
Trying to find common ground on values, I think, is one of the most important things.
If you could just find out where you agree on just basic values, human values,
how humans should be treated, what you should think about the way that you should treat people in the world and so on.
If you can find enough common ground there, you can build and maintain a relationship,
even if you have other different beliefs.
I think that's where the problem can arise.
If you have fundamentally different values, like you were saying,
if you're gay and your parents think you're going to hell because you're gay,
well, now you've got a fundamental conflict in values,
and I think there's probably, unless they're going to change on that, there's really nothing that you can do.
I mean, that's a difficult thing.
And if you're in that situation, the next best thing is, like you said, is to try and create your own family.
Like, you can get a group of friends together, develop friendships in your life that are like family,
and just make your own family.
I guess the resident Joss Whedon fan?
I don't know.
Oh, excuse me.
Oh, so we have two here at least.
That's the theme.
Just about out of time.
That's the theme of Joss Whedon's, many of Joss Whedon's shows and things.
Watch more Joss Whedon.
Take one thing away from the show today.
I want to thank Richard Carrier and Chris Johnson for being an incredible guest today.
Thanks for being here.
And our fantastic audience.
See you all at El Royo and tune in next week.
