The following conversation between Gregory Landway, Daniel Schmockdenberger, and Jason
Snyder was recorded for the Planetary Regeneration podcast hosted by Gregory.
It is being shared here to include the Doomer Optimism community.
All right.
Wow, I'm super, super stoked about this episode of the Planetary Regeneration podcast.
I have my friends, Daniel Schmockdenberger and Jason Snyder, to dig into a conversation
about the edges and potential of localism, global coordination, failures, challenges,
and opportunities, and super grateful for both of your time this afternoon, this evening.
And yeah, just stoked to dive in.
Maybe I'll just do a quick introduction for each of you.
I'm pretty sure that most guests, listeners, that is, know both of you, but I'll start
with Daniel.
So Daniel Schmockdenberger is, I think, really one of the more rigorous and interesting thinkers
amongst a particular emerging field of thought that is exploring, I don't know, I've heard
this sort of broadly, this loose confederation of people referred to as Game B a little bit,
although in some ways, Daniel, I don't totally put you in that category, but at least Game
B adjacent and provocative and sort of like leading a lot of those conversations.
And Jason, you're one of the co-conveners and co-creators of the Doomer Optimism movement
and podcast, and I think this is sort of a meeting of different but similar ways of thinking
about the meta-crisis and maybe in some way the meta-opportunity or potential for we humans
and how to inhabit the earth in a better way.
So with that, I'd love it, maybe pass it over to you, Daniel, just to say hello and maybe
anything you want to just frame out or say hello to the audience and then Jason, get
your voice in there.
And then I think after we do a quick round, let's jump into the meat of the conversation
here together.
I'll let you take it from here, Daniel.
Well, thank you for having me.
It's really good to be here.
Greg, I remember you and I were talking about this when we met at a conference some number
of months ago and we're talking about potential downsides to exclusively localist focus.
And so I look forward to getting into that content.
But I have always appreciated your work that is looking at how to have tech in service
of nature rather than the idea that a high-nature world means a low-tech world or a high-nature
tech world is exploitative of nature because if some subset of the population tries a lower
tech world and the other doesn't, the ones trying a lower tech world simply can't influence
the ones that have a higher tech world all that much because the tech ends up equaling
power.
So how do we get tech in service of ecology and foundational humanity, I think, is critically
important and regenerative focus.
And I am just meeting Jason, but since I work on catastrophic risk, the doomer optimism
theme is good because our approach is to take all of the catastrophic risks collectively
as the design constraints for what humanity has to coordinate to make it through and to
look at only those models of civilization and make it through all the catastrophic risks
as viable, which is definitely taking a well-informed-by-the-doom approach and then looking at how to thread
that needle as the optimist approach or what we can call post-cynical optimism sometimes.
So looking forward to seeing where we go.
Great.
Well, hello.
Pleasure to be here.
I've known Gregory for a little while and I'd like to say that we're friends and sometimes
we argue about things, but that's good.
Daniel, I've followed your work on podcasts for a few years and I feel like it's been
very useful for me to help frame my thinking, so it's an honor to be in conversation with
both of you.
I guess here I'm representing the doomer optimism podcast in world, even if it's not a monolithic
thing.
So I don't know to the degree that I can represent it.
I'm happy to be here.
Yeah.
And thanks for being here, Jason.
I forgot to mention, I think we're going to be co-releasing this on the doomer optimism
feed and the planetary regeneration feed.
So I'm pretty excited about that cross-pollination.
So just to start out, Daniel, I love the framing of high-tech, high-nature, low-tech, high-nature,
low-nature, high-tech, this sort of quadrant framework, probably you could sort of think
of it with tech and nature on opposing sides and what happens when you're strategically
oriented in those different ways.
So do you want to just take a brief moment to expand on that as a framework for thinking
about strategies in the 21st century for people who are kind of bumping up against the metacrisis,
the meaning crisis and thinking about vocations and life ways and what the hell do we all
do as individuals or as communities?
Yeah, sure.
I think if you put it on a two-by-two grid like that, high and low nature, high and low
tech, from where we are and with the implicit coordination dynamics that have to be dealt
with, I think the way you framed it, the high technology, high nature, and more specifically
technology in service of the rejection of nature and our ability to continue to engage
with it, part of it is the only quadrant that can forward.
The low-nature, high-tech is the one we're on, right, we just use our technology to nature
into trash faster than either side of that open loop can reject health trash and pollution.
And if you think about rising out of nature, building tech, using the tech to compete with
other humans to convert nature into commodities, pollution, and waste faster, that is obviously
us using our exponentially increasing capability to destroy the substrate that we depend upon.
I'm not thinking of nature as a substrate, it is a good way of thinking about it because
it leads to this kind of extract way of being, people thinking about nature as intrinsically
meaningful, beautiful, sacred, and that our life should be in relationship to and in
service to it is much better, but even from just a kind of human utilitarian view in so
far as we emerge out of, and it is our substrate, any system that debases the substrate it depends
on is in the process of self-terminating.
So the increasing tech that way, right, a linear materials economy that is looking at
nature as natural resources to be extracted, and the other side of that after they're used
for a short period of time is pollution and waste, and we're extracting them faster than
they can replenish, so we get depletion and all the planetary boundaries on the depletion
side, loss of species, loss of soil, loss of hydrocarbons, phosphorus, blah, blah, blah.
Then turning them into waste and pollution on the other side, faster than they can be
processed, climate change, chemical planetary boundaries, mining wastes, etc.
All the planetary boundaries come from high tech.
With our financial system having embedded growth obligations and a linear materials economy
being what coordinates how that tech works, and so to not cross all the planetary boundaries,
we have to address that.
If you tried to say, well, what about the low tech ones?
Low tech, low nature is like the image of some kind of post-apocalyptic scorched earth.
There's a few humans left on a shady biosphere in a caveman-like life.
High nature, low tech might seem like a nice option, except it's not inactable.
This is where we were historically, but if unless the entire world agrees to all decrease
its tech, then whoever doesn't, whether they have more military tech or more extraction
tech, whatever, they're going to grow their populations faster when in warfare, have more
geopolitical influence, all those other things.
Because whoever is seeking to do something that is in service to nature that doesn't
cross planetary boundaries has to influence everyone else, because it's not like people
in some area can solve a planetary boundary by themselves, and yet they're all affected
by the planetary boundary.
If we want to avoid breaking the hydrological pump of the Amazon or having fluorinated surfactants
everywhere, kill everything, or species extinction, we have to change what China does and what
India does and what Europe does and what the US do, which means you've got to have a model
that either they're going to adopt, which means that whatever you're doing has to actually
be able to influence.
And so realizing that there isn't a king of everything that can say, let's degrowth
and lower tech, then you don't want some groups opting to do a thing that isn't enough to
change the planetary reality and definitely can't influence the rest of the scenario.
So how do you use the top tools of coordination and technology in a way that regenerates rather
than depletes and that has the capacity to influence the rest of the world to adopt them
in time seems to me the only way forward?
Word that totally mimics my analysis and view.
There's a whole bundle of questions there that I'm really excited to dig into with both of you.
I think I kind of want to weave your voice in here, Jason, just, you know, what emerges
for you when you hear this sort of, you know, kind of, I think Daniel's staking out a pretty
clear perspective, which I basically agree with that, you know, if you think about this
hard, you sort of realistically, we have to be acting in the high tech, high nature quadrant.
I think, you know, I like that framing, it matches my logical perspective.
And I know that that's not going to match a lot of people's perspective in the
doomer optimism community, who are going to be thinking maybe there are ways to move forward
with a low tech, high nature existence or transformation.
So I'm just curious, you know, what are your thoughts and questions after listening to Daniel?
Yeah, OK. Well, I guess, first, I would want to question what kind of high tech I think most of
us enjoy the Internet, and we're often reflective that we do enjoy the Internet,
and what it enables, even though you were kind of let I adjust adjacent.
And so what does that mean? I would also want to kind of question you guys on how you would have
high tech without sacrifice zones, all of the mining of, say, the copper that would go into
all the renewable energy technologies and infrastructure for digital technologies in general.
What so I guess for me, the question isn't so much high tech versus low tech, but what is the
appropriate technology? And then bring in your challenge, Daniel, with the with the multipolar
traps. You know, I don't think I can argue with you. I think your logic is correct.
One lens that I often use is I happen to think that in many ways, collapse is happening,
or is going to be happening faster, both because of planetary boundaries, but also
because of energy throughput, just the amount of available dense energy,
as well as minerals and materials. And so we cannot continue this embedded growth obligation
on global scale. We cannot continue extracting materials in a literally linear economy and,
depositing them as waste in various parts of the world. And so I don't think I disagree with you
guys, but I think this conversation would be good to kind of flesh out what would high tech mean
in a world of planetary limits? Where are the sacrifice zones going to be? Are we going to
recycle all of these technologies? Where are we going to get the energy to do that? These are the
kinds of questions that I'm interested in. Of course, if we can use technology to regenerate
the earth, which is, I think, what your focus is, I agree, that sounds great, but can we also
live meaningful lives in our relationships to technology in a kind of Ilychian sense?
That would be good too, right? So maybe we're in a high tech world, but our personal
kind of community aesthetics are more like cottage core, solar punk. And so what does that look like?
So yeah, I think if we can explore these things, that would be good.
There's so many things embedded in what was just discussed. I think where I'll start is that we're
already in collapse and that maybe some people are thinking about living in a post-collapse
environment. I think I'd like to make some distinctions between things like post-growth
and post-collapse. I don't know if anyone here is familiar with Nate Hagen's work. I'm imagining
they are based on something I just heard you say, Jason, but Nate and I just did this whole
bin not break series on what it would take to get to a sustainable global materials economy without
radical collapse. But yeah, I just want to note that I do follow him closely and I did listen
to that series. So if we're thinking about the various types of collapse scenarios, various types
of catastrophic risk scenarios, I would like to decrease anyone's faith that their off-grid world
makes it through. And this is where the doomer part comes as a good breakfast to where optimism might
live. So if we're talking about climate change and other environmental refugees at the scale that
we're probably forecasting at UN saying 300 million to maybe a billion in the next 10 plus years,
and that after a few million Syrian refugees, nobody wants to take refugees anymore,
and that we're not talking about ocean level rise or venusification to cause this,
just extreme weather events hitting high population areas, and that how does that work? How does that
play out? Is that just really a bummer for a lot of people in poor parts of the world who have
very shitty lives in refugee camps? Nope, not in most of the scenarios. I mean, that itself would
be gruesome, but we see the heat waves in the Bangladesh or Pakistan or Iran or whatever as a
issue over there because if you have tens of millions of people, they get displaced because
they don't have enough groundwater in the store to make it through a crop loss from a heat failure.
So now we're looking at migration of the people and without enough resources and nowhere to take
them, we start to get resource wars. But you're looking at that happening on say in India where
it probably cleaves along Muslim Hindu lines, which maybe turns into a new nuclear conflict
between India and Pakistan or it happens in Iran and you similarly have adjacent country
nuclear conflict zones or you hit major supply lines of a world where everybody's supply depends
upon six continent dynamics and that the solution to fighting World War III, we instituted after
World War II, involved exponential growth of the economic system, which involved exponential
extraction so that we the major superpowers didn't have to take each other's stuff to keep growing
and that as soon as you start to go post growth, you actually remove the basis of the
not World War III solution. You don't get the situation where these impending catastrophes
are a problem over there that if I have a pretty good off-grid place in Montana or whatever,
I for sure make it through. Also, you guys probably saw the article on PFOS that was published a
couple months ago showing that fluorinated surfactants and rainwater globally already
passed planetary boundaries as defined by EPA and EU Health Regulatory Commission.
But what we're seeing there is in rainwater and in snowfall all around the world, including in
the places people are off-grid, you have higher than allowed healthful standards of chemicals
that don't ever break down that are endocrine disruptors and carcinogens and like that that
don't just affect the humans, but also affect the soil microbes and nature and everything else in
the area. So the idea that I can somehow separate myself from humanity because it's on this cluster
fuck drain, I'm going to go and be fine with my family. From the point of view of the nuclear war,
the breakdowns in the internet and supply chains, I'm depending upon to literally the quality of
the rainwater from the atmosphere I'm in. We are too interconnected to think that way.
The optimist approaches for me involve actually thinking through how to transition globally
for everybody. That strategy is the low-money version of the rich person's doomsday bunker,
which is the elite sea, some said of the elite sea, high probability of breakdown of Pax Americana
and like fuck world situation. So they have a private jet with a tank full of fuel and a
piloting for one of their multiple doomsday bunker scenarios where they can make it through
while everybody else is fucked. And I want to radically decrease their confidence in that strategy.
I also want to decrease the Key Nation-State strategy that they can make it through a large
scale war and win. But I want to decrease the low-cost version of it too. Now, of course,
I think people having a certain degree of local resilience is smart, not in so far as it means
forgetting the way the local is embedded in the larger contexts and that we are not just responsible
to ourselves, our family and our locality, but also to the world that we're contextualized in.
So I have a lot of other things to say about the where are the sacrifice zones and what level of
high tech does it take for the chip manufacturing to be able to have the internet that you want and
satellite launches and everything. But I'll just start with that part on the problem of the escape
route ideology. Love it, Jason. I'm going to kind of turn it over to you for this section of dialogue,
like just hear your responses there. Yeah, I don't personally resonate much with the escape route
ideology, but I tend to think that there's an interesting congruence between that and what I
think we need to transition more to is a more kind of distributed living systems, more localized
living systems, at least with more emphasis on subsidiarity or multi-scale localism, acknowledging
that many things do occur at, say, a global scale. I'm interested in kind of building up
a bioregional organization. And so, and I just noticed that so many of us, at least
in the West, are very unresilient, right? And so we don't know how to do things with our hands
anymore. We don't know how to fix things. We don't know how to grow food. We're completely dependent
on global supply chains. And so for me, the more people get inspired to become locally resilient,
the better off the larger system is going to be in general. And so while I don't think that anybody
can hide out in a bunker and expect to do well in the long term, I agree with you wanting to decrease
confidence in that. But I think that moving in that direction, localizing as much as possible,
is generally a good thing to do and will have good, larger system effects.
Greg, this now gets us to the original place you wanted to go in the conversation. Should we go there?
Yeah, let's go there. I'm sort of keeping track of a few things that I want to observe and
interject, but I think let's just keep this flow. It's going perfectly.
I think in general, the idea of increasing local resilience so in so far as there are
inevitable failures anywhere, they don't create cascading failures everywhere.
One of the things we saw during COVID was when the shutdowns of travel happened to prevent
movement of a virus. It also meant prevent movement in supply chains. And one of the things that
meant was the movement of pesticides. So we got locusts eating all the crops in parts of
Northern Africa and the Middle East and preventing the movement of NPK. And so all the places that
depended upon that kind of fertilizer. So I think obviously those are bad agricultural
technologies anyways, factoring all the externalities. But yeah, I don't think we want a situation
where you have a problem in one part of the world and we get that much cascading failure.
I think it's also true, as someone was mentioning earlier, thinking about not just the metacrisis
of the catastrophic risk, but the meaning crisis. I don't think there is such a thing as a meaning
crisis if people are connected in person in high intimacy connections to people around them,
which obviously is the evolutionary environment of humans in a kind of tribal world.
So more connection to the earth, more connection to the physical environment,
we're in more connection to the humans around us and more resilience to cascading failures,
all that seems pretty nice. The other thing that we need to factor with that is it ends up being
inevitable that people in two different regions interact sometimes in some ways.
This has been true since the earliest humans. Having positive some interactions has kind of
always been the way to avoid negative some interaction. So if we're seeing all the existing
into competition over resource limits, generally, and some kind of warfare with them ends up being
an appropriate strategy, if they're producing slightly different things than we are and we get
to go into trade or exchange with them, then that positive interaction is more desirable.
So that's like an ancient technology, the trading post and etc. And that is not purely localism,
because once you get things that are valuable from another area and they start to differentiate
their capacity to make those better based on their locality, specialty, whatever,
you do start to get dependence. The most recent instantiation of that in a formal way or one of
them was after World War II and the desire to never have another world war, because you can't
have a world war in a post nuclear world and ensure that anybody actually comes out of it.
The globalization of the supply chains and the formalization of the financial service enabling
all the trade was a part of the solution. The financial system obviously, as we already mentioned,
if you get exponential growth of the global economy, everybody's impulse to have more can be
met without having to take each other's stuff. The problem is you're taking nature stuff and
eventually you stop being able to do that, which is what we're hitting now. But the other side of
it is when you have these six continent supply chains, if you bomb anybody, you're bombing your
own supply chains, you have a strong incentive not to bomb people somewhere else where you depend
upon the stuff they're producing. And in so far as everywhere could produce its own stuff locally,
we are less actually interdependent with what the people in the other areas are doing.
And so then there's this question of, well, do we produce our own food and process our own
bio waste, but we don't produce our own computers and biotech and whatever. Well, whatever we don't
produce ourselves, we're dependent on and there's fragility. But we also are interdependent by
directionally and as a result, have to figure out how to make things work with each other.
And I think one of the, like, there's not enough trust in this global system, the global system
is fuck, let's regress to something smaller than global creates a kind of regressive nationalism
and also a regressive tribalism and localism of like, we'll take care of our own, we don't need
you. But it is first, it's just incongruent with all the people who still like access to biotechnologies
that their community doesn't produce, should they end up actually getting in a situation that needs
it and they still like computers and things like that. But it also, it just doesn't work, right?
Because if the AI apocalypse or the synthetic bio or the movement towards nuclear war is happening
anywhere else outside of our community, we're still fucked. And so ultimately, our technology is
big enough to affect the whole world that everybody has to be invested in what everybody
else is doing. And so this is a place where localism can be anti productive counterproductive
because being forced to stay invested in what everybody else is doing can be important to
the scale of solutions. So I do believe that there are things that should occur locally,
you get the benefits of less transportation and more freshness and tighter closed loops and the
ability to see externalities more as well as resilience. But I also believe there's a lot
of things that should not be local because they happen more efficiently with economies of scale
and because the interconnectivity of each other is actually in the interdependence is really
important. So that's the things that have to be held in tension. Yeah, fantastic. Thanks, Daniel.
And I think this is very, this is the rich part of the conversation. And I kind of wanted to weave
in a little bit of my perspective here, which is, you know, if we're framing this out, I really
appreciate the clarity of framing the way that, you know, however we talk about it, the neoliberal
global order in which globalized trade and a globalized financial system is the antidote
to, you know, World War Three and, you know, nuclear Armageddon. And I think it's important
to understand that that is actually the inspiration of the institutions that have set up the world
that we now live in. And it's super clear, okay, and that is at the expense of Mother Earth,
of nature, of living systems. I think that's a crystal clear analysis. And really, you know,
from that analysis, my personal perspective is, if you shift the financial system such that
value becomes not just an ecological debit, ecological credit balancing system,
but that we actually start to derive status, wealth, and acknowledge the value of living systems
of nature, both from a sacred and completely unquantifiable way, and like a veneration way,
an ethical way, a moral way, an artistic way, an aesthetic way, as well as a quantified way.
And this is sort of like, I have a lot of thinking about currencies and money as
properly multivalent. It should be a wave antiparticle, it should be sacred and able to be
used in transaction. But that's maybe a different conversation for a different day.
But if we close that loop, then what happens, I believe what happens, is the aesthetic values
and the sort of like regenerative efficiency of local people taking action to care for local places
and live good local lives that are tending those food forests and caring for those riparian
buffers and stewarding those forests becomes financially advantaged without, you know, like
place, you know, and we're using and leveraging technology to achieve that. And that's in my
mind, and this is very, it's a pretty simple analysis in a lot of ways, but in my mind, that's
the, you know, that's the direction, that's the sort of region direction, which is to say
that's the next step in the evolution of global institutions is to transform our financial system
to place the health, the ecological health of our biosphere and the nested bioregions
and watersheds at the center of how we measure financial wealth.
Yeah, I think saying we want our currencies to be multivalent and to be particle and wave
and to hold nature in a sacred and artistic way, but also a quantified way. I think
at first blush that sounds right. And of course, the devil is in the details on there, right?
So the quantification and then the commensuration of quantified things
is pretty deep to the game theoretic challenge and all of the entropic process we have.
So when we talk about the transformation of what has to be in terms of like our financial system,
there are some things, there's a lot of things to talk about, removing the growth obligation to
have to keep up with just compounding interests, let alone all the other things to force exponential
growth of energy services. Obviously, we have to do that because you can't run that exponential curve
in the finite biosphere forever. That's among guests because we don't know how to make a global
financial system and not World War III any other way. So that's a big... Property rights is a huge
thing. What does it mean to own property? Who owns what property? Given that if my access to a
resource comes from owning it, which also involves preclude other people's access and more stored
resource gives me more capacity to respond to future eventualities and whatever, then if all
revenue gets reinvested, I don't have an embedded growth obligation. If you have profit and you
have extraction of a resource that can give you any other resource, i.e. a currency that has
high fungibility, you have a very high theoretical incentive for maximizing that extraction. I'm
talking about profit as extraction revenue minus expense. So who owns that surplus and how do we
couple or decouple access and stewardship are really important questions, but arguably harder
then and even deeper than those is fungibility of value because if I can turn a tree into lumber
and then I can sell the lumber and buy food or buy other commodities or whatever it is,
pretty soon it's clear that if I cut down trees faster than I need them and have stores of timber,
both because of economies of scale and ease of shipping and whatever, it's more profitable to
do that in many contexts, but then I also don't even want to store the lumber because then before
I can get a new thing, I have to be involved in sale. I just want to store the high liquidity,
high fungibility, high stability global currency and that if you think about money as a unit of
game theoretic power, a unit of choice, but a unit of optionality and so it makes sense that we have
like the dollar as a reserve currency has both the most optionality and the highest speed of
exchange with the most stability and we used OPEC and a whole global system to make that the case,
like of course we did, that thing makes sense, but if I can exchange one thing for another thing
through an exchange layer, the challenge becomes I'm taking things that in reality you can't make
out of each other and making a abstracted value layer where the fungibility in that abstracted
value layer can say I have an incentive to have more of this abstract value token and I can actually
destroy real stuff to get more of this abstract value token, so I can't make a tree out of copper
but I can use money to buy copper or buy trees and so in reality those things are non-fungible
in the economic layer, they're fungible, when I just make economic calculus choices I'll end up
messing up the base layer world, so how do you quantify things but recognize these metrics are
not commensurable, there's no amount of parts per million of mercury that equals any amount of
parts per million of CO2 or any number of extinct species, so how do I decide how much of this is
worth how much of this, there's no fucking real good way to do that and if I try to figure out
some basis of the commensuration of those metrics, we're usually end up getting pretty gruesome
problems there, so do you need to quantify stuff for the accounting, yes, but it's almost like
each non-fungible reality needs its own closed-loop accounting, I need a closed-loop accounting on
copper, I need a closed-loop accounting on nitrogen but I can't have a game-theoretic
optionality token that is fungible between copper and nitrogen and that would look like a
unit of account or a token for every fucking non-fungible thing and some way to close the,
you know, and yet we want something like exchange for the reasons that we mentioned earlier,
so I would say there's some really tricky things in how we do the quantified accounting part
properly. For sure and I think you're hitting the nail on the head, I really, I talk a lot about
that, what is responsible fungification or like when you, how do you translate between non-fungible,
I think that's the big question and I think, you know, there's two ways I think to answer that and
one is, you know, at the end of the day, for it to be useful, you do have to actually be able to
have like an exchange rate between, you know, mercury poisoning and carbon sequestration or,
you know, oil extraction or a debit or service in the economy, you sort of have to and at the
moment, and there's different ways you could do that, you could do that algorithmically
through some form of, you know, we, our society, western society at least and I think most societies
have been dealing with these issues in various to various degrees of success and failure for
really long time, you know, it's like there's like blood debt, you know, back in the day, if you
killed somebody, you owed their family, you know, like five pieces of gold or whatever, like
obviously that's crazy but that's kind of the level of things that we're talking about, you know,
if, if a company commits ecocide, how much do they owe and how do you replace that and to me,
those are the coordinate, like those are the prime coordination problems. I was just up in COP,
at COP 15, biodiversity, Congress of the parties, where they're essentially negotiating this,
right, they're negotiating, they were negotiating, you know, how do you include ecological integrity,
biodiversity metrics into corporate accounting and like a framework for reporting and, you know,
incorporate that into the rule of law of all the signatory states in order to, you know,
sort of like hold themselves and the companies that operate within them accountable to ensuring
that we're not continuing to degrade the wildlife habitat is, is one of the primary things that
they're talking about. I, I tend to think, you know, or maybe this is wrong, but I tend to think
it's, it's easy to get lost in the, the complexity of that, but there's also a few clear places and
this may be, you know, this may be totally off the, you know, I may be off my rocker here, I would
say, you know, because again, I guess from a first principle perspective, it seems to me
not so much that I'm like a hand wavy proponent of the financialization commodification and
monetization of nature, but instead that that is a like an inevitable logic from a particular
worldview that is going to be unfolding in response to this specific challenge that we're facing.
Therefore, the question is how does it happen in the best possible way and how do we set ourselves
up for the highest likelihood of evolving the right answer to that big question that you just
asked Daniel, which I don't claim to have an answer to, but how do you govern standards of
fungibility between completely non fungible elements? How do you set up an infrastructure
for this type of complex accounting in a way that allows communities like local communities to express
agency so that they're preserving life ways and ecological integrity in the face of these really
like crazy global dynamics? Those are the questions that I sit with when I'm making decisions
around, you know, design decisions around region network, for instance, like how we're
approaching things. It's less like, oh, here's the magical way. I have the equation. Here's the
algorithm. No, it's more like, okay, what do we need? What are the tools we need for this decision
to be made over and over again, but in like a local context so that people can say,
in our context, how do we make the decision about what that cost is going to be? And then how do we
share that decision and then potentially make global decisions about those things as well?
Those are like primary contracts between humans, I think that's, that's my perspective. Like that
really cuts to the meat of, you know, how to overcome the coordination errors and like what
we all need to be working on, essentially. Yeah, I have thoughts on that. But wondering
what Jason is thinking. I guess I'm just curious, Gregory, what are some ways, you know,
what are some tools, platforms that you see can bridge this gap between kind of contextual
integrity, both across communities, but also across non-pungible resources and global exchange
rates? Like, do you have some ideas or does region network have some ideas of how to bridge that gap?
Yes. So, I mean, there's, there's like a set of layers here. I feel like we're writing a tiger.
I don't feel like we have these answers down, Pat, but there are some, okay, so there's a set of
pieces here. So, from sort of first principles, you know, I think you need to have, you know,
these essentially these non-pungible units that I would refer to as a class, as eco-credits,
which are a symbolic representation of a positive ecological outcome, right? Intrinsically have a
relationship with something that is like an ecological debt, debit, or debt unit. That's
most easily understood and most mature in our consciousness, civilization scale, it's like
carbon offsets, right? Where we're like, okay, you know, a ton of carbon emitted in the atmosphere
has a certain social cost. Therefore, a ton of carbon that has been avoided or has been removed
has a certain price. That's pretty clear because it's like for like, right? And obviously, what
Daniel's raising is, but how does that relate across different domains? So, I think the way to
answer and but just to say, even in that domain of carbon crediting, there's an awful lot of
complexity and challenges and I don't want to hand wave that away. Even just to get some
semblance of liquidity and fungibility and price within a new carbon economy that appropriately
places the value on living carbon in biodiverse and tacked forests such that, you know, that tree
in the Amazon is worth more standing there and providing its, you know, inner reductionist
human utilitarian language, its ecosystem services and air quotes, that it's worth more there doing
that than it is as toilet paper or whatever. That just that fact needs to get encoded and there's
plenty of challenges there. Then when you're moving across domains, you know, I think the answer to
that question, the work that Matt Prakowski's doing with Bioform Labs and Open Earth, the
John Clippinger, the work of this sort of this idea of the implementation of active inference
modeling, which is a form of, I guess, Carl Friston developed this form of essentially
like Bayesian statistics to model cognition is where this actually is coming from. So it's kind
of AI or AI adjacent, but it's been started, people are starting to develop it to create
this concept of, I guess you could say, a holistic organization that is stewarding common pool
resources, right, in which you can have this multivariant approach to maintaining non-fungibility
and bringing together multiple stakeholders to make governance decisions about what are intrinsic
values or relational values, two different approaches, not just strictly exchange, utilitarian
exchange value, where the only value comes from it's sort of like open market exchange value.
So to create that organizational structure where people can overcome coordination issues around
that, have units of account and coordination issues, it is something like, I think, kind of an AI
augmented or it's better to say just sort of like computer augmented system where people can govern
specific parameters and upgrade those specific parameters to define, you know, in our community,
this is what we find valuable. We find the water quality important. We find biodiversity, soil
health. These are things, each one of them independently, which can be monitored and measured.
What's important is to think of them as living, not to just be managing towards that singular metric
and extracting as much value, but to be, you know, just like anything, we use this information to help
us manage complex systems and to kind of build, you know, to build systems around that, then
that can have like the success of that unit's ability to manage that complexity, then that
conceivably can have an exchange rate, right? People could be buying in, longing and shorting
these different kind of self-managing units, and they can create, you know, their own sort of
internal credit and currency approach, and you sort of like start to get something that looks
like a foreign exchange system based on different currencies. And out of that, I think you, you
know, you sort of, this is getting a little speculative here, but you want, we want to,
you know, evolve the global reserve currency. The global reserve currency needs to have
its base, it needs to have liquidity, it needs to have fungibility, it needs to allow optionality
and be able to allow people to, you know, exercise agency and power, but it needs to be
derived from our success at managing these common pool resources, right? So instead of
deriving from the entire financial industry being long on the U.S. military's continued
ability to, you know, exert hegemony over oil reserves and the other elements that sort of
make up the U.S. dollar's supremacy and liquidity as a unit of account, it needs to be evolved
over time or maybe quickly to have different first principles that are generating that liquidity,
I believe. I don't believe we get out of this without evolving our currency system.
I don't know if that answers your question, Jason, but...
Yeah, it starts to. Maybe just a kind of, maybe a dumb question, but if you're trying to assess
values of resources, negative or positive externalities, both across space and across time
in nested systems, right? So you mentioned like a community who values clean water,
but then it's part of a larger hydrologic cycle that impacts the bioregion and ultimately the
globe. So you have to account for that. Are you thinking that basically machine learning AI
is basically going to do the legwork in, you know, tabulating all of that value?
By the way, you know, what is the discount rate over time and how are we thinking about that?
Well, I love the discount rate question and that I don't have a clean answer for
discount rate questions. I only have hand waviness there. My instinct is, yeah, we're going to tend,
this is a great use of technology and computational capability. This is high tech, high nature,
right? And at the beginning, you don't really need it that much. We can get away with a lot of,
like a little bit of hand waving, some shared belief, and it's not that much computational
capacity to be, you know, having a pretty solid handle on carbon cycle health, for instance.
And if you have a pretty solid handle on carbon cycle health and you include some metrics for,
you know, hydrological cycle or biodiversity cycle, you don't need, we don't need to be
getting into this really, really crazy detailed, we know everything about everything world. We
don't. You get a proxy and you can build an index off of that proxy and it isn't that crazy.
We're not tracking everything, right? Now, of course, if you have a single metric that gets
challenging because then people will eventually try to game it and, you know, so you want it to be
multi metric and sort of variant, you need some checks and balances there, but you don't want to
over-complexify it. You need the redundancy so that it doesn't just collapse on itself,
but you also don't want to, I'm definitely not a believer in just like monitor everything and
create this giant, you know, it gets top heavy really quickly. So there's sort of, you know,
there's a lean version of this, which I think is viable and you can already, if you squint,
you can already see it emerging. So I don't know either of you as an audience as well enough.
I might imagine that for many people who are engaged in regenerative agriculture or
more local resilience, a conversation about the complexity and game theoretic susceptibility
of fungibility of disparate metrics is a little bit esoteric. It does happen to be critical.
So I just rock, rock on. Don't worry about it. I hope this stuff we're talking about is useful.
I want to try to maybe ground it a little bit. So I want to give a couple examples.
So we're talking about a community values clean water. Okay. Well, let's say that the water
sources we have access to right now are not as clean as we would like them. And so we look at
how do we clean them? Well, it happens to be that the things that aren't clean in there are not just
the results of normal natural processes, but industrial chemical manufacturing process where
the water has tiny pharmaceuticals in it and has fluorinated surfactants and fluoride and
a bunch of things in there and chlorine resistant cryptosporidium and whatever.
And the normal processes of filtering that water through kind of biologic process where
the waste is used for something else don't actually work. Or we just have way too many
fucking people in areas where we're using up all the groundwater and we have to look at the cell.
So I can make water for my people cleaner through D cell or through reverse osmosis,
but the waste that I'm pulling out of the water has to go somewhere. And if it is waste that I
can't biologically process easily, because you know, when you one of the things to understand about
the post industrial world, and I don't really mean the industrial revolution,
I really mean starting with like blacksmithing is before that the rest of the natural world
is just a cycling of the same atoms in the biosphere layer, very little engaging with
the minerals deep in rocks, right. And so when we think about what mining was, we figure out how
to dig stuff up that is well below the biosphere, separate out the various elements of these rock
ores to get parts that are useful to us. And typically there's a bunch of parts that are
not that useful, which is the toxic mining tailings that is maybe the number one source of
pollution, pushing us on the freshwater planetary boundary. But even the other thing, even the
intentionally useful things that we refined, we refined the lead and the mercury and the
cadmium for industrial purposes, those were all extremely elementally low in the biosphere,
which is what allowed the biosphere to work where you have basically mostly six atoms,
and then a relatively even distribution of the types of trace minerals that occur in biological
things so that a frog and a honeybee and bee venom and a tree can all get turned into each
other through in a mushroom and whatever. But it's not true when it comes to styrofoam or
lead in the water or a chlorinated surfactant or whatever. So if humans are going to actually
leave the biosphere via mining to make this other stuff, we have to create closed loop processes
for all of those things at an atomic level, and we have to factor the breakdown of those systems.
How do you make sure they're highly resilient? Because nature already made these radically
overlapping highly resilient systems, but for the elements that are in it, and we're looking at a
different kind of elemental set. So that's a significant story, right? Because processing
organic matter waste from farming or whatever that gets into water through biologic processes,
but where it's of biological origin is different than the other stuff. So if I make my water
cleaner through desal or RO, but the downstream was I had to make some other water dirty or
somewhere else, how do I think through the accounting of that properly? And particularly,
if it's very hard to measure because of dispersals, and maybe I don't even know all the things that
were in it to know what to measure for, or how do I know in my measuring pharmaceuticals in this
water, which pharmaceuticals? How do I know? Do I just use total dissolved solids? So this is just
an example to start to say it's hard, right? It's hard to ensure that the method I'm going to use
to clean the water here. If I don't go upstream to things like fixing our entire process of chemical
manufacture and industrial process from scratch, it's hard to try to locally fix that without
externalizing some cost or some problem somewhere. And so just thinking through that is important.
That's the first thing. And then I was going to say,
Can I interject there just for a quick moment? So in the carbon world, what you're describing
is called leakage, where you're working on calculating negative externalities from the
positive action you just took. And there is sort of a way to think about that. And obviously,
from my perspective, a logical thing to do is to make sure you A, you track that, you incorporate
that, and you price it high enough to incentivize that larger transformation, where it's basically
like, yeah, if we're serious about this, and this is sort of like how we're going to be tracking value,
we've got to go upstream, and we've got to actually transform this whole system. And
it's logical how important that is. Because at the end of the day, we are getting to this,
it's sort of like we get into these recursive arguments, and we're sort of like,
are we going to allocate resources to repair the life support system of our spaceship?
That's kind of an absurd argument to get into in a way. It's like, do you have enough resources
to do that? Well, you have to go do it, right? Reallocate resources to do that thing.
This is actually, I'm going to go where I want to go next, and then I want to come back to what
you just said. So let's say that we know that optimizing for a single metric, no matter how
good it is, is very problematic. And our single best example of that so far is GDP, or GDP per
capital. Because of course, the idea that GDP going up means the total products and services
that humans are choosing to engage with voluntarily, even though they don't have to,
because it solves real problems and the quality of their life goes up. But GDP going up goes up
through war and through addiction and involving environmental destruction. So we know that's
not a good enough metric. So then we want to start to tack on other things, like a carbon credit
or a Gini coefficient or whatever. And so let's say similarly, we go to just the regenerative
world, and we say, okay, we're going to focus on the metric sequestering CO2.
We all know this is like a toy example, but we all know that we could use more NPK fertilizer
to grow certain kinds of genetically modified high CO2 sequestering plants that most CO2 per
unit time in a particular area, while killing oil city and causing more nitrogen and phosphorus
run off into the water. And so then we're like, well, that's not good. So we don't want carbon
reductionism. So we have to factor the nitrogen and the phosphorus and the soil microbiota.
And so then you start to say, okay, but how much effluent of nitrogen is worth how much of the
CO2? Now I have this exchange rate. But as say in a, there's almost no nitrogen effluent and
adding a little bit more doesn't seem anywhere near bad as we need to get CO2, you have a certain
exchange rate as the nitrogen starts to increase towards a point of criticality that exchange
rate has to change. So there's this dynamically changing based on something other than markets,
because typically the dynamic exchange is based on each owner of value deciding what they will pay
for the thing. But here, you can't just have individual owners of value deciding what they
will pay for things that are necessary for planetary life support, where a lot of people
will have incentive to free ride and say, I don't care to invest in that particular thing.
And so you have to have something like cost being fixed by law. So let's even say that we have
10 or 500 biometrics that we're factoring in our resilience. And we have some
complex algorithm for affecting the weighting of those things. Then I bring an AI system to
exploit it. And I say, okay, well, whatever strategy gives, there's going to be some weighted
function that will optimize the currency units I can get based on the current, you know, metric
weighting set. So I can use an AI to say, how do I optimize my currency extraction? And of course,
it will be addressing carbon and nitrogen and all those things in there, but it won't be addressing
the pollinator or whatever thing isn't in that set yet and factored. And so I can externalize
harm to whatever's not in the set and or by exploiting an exchange rate that as soon as I
exploited it a bit stops making sense. But then as soon as people catch it up and realize it, my
asymmetrically better than the systems faster AI figures out how to optimize for that. So
not everyone has an equal ability to exploit market value. So whoever is able to employ
higher tech tools to exploit the market value, even in a weighted set of metrics can still end up
doing that thing. And that's the thing we have to protect for. So you're talking about use the AI
to do the opposite. And this is why it was key that you said it was not a private property ownership
model that would incentivize that it was some commons communal ownership model. And you probably
have some kind of choice making that is not exclusively associated with ownership, right?
Like if someone has a voting right associated with citizenship, they can't actually sell that.
So it is non fungible, non transferable. And yet you might have certain choices like what gets
encoded in rule of law that supersedes economic incentive that happen in that space. So you could
say the voting right is a non fungible token that has power over certain things that none of the
including the regulation of what the fungible and extractable tokens do, which is right. That's
already what we have in the idea of a, you know, a liberal democracy with having democracy and
markets together. It's just this, you can see that the capacity of the market figured out how to
erode the capacity of the governance over time. So I'm not saying that the ideas you're talking
about aren't the right approach of things that have to happen. I'm just pointing out some of the
things that have to be thought through well in the failure case of those strategies in the process
of designing them. Totally. And the risk here, you know, to be frank is that the biggest challenge
we face is that thinking those through well is an anti signal to investment capital.
Because we're in the middle of this crazy race to the bottom where, you know, a VC wants you to
not think about those things and they want you to just like get like win the short term game over
and over and do that as effectively as possible. And if you're not doing that, it's an anti signal
to investment. There aren't really like the patient capital, philanthropic capital, you know,
where, where are the present moment resources going to come from to really sort of structure
and engage with those questions. We've done a good job of sort of like magically giving ourselves
space and time, although, you know, that doesn't last forever. And the amount of space and time
needed to think through and design, like go through design exercises, pilots be humble and like
expect to be wrong and sort of continue to set up the right sandboxes for this, you know, because
at the end of the day, I think I completely resonate with your intuition, Daniel, that, you
know, in order for this to work, we actually have to get down and redefine sort of like the monopoly
on private property and exiting rights. And that's really key to setting things up so that they work
well is, you know, really at the end of the day, I believe this is all an exercise in reembedding
markets into commons, right? Because that's how markets can be a force for coordination instead
of just sort of like this, you know, this race in which value extraction is optimized.
Embedding markets and commons, I think is a really good high level tag for a lot of things that needs
to happen. Jason, where are you at in this conversation that sort of emerged, you know,
and rapidly sped off as I was like, Oh, this is, you know, this is what we're working on exactly.
Well, I'm enjoying listening to this. I find this interesting. I mean, in the back of my mind,
what I'm thinking is, let's say that somehow your vision was achieved, Gregory, and we were able to
internalize all of the externalities. What would that mean about how society is structured? And
this goes back to my idea about kind of networked bioregionalism or cosmopolitan localism or, you
know, whatever kind of, you know, big kind of generality, you know, we want to think about. And
to me, it's still like, you know, if we're moving away from linear systems, and there's a lot more
recycling of minerals, we develop technology to do that, I still think that there's going to be more
focus and maybe I'm curious if you agree on local production of some things. I think food
is a big one. And so it's less efficient because you don't have the economies of scale. And so
it's an implicit kind of degrowth, which, you know, many people think needs to happen anyway.
Right. And but we still need global coordination. We need global tech, especially in the digital
tech sphere and mining of key minerals and things. And so there will still be global trade,
and there will still be global coordination. But I guess what is, you know, if all of this
goes according to plan, how is society structured differently? Like, do you have an idea about
that or we just have no way of knowing? I certainly have ideas. I'd love to hear
Daniel's comments on this. I feel like, you know, oftentimes Daniel in the you're so brilliant at
describing the meta crisis and sort of like walking through the sort of like logical sequences and
multipolar traps. But oftentimes, I find myself when listening to your conversations in this sort
of like, oh, I really want to know Daniel's opinion about like the world that potentially comes
next, the future vision and paths to get there. They're so okay. I appreciate you separating
those two things because they're really important. The paths to get there have to be inactable
and inactable at the progressively increasing scales that are needed if it is to become,
you know, widespread enough to address global issues. And that means has to be inactable within
the current cultural value systems, incentive landscapes, deterrent landscapes and everything
else, which don't look anything like what an idealized long term system might be. But an
idealized long term system cannot just be made to happen by global divine mandate or something.
You know, so a kind of libertarian type, like a Peter Thiel might ask the question if someone
is to describe what their more ideal long term system is, would say, tell me how your utopia
works and then tell me given how many people for religious reasons and for their political
ideologies and their vested interests don't want it and would do anything they could to prevent it,
tell me how much violence you're willing to enact to make your utopia happen and what the
results of inflicting that much violence culturally into those who do it are and is still utopia.
And so, you know, this is like John Wells' position, the enactment problem. So I think
we have to go back and forth between imagining, like understanding what the fundamental problems
are well enough to think about what solution sets that would be long term viable are,
which is the kind of future planning to think through how to reverse engineer,
but then also understand the current landscape of the world and what is inactable and what creates
externalities when you try to enact it to say what could take a step in the right direction,
also knowing that a heap of stuff will happen that we can't anticipate. So a step in the right
direction, reassess, try again, the forward engineering approach. And you kind of have to
go back and forward between those two approaches and forming each other. So we can talk about
some criteria of what a longer term viable set of global human systems must entail,
which doesn't necessarily say how do we enact them or what exactly they look like,
if that seems like an interesting starting place.
Yeah, and I really appreciate that. I mean, I think that's really an important reminder that
the reconnection of the ends and the means and the dynamic relationship between them and
how impossible it is to separate them. And maybe it's a distinction between a pro-topian approach
and a utopian approach or something like that. So yeah, I think that does a great framing. And
yeah, I mean, I think just diving in and kind of like weaving those back and forth a little bit
would be would be really beautiful. Yeah, I think the kind of classic libertarian capitalist argument
about why not to be utopian is that in the name of some kind of benefit of all the people Marxist
ideology, we got Stalin and Mao and etc. I don't think that is a holistically solid assessment
of the dynamics that happened. But thinking through the ideal world where you're willing to
cause whatever harm you need, hit learn in another case. This actually comes up for me today in terms
of my concerns about how much utilitarian ethics are proliferating as we're doing
planning ethics and machine learning so that the self-driving car can decide who to kill
in a scenario, the passenger or the person, the street or the whatever. And then as a result of
just kind of not only the coding of that, but rationalism in general, much easier to do some
kind of utilitarian ethics, which gets again into these commensuration issues. How many of this
nearly extinct species are worth? How many of these not that extinct, but maybe more sentient
species and whatever?
Question for you, Daniel. In that specific example, do you know if anyone is thinking about
what it would look like to allow a driver to program in their own choice about that? Like the
owner of the car or a company that owns a fleet or something to say, because people make those
choices maybe in split second decisions, but people do make that. That's a decision that
agency would usually sort of vest down to a person in the driver's seat who might choose
to take the risk on themselves instead of killing like a kid or something.
Yeah. So I mean, that's a very complicated topic is when you start to have these very complex
cybernated systems, the control on the cybernated systems affects a lot. So do we try to govern
the controls on them or do we try to make it user-adjustable? Yes, it's being thought of in all
of these places. I would say one of the places the conversation has advanced a lot is the control
of social media algorithm settings, knowing how problematic they are currently when you optimize
for time on site and engagement in ways that increase depression and tribalism and sanctimony
and certainty and wrongness at the same time. It's obvious that they need control differently.
Does the government step in to control the algorithm and ensure that it's in some positive
fiduciary relationship with the society and the individuals who kind of figures out and adjudicates
what that algorithm set should be? Or does each user get to decide for themselves?
And can the user even actually do that well if they can't factor the complexity of what
the non-obvious effects of those settings are? And then also, what are the default settings?
Because even if I can change the settings, almost nobody will. And so the ease of change
in the default settings end up being significant. So yeah, I think this is a very important
is a very important topic. But the place I was going is utopianism causing violence.
The version right now that I see a lot is especially the movement in places that think
about long-termism through utilitarian ethical lenses can say in the most amount of suffering
and the most amount of benefit could occur by humanity existing over billions of years.
And the huge number of people that will happen when we're an interplanetary species. So to
the amount of harm that happens from not getting there is so much more that it justifies anything
we need to do to get there, therefore, dot, dot, dot. And in the name of excessive epistemic
certainty about future cases, we can justify a lot of violence now because it's less harmful than
the other thing in our thought model. And of course, we can do this with climate change because
climate change is going to be so bad, we need to do X, Y, and Z in geoengineering project.
So I would say in general, I want people to forecast and make good choices now based on that,
but I'm also dubious of them being over certain of their forecasts. And as a result,
from a totally ethical standpoint, justifying harmful actions now because it seems less harmful
than in action. And so how to make sure that when you're doing that thing, you're calculating
that you're weighing your own uncertainty heavily enough is really important.
Disclaimer noted, now we want to hear the vision of the future that you want to see and live in.
So let's say that we look at a civilization using the Marvin Harris model of a civilization is,
can be thought of in terms of its infrastructure, its social structures, and its superstructure,
infrastructure being the entire technology stack that it utilizes, social structures being all of
the agreement fields, the economics, the governance, the law, the institutions that it uses for
collective choice making, and the superstructure being its culture and its basically shared values,
definition of the good life, things like that. So if we instead of saying infrastructure,
social structures, superstructure, we could say technology, political economy and culture,
something like that. Then we could say these three things inevitably inter-effect each other.
No one is the most fundamental. Different schools of thought will argue, like Marvin Harris argued,
actually infrastructure drives the other ones almost exclusively. Almost every spiritual and
religious ideology says why superstructure can guide the other ones. Obviously, when in so far as
we're thinking about economic theory and theory of governance, we're focused on the way the social
structures will guide the other ones. So just to go very fast through this, they all inter-effect
each other and there are necessary things that must happen criteria-wise in each of those that
lead to a set of reinforcing dynamics that can lead to a metastable civilization.
If we were to talk about what you're saying, each of those three is nested in ecology. Yes,
of course. These are the three aspects of human civilization and exactly we're totally
nested in ecology and you could say the ecology is nested in physics if you want.
So a couple of things. We talk about the infrastructure side a lot, though in this
conversation we've actually been talking about social structure, currencies and governance and
like that, but we've been talking about abstractly. We talk about infrastructure like a closed-loop
materials economy. We have to ensure that we are not meeting human needs via turning nature
unrenewably into meeting those human needs and particularly unrenewably at larger scales
and can continue to happen and then creating waste faster than can be processed. So one,
you have to move to completely closed-loop atomic accounting like at an atomic and molecular level
closed-loops and you have to go post-growth. It doesn't mean there can't be growth, but it means
that the embedded growth obligation has to go away so that any growth that happens is actually
calibratable with the environment. So now what actually does that materials economy look like?
I think, well obviously our energy production has to transition in that world to a renewable energy
source and a post-pollution energy source or where we can be processing that pollution within a
set of processes that can be described as closed-loop adequately and I think that
this is where if you just say what is the very long-term versus what is the very near-term
based on intermentancy issues and based on energy return on energy investment.
Do we get off of hydrocarbons exclusively with kind of decentralized renewables? Probably not.
Probably some large-scale centralized renewable type things like deep geothermal and
maybe space-based solar or whatever are probably important and probably nuclear is important but
here's where I would say thorium nuclear and phase three or phase four and micronuclear in
non-seismic areas with hardened energy grids and different waste management is really really
different than phase one and phase two nuclear without a hardened energy grid in seismic areas.
So you shouldn't think of nuclear as a category just like you shouldn't think of vaccines as a
category you should think of each one with its own unique pros and cons but there is obviously
it takes a certain amount of hydrocarbon energy to build any of the new energy since that's where
energy comes from so there is a transition of the energy economy and then a transition of our
materials acquisition and our waste management and so we can think about that there's a whole
lot more in terms of what should be local what should be at various scales what should be at the
city scale the bioregions scale the continent scale or the multi-continent or planetary scale
obviously there are some minerals that are really important for things that we care about that we
don't know how to operate without that are not evenly distributed across the world that can't be
only at a local scale on and on but like do we need to be processing organic matter across
bioregions or should organic matter all process closed loop within a bioregion probably should
and water cycles and things like that but so there's a whole set of criteria for what is the
future of infrastructure the scale the criteria and the transition of the specific subsets of the
technologies when it comes to superstructure and social structure the first thing I think
is really worth saying is that if your social structure i.e. your system of governance and
collective choice making that is enactable via something like rule of law and maybe a monopoly
of violence if that social structure is not grounded in superstructure i.e. if it's not grounded in
the collective values and will of the people it will be oppressive and yet at the same time if the
collective values and will of the people want things for themselves that is bad for other people
or bad for the world the thing that is grounded in their values will also suck so ultimately you
have like the cultural work to have people understand all of the trade-offs well like actually
one to have them care about every part of the web of life they're interconnected with and have an
identity that is an emergent part of an interconnected web of life not a separate our
nation our people are religion separate from the other guys or our species a culture that
doesn't do that is a culture that will be bound to war and environmental conflict because the desire
the identity of the people is separate from the world enough that they will use their technology
in ways that cause harm to it so the identity and then the associated values not all value sets are
actually commensurable with being able to steward the power of exponential technology only a few
of them are and given if you can affect everything all that much you have to care about it which means
you have to have an identity that's bound with it I do think that becomes obligate of any worldview
that advances itself and the ones that don't can't be part of a worldview that advances themselves
because warfare which most all worldviews in the past have done with exponential technology
equaling exponential warfare self-terminates and externality is which pretty much every
which you know many worldviews throughout history have driven lots of environmental externalities
also cap out so only worldviews that don't drive externalities and warfare i.e. care about everything
and of the complexity to process it have the possibility of continuing in the ecology and
physics of the universal way that it is hard question here for you what do we do with people
who have a warfare worldview how do you how does that transformation this is kind of like moving
into the critical path or like the path dependency you know what what how do we dance along that line
to decompose or compost or you know allow people to to regenerate or evolve their worldview
you know because obviously if you impose if you act with a worldview that can conceive of sort of
like cleansing anyone who has that worldview you've just collapsed into it right so what's the
yeah i'd love to hear you riff on that for just a moment in service to the like toggling back
and forth between the the ends and the means yeah okay so first let's when we say warfare we usually
mean actual physical violence so called kinetic warfare but sometimes we can talk about
peacetime where we engage in trade and politics and diplomacy and then wartime where we engage in
bombs but the other way to look at it is a continuum of navigating conflict where you know
bonklausowitz says war is politics by other means which that same statement can be reversed the other
way so in that way you can talk about kinetic warfare in the context of economic warfare
diplomatic warfare cultural warfare information warfare population central warfare and particularly
since the proliferation of things like fifth generation population centric warfare are actually
primary strategies of nation states against each other the clear line of using bombs to attack
each other versus not is really gone so then we're really looking at kind of conflict theory and
and so you can even see that the left and right inside of the us are engaged in a culture war
right and info war and cultural war against each other where each of the last few elections feels
existential to the entire republican system if our guide doesn't win to the other guy
to the other side and so obviously a democracy breaks down if your fellow countrymen are the
enemy are the in existentially terrible enemy that you're at war with there is no kind of common
unity basis but what I and so what you see is that the left will say things that appeal to the left
even if they totally villainize the right because there is no anti incentive in the current
governance system immediately for villainizing the other side and pissing them off because you
you know if you had something like rank choice voting you would actually be disincentivized for
doing that highly polarizing thing because whoever gets voted very last does much worse and so you'd
have an incentive to appeal across the entire space but where the current incentive is mostly
just to appeal to your own side you can do it by villainizing the other but then of course
the other gets existentially scared enough from that that they mount a more powerful and counter
response next time they get elected whatever you did in four years gets undone in the next four years
and whatever strategies of warfare that you learn that were effective they've reverse engineered
made better the next time and so the net result is just an escalation of an arms race and the
escalation of the arms race means the consequences just keep getting worse and worse so if you're
not totally fucking short-sighted you will stop that if you're totally short-sighted you'll say
we'll deal with that later we have to win the selection whatever it takes villainize the other
side tell some lies so long as you can get away with them you know whatever it is but if you
realize that whatever you do that's so important that it's worth doing that in these four years
we'll all get undone in the next ones and you're equipping the other side to be more powerful by
whatever new strategies you figure out that they'll reverse engineer then you calm yourself down a
little bit and say okay not just if I'm going to share a message how do I share a message that
appeals with my intended user base but who's not going to like and agree with this message and how
are they going to respond you've got to think about that so thinking through the long-term failure of
culture war can get someone to stop it and in the same way with kinetic war thinking through
um okay so in an escalating arms race of this on all new exponential technologies where we're
going to weaponize genes specific bio weapons and um autonomous AI weapon systems and this means
that smaller and smaller actors are going to have catastrophic weapons like who the fuck wants to
live in that world and how does anyone deploy that tech and ensure that it doesn't then get
deployed against them so there is a way that anyone who's engaged in war out of necessity can
think through the long-term non viability of that path and start to say is there a better path
if you think that path is viable though you might go for it and I'm not saying in the current world
there is no place for war if you have a group that has been highly conditioned with ethnocentric
genocidal cleansing ideologies and their weaponized and they're willing to move with that you can't
necessarily not engage with that but the question is how to engage with it only in kind of absolute
necessity and orienting towards a case of getting out of that thing and that's actually very tricky
because I don't think you can say let's never physically engage in war I think you just your
ideology will lose but if you're successful at it you usually think about how to keep using that
same success principle so to say how do we use a success principle only when we're necessary well
absolutely leading the thing that made us successful is a type of frame of mind that is necessary but
not common yeah I feel like you're sort of sharing you know it's like Machiavelli's prince this is like
schmockenberger's you know prince 2.0 like if you're going to be a leader these are the things
that you need to think through in order to have a longevity and stability in power is a responsible
not that Machiavelli was necessarily concerned with responsibility but you know game be Machiavelli
yeah game be Machiavelli yeah I think game I think Machiavelli was saying if you want to
be effective at all in protecting your people or engaging in anything like these are principles
that are at play you must understand them but then what we're saying is the ongoing arms race of
everyone employing those principles more effectively in the short term actually ruins everything in the
long term and yet if you don't employ them at all in the short term you'll probably just fail so how
do you not fail in the short term while seeking to change the entire game rather than just continue
to escalate it because winning it doesn't equal winning it forever it equals escalating it yeah
no for sure and I think that that's a that's a that's a really important that sort of like
not losing while changing the game is is a really powerful provocation I think and and I think I
can't help but feel like the simple way of saying what you're saying is we need to appeal to each
other's better angels or we need you know there's it ultimately boils down to sort of like a moral
decision for people in power to choose the long game over the short game that's how I'm
distilling what you're saying in in in very brief so I think that nobody can choose the long game
over the short game as long as any other competitors choosing the short game and the short game choice
gives them enough game theoretic advantage in the near term multipolar trap everybody here knows it
well and so if China was to say okay we're going to price carbon properly because that's important
for the environment but they couldn't ensure that the US and India are going to then they just can't
right and vice versa so you have to be able to create the possibility that for anybody to do that
thing enough people have to buy into it that they're not so disadvantaged by doing the right
long-term thing they're not so disadvantaged in the near term that they're fucked in order to do
that you've got to create very high transparency to see is the other side of actually keeping it
and you have to create some kind of capacity for enforcement associated with that transparency so
I think global multilateralism with high degrees of technologically mediated transparency
satellites etc that allow us to be able to make new agreements that nobody could make on their own
because it would be so competitively disadvantageous and yet everybody has to make I think that's
critical right I think we have to do that and it's going to be really hard because anyone within
that country's population that doesn't understand the criticality of that which will be many will
think it's a terrible idea because the trade-offs affect things that they care about when we start
talking about degrowth which is necessary for the environment anyone who doesn't get that that's
necessary for the environment and thinks that it is some kind of global conspiracy of lizard people
or something will say that degrowth actually means less resources for my family and maybe it
even disproportionately first hits poorer people worse so those like those things really have to
be thought through um and factored but yeah it's not just a moral argument because you like you
can't make the moral choice and lose to the other side that is doing the immoral thing and then have
the immoral thing run the whole world and have that be moral it's not right you so it's a combination
now wait this is important what I was trying to say about infrastructure social structure
superstructure was that the social structure i.e rule of law that can back a monopoly of violence
that can bind any other actor from doing things that we collectively agree or fucked to do
that basis the jurisprudence of the basis of that rule of law plus the adjudication of it
has to be grounded in the will of the people i.e superstructure or culture has to be upstream
from social structure and then your social structure your governance layer has to have the
adequate udaloups i.e the adequate speed and capacity of process to be able to govern that
which it's supposed to govern to be able to regulate that which it's supposed to regulate
because if the private sector and tech can outmaneuver through the combination of lobbying
and campaign finance and better lawyers for loopholes in the law and um first mover advantage
if it can outmaneuver the regulatory process then you basically have broken the regulatory
process and it doesn't meaningfully exist so you've got to ensure that your social structure
employs the same types of information technologies or the cutting edge of information technology
so that it has the udaloups necessary to regulate the field of tech and then its job is to guide,
bind and direct the tech for its life supporting and and yet not not life supporting purposes
its capacity to guide, bind and direct it has to be grounded in the collective values of the people
which is the cultural development which must be at the level of global shared interconnectivity
of identity and values and then the tech doesn't just affect the environment and doesn't just affect
the physicality of the people it affects the value systems of the people because any tech that we
engage with creates patterns of human behavior that end up affecting our experience of the world
so you've got to also think through not just the physical externalities but the psychosocial
externalities that are in turn affecting culture or the superstructure so now we're just describing
what is the long-term world look like and it looks like where everybody understands the
interconnectivity of the world and cares about it and even has their identity reified at that level
I'm not a separate being I'm not just an American or a Christian or whatever I exist because this
whole biosphere exists I wouldn't exist without the plants and the algae and so many other people
that make all the shit that I depend on I'm an emergent property of this whole thing and because
I don't even exist without all the rest of it I can't have an identity that is separate from it
and seek to advantage myself at the cost of it and that's just true right that's just scientifically
ontologically more true so you can't have a value system that is just based on non-reality your
worldview has to be more true which can then also be more ethical so how do you and how do you ensure
that your economic system is not creating perverse incentive that conditions the wrong things
in the value system and how do you ensure that your tech isn't producing psychosocial
externalities i.e smartphones and facebook ruining family attention and things like that
and attention span in general and um hypernormal stimuli so you've got to ensure that if the core
is how do we develop culture or then culture can be turned into governance rule of law etc which
can buy and guide and direct the tech then you have to have a society that's investing in that
where you're ensuring also that social systems and the infrastructure systems the effect that
they have on the culture is in the right direction now i that's at such a fucking high topological
level that it's still hard to get a vision of what does that look like do we have nation states do we
have city states um do we have skyscrapers do we have farmsteads do we have eight billion people
or half a billion people so we could still get into all that but that was the first level of me
wanting to address the question of long-term future of civilization at a criteria level what
must the criteria be yeah i love it you know it's super helpful and as you were describing that
you know sort of like the the worldview that people need to be able to inhabit and you know
sort of like what it what it means to be a citizen a responsible citizen i just got this really deep
i felt a deep sense of gratitude for my relationship with carol sanford specifically
who's been such a leader in creating experiences for people to evolve their epistemology ontology
cosmology through deep kind of spiritual reflection but in the business world or in the world of the
public sector and like that like you can see and i have experience and evolution of that and what it
means to to sort of even grow a capability and capacity to be taking kind of responsibility
at a scale you know it's sort of like what does it take for us to grow our capabilities individuals
to be a part of a society that works and then what do we need to do in order to change that and
just to like ground that for listeners you know and i've heard you and and and jordan talking about
this a little bit um recently in a dialogue that you guys were having maybe with jamie wheel as well
and it just rung to me it's her work sort of like and i don't know if you've been exposed to her
or anybody else has but just you know that lineage of um very rigorous self reflection
and and commitment to engaging with regenerating the systems that were embedded in whether that's
the biosphere or the industry that we're working in or the the local town that we're a part of
and just kind of like growing that capability and how essential that is you know and and how
that's not a tech thing that's a that's a commitment to growing agency and human capability
and capacity so yeah i just just love that and kind of like weaving that into to you know that's
a that's a solid foundation that people could go and engage with i'm i'm looking at the time here
and i'm like i'm so hungry to get to the um you know to the next stage but it's as if
as if it may never happen you know the i feel like there's this elusive um you know world
that daniel holds in his heart that may never you know appear in uh except for maybe around a
campfire or something you know we may never get this recorded so um i i obviously have no idea how
the world is actually going to unfold nor do i know what the right long-term systems look like
in detail but there's a lot more that i have a thoughts on yeah that you have an image of you
have a living that you're sourcing you're like sourcing a living image that's sort of yeah yeah
totally so the future of economic system and the future of governance systems and you know a lot of
things uh we could get into it more depth and i think it would be really fun and also specifically
food systems and water systems and things like that um and i would also really love to
understand a lot more than we got to in this conversation about jason's thoughts on those
things uh but i know we have to wrap and so i also realized that the the conversation was a bit
esoteric a bit meandering and left more threads open than it closed but um i still enjoyed having
the conversation with you guys and uh so thank you for engaging in it yeah no likewise i'm super
grateful for your time daniel and yours uh jason and you know i'm totally down to keep keep digging
in um you know if we can manage our mutually challenging schedules it would be fun to do a
little bit of a series dialogue on some of these especially the future of food i think that'd be
really fun to dig into and talk about in more depth but you know really all of it um well yeah i'm
super grateful maybe i'll just let each of you do a quick closing remark before we close down for the
evening here jason do you want to do you have any uh thoughts reflections uh any anything you want to
leave the audience with as we close out well i just want to thank you guys i thought this was
stimulating for me yeah i guess a couple closing thoughts one you know i think what we're trying
to do with doomer optimism is one it's a recognition so like what you're talking about daniel and all
of these considerations i'm glad that there's people out there that are that are doing this and i
and you know i hope more orders of magnitude more people think in these terms uh and their kind of
responsibility for larger scale systems uh but i also think that a lot of people aren't going to
to do that and i think what we're trying to do with doomer optimism is give people a very kind of
tangible way to rediscover value in their life and tangibility in their life you know by say
starting a homestead maybe that's helping you kick your internet addiction and it's helping you
think more crucially about technology and energy and uh loops and the biosphere and
and because you're not atomized agents uh perhaps you're you know engaged in culture building again
developing relationships and because you're also on the internet some you're you're still
you're not becoming hopefully that's this is my hope not you're not becoming so inward focused
that you know that you become you know either uncaring or ignorant of the larger responsibility
that that that you're a part of and in political economy uh social structure uh i i think that's
well you're you're you're you're placing certain limits on yourself where you're trying to
by localizing right instead of just buying the thing always on amazon which we all do but
and you know trying you know maybe perhaps you could get it locally from a neighbor or in your
county or you could make it yourself right and so and and there's an implicit kind of degrowth
implication of that as well because it's necessarily not as efficient uh if you're not
coming for externalities and so i i'd like to think that the projects are complementary
but maybe they're working on different scales and so i guess i'll leave it there yeah and i think if
again i don't know the audience in your world well but if there were people who felt apathetic
and hopeless about the macro scale of the world and their optimism came from decreasing the scale
of like maybe i do have agency over my own life and maybe over my own local region more and maybe
there is something net positive i can do for the world by at least not being part of or not
contributing to the extractive world as much and maybe prototyping something maybe creating some
local resilience and prototyping something that would help prevent some of the cascading failures
i don't want to decrease people's um motivation to do that i think that if people are feeling
motivated in that way that is important and awesome and all you know i would say is that
like going from no agency to some agency even if it's just the agency to make your own life
better is a movement in the right direction and going from the agency to make your own life better
to your family's life better and then maybe a local community is better is a movement in the
right direction and to just keep that direction going as much as you can realizing that even if
you stop getting most of your needs your food and whatever met by global supply chains you are
still part of a world that independent of even caring for the other people and animals and other
parts of the world which you probably do you're also directly affected by them or indirectly but
really affected by them and to not get dysfunctionally bummed by what you can't do about it but to
care about it in ways that can motivate new insights and even if let's say you moved to get
to produce a lot less waste and have much deeper better relationships with your neighbors and you
you know produce much more of your own food and you start to realize that you can extend this to
your larger community than just a few neighbors you actually create some local resilience the
step from that to then mapping what were the things you thought would work that didn't and what were
the things that surprised you that really worked well and putting that online so that other people
that are inspired to do similarly can everyone can be benefiting from what everybody learns
and staying apprised of the macro issues enough that where you would have the ability to do something
meaningful you can that's really all i would add to that focus yeah and that's and that's really for
me at least that's kind of the part of the explicit project is this idea of cosmo local
diffusion of innovation and mutual aid and knowledge sharing you know across scales
in physically you know at a bioregional scale but um magnetically uh at much larger scales and so
yeah i think that's great advice um and i think that's that's definitely the direction that
you know i'm trying to help help help guide it good of it yeah um i apologize i'm gonna have to
move us towards wrapping i've just gotta um get the kiddos in in bed here so um kind of coming back
into the the very grounded reality of my uh my life as a as a householder yeah and i'm um i'm
amped that this first thread i mean i think we went a lot of different places but that for my
instinct that that conversation sort of like around embedding our instincts around the aesthetics
and ethics of local action and you know the the importance of relearning you know all of that
stuff but also getting that living edge with the global coordination coordination issues and the
sometimes mind-blowing both ethical and um technological quandaries that we're facing
and just like it's a very rich tension and i really feel like holding that tension
in allowing that to guide our creative agency and the questions that we're asking is just really
really fruitful so i'm super grateful for both of you and the work the thinking that both of you
exhibit so thanks so much for taking the time for the conversation and i'd love to do it again
sometime soon yeah thanks guys thank you both take care
