I used to live and work in the former Soviet Union, and while I was there, there was an
old Russian joke that I learned in which a government official visits the countryside
and finds two peasants living side by side and tending plots of land that are the exact
same size.
The official visits the first farm and finds it's in pretty good shape.
He asks the farmer how things are going, and the peasant replies, great, I just saved
enough money to buy this wonderful cow.
Pleased with his first visit, the official visits the second farm, which again is almost
identical in quality.
He asks the second farmer how things are going, and the peasant replies, terrible.
The official asks, I'm sorry to hear that.
Is there anything that I can do to improve your situation?
Peasant thinks about it for a moment, and finally replies, yes, please shoot my neighbor's
new cow.
This joke signifies something about the way we think about economic prosperity and happiness.
One of our implicit assumptions is that people are happier and more prosperous when they
acquire more and more wealth.
That joke I just told, however, suggests that some people think of prosperity in a relative
sense.
That's not how am I doing, but rather how am I doing relative to others?
Am I making more money than my brother?
Am I earning more than my friends?
Do I have a better house than my neighbor?
Destroying the wealth of others is probably not a great idea to increase everyone's sense
of well-being.
But the joke raises an important issue that we need to address if we really want to understand
the foundations of prosperity.
The second farmer was almost as economically well-off as his neighbor.
His farm was identical in every way, except for that cow, but he wasn't nearly as happy.
So should we now say that he was significantly less prosperous than the first farmer?
This exposes an assumption that most people make without even thinking about it, and it's
going to be what we're going to be talking about in today's lecture, which is that we
should care about economic prosperity because it makes you happy.
In everyday conversations, people tend to use the terms income, prosperity, and happiness
as if they are perfect synonyms.
As we'll see, however, the relationship between economic affluence and happiness is just a
bit more complex than that.
The important assumption that more income equals more happiness is worth a bit of stress
testing, and that's what we're going to do in this lecture.
We're going to explore the precise connections between income and happiness to see if, going
forward, we can use these terms as if they really are perfectly equivalent.
The connection between income and happiness is so ingrained that when we think about how
countries or how individuals are doing, we almost exclusively use the language of money.
For example, it's thought to be crass or impolite to brag about one's income in polite society,
but it's actually pretty common to brag about the things that we buy with that income.
Think about it this way.
How many times have you talked to a friend or a neighbor and they show you a car they
just bought, or a brand new computer that they've gotten, or for that matter, whether
or not they're remodeling their house?
Let me be honest, I'm completely guilty of this as well.
I was one of the first people in my neighborhood to buy a flat screen TV, a really big flat
screen TV, and I had no problem inviting my neighbors over so they could see that TV.
That made me feel happy.
That made me feel prosperous.
These possessions are seen as a sign of our happiness.
Similarly, for countries, the traditional way of measuring national prosperity has been
to look at either gross domestic product, GDP, or per capita income.
In other words, for most people who think about this, income means the exact same thing
as prosperity.
Again, this seems like a straightforward assumption, but in recent years, a surprising
number of states, think tanks, and international organizations have begun looking at alternative
measures for prosperity that go beyond income.
So, for our first example, in 1990, economists at the United Nations Development Program
created a measure called the Human Development Index to think about other ways of measuring
prosperity.
Now, I mentioned this concept briefly in the first lecture.
The Human Development Index, or HDI, incorporates some additional factors beyond per capita
income.
So one dimension they consider to be relatively important is health, and they use measures
of things like life expectancy and infant mortality rates.
Now, in some ways, this isn't terribly surprising.
One would expect that if you're healthier, you're also presumably somewhat happier.
Another measure or dimension that gets incorporated is education, which measures things like years
of schooling or literacy.
And again, this seems to be a relatively straightforward assumption, presumably the
better educated you are, the greater your capacity for happiness down the road, the greater
the capacity for development, and indeed, in later lectures, we'll talk about the crucial
role that education plays in promoting economic development.
Now, these criteria tend to be positively linked to income.
Wealthier societies also tend to be healthier societies, for example, and wealthier societies
also tend to be better educated societies.
But this doesn't always work.
A similar approach was taken by the Legatum Institute, a London-based public policy organization.
In 2008, the Legatum Institute developed a prosperity index that has a number of non-economic
components even going beyond the UN's HDI, which included education and wealth.
So what did Legatum decide to include?
Well, one of the factors they thought about was security and safety, namely, individual
security and safety from, let's say, crime or criminals, but also from the state, from
the state necessarily cracking down.
So they also included measures on things like personal freedom.
It might be very well and good to be rich, but unless you can speak out, you're constrained
somewhat.
They also measured the degree of something called social capital.
Social capital refers to the network of relationships that individuals have and the memberships
that they belong to with other associations.
Again, all of these things tend to be correlated with income, but not always.
Now, beyond Legatum and beyond the United Nations, even national governments are beginning
to broaden the definition of prosperity.
For example, since 2005, the very tiny South Asian monarchy of Bhutan, just north of India,
has developed a measure called Gross National Happiness that they like to use instead of
GDP.
Gross National Happiness includes some of the measures we've talked about before that
both the UN and Legatum included.
However, Bhutan also incorporates things like measuring psychological well-being, the quality
of political governance, even something as strange as cultural diversity and resilience.
Now Bhutan is a small country, and for all we know, they're pretty happy, but will anyone
listen to them?
But it's actually the case that larger and richer countries are toying with this idea
as well.
In 2008, French President Nicolas Sarkozy expressed dissatisfaction with a reliance on
GDP as a measure of national prosperity.
He created a commission chaired by Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz and
Amartya Sen to consider other dimensions of measuring national well-being, including
quality of life and sustainability.
Which sounds great, except he then lost the next election, so it's possible that the
French people disagreed with him about the elements of prosperity.
In 2010, British Prime Minister David Cameron announced that the UK's Office of National
Statistics would also survey people's sense of well-being.
And in 2011, the United Nations General Assembly stated that the pursuit of happiness is a
fundamental human goal, and called on countries to undertake steps that give more importance
to happiness and well-being in determining how to develop.
If all of this sounds odd or strange, Thomas Jefferson, who drafted the Declaration, originally
talked about the inalienable rights to life, liberty, and property, which echoed John Locke's
ideas.
At the last second, he changed it to the pursuit of happiness.
This is silly, though, right?
Surely economic prosperity is positively correlated with things like health, education, and happiness.
So why not just focus on income?
Because once you add these other factors, the national prosperity rankings actually
look a little bit different than just looking at per capita income.
In particular, the Scandinavian countries, Norway and Sweden in particular, zoomed to
the top of the Legatum and the UN Human Development Rankings.
Now, these countries, to be sure, are economically prosperous, but adding these other elements
makes their social model look even better.
So maybe income is not the only thing that buys you happiness.
As it turns out, there is a lot of survey data that backs up the argument that more
income does not automatically lead to more happiness.
So we're going to take a look at this now and assess this polling evidence.
But first, we need to talk about terms.
Generally, if you were to sit in on an economics 101 class, you'd hear that the goal of economics
is to find ways to maximize someone's utility.
This makes sense, except that it's very hard to measure utility, particularly across individuals.
Some economics textbooks used to talk about utils as a unit of utility, but those are
about as useful as the widgets that economists talk about when they talk about a sample product.
So by and large, economists equate utility with income.
In other words, most economists do assume that money buys happiness.
Even economists, however, acknowledge that money isn't the only thing that matters.
That's why they, like psychologists, have tried to measure happiness more directly, particularly
via responses to survey questions, survey questions like the following.
Generally speaking, how happy are you with your life?
Very often, people, when they're asked this question, are then asked to rank on a one to
ten scale as a way of giving an answer.
And these alternative measures of well-being are onto something.
For example, holding everything else, including income equal, three criteria appear to be
strongly correlated with happiness.
The first, which we've talked about before, is health.
People who suffer an adverse health shock are inevitably less happy.
And if you think about it, this makes sense.
If you've encountered a long illness, it's understandable that you would be somewhat
less happy.
Another important criteria that determines the level of happiness is marriage.
Married people tend to be happier, particularly in the developed world, although these reasons
are very often different from men and women.
Men tend to be happier in marriage because with a spouse, they're capable of doing more
things socially.
With women, the primary reason is the added income benefits that they get from being married
to men.
The third important factor that determines whether or not people are happier is religion.
Survey after survey shows that more religious people are happier in general.
Harvard's sociologist and political scientist Robert Putnam was particularly interested
in this finding and conducted intensive survey research to find out why.
He found that religious people were not actually happier due to their belief in God.
Even atheists or agnostics who attended church because of their family obligations still
recorded higher levels of well-being.
As it turns out, religious people are happier largely because of the tight friendships they
generate through attendance at their places of worship.
Some would expect that, all else equal, income would also be strongly and positively correlated
with happiness.
Here, however, things get complicated.
Richard Easterlin was the first economist to study this in depth.
In 1974, he published a paper that yielded a surprising finding.
Over time, he found no general correlation between happiness levels and per capita income
across the developed world.
Even though these countries had experienced massive increases in income over the previous
50 years, the typical citizen was not necessarily any happier than the typical citizen from
a half century ago.
So even though the United States as a whole is richer, he didn't seem to necessarily be
happier.
This finding is now known as the Easterlin Paradox.
Since then, there has been additional research that appears to back up the finding that income
doesn't play that large a role in determining levels of happiness.
Consider the following findings.
The first is the Paradox of Unhappy Growth.
Economic studies by Angus Deaton as well as Betsy Stevenson and Justin Wolfers have found
an interesting problem.
In countries like Ireland or South Korea, which experienced economic modernization in
a short period of time, the onset of rapid growth was negatively correlated with happiness.
A booming economy appears to have a negative effect on levels of happiness, particularly
during the early stages of rapid growth.
It seems pretty odd that fast-growing societies would be less happy.
A series of studies of Latin America conducted by Carol Graham and her colleagues found that
positive correlation between income and happiness, but primarily among the poorest of the poor.
Above a subsistence income, the relationship falls apart.
Comparing surveys of well-being across countries revealed some odd discontinuities.
The Afghans surveyed during the last decade show higher levels of happiness than those
asked the exact same question in Latin America, even though the income of the Afghan respondents
was much, much lower than the Latin American respondents.
The idea that people in poorer countries can be happier than people living in richer countries
is referred to in the happiness literature as the happy peasant paradox.
The idea that someone living in a pastoral ideal, not having to worry about the problems
of modern society, is somehow better off.
A similar effect turns up when comparing Nigerians to Japanese.
Even though the latter country is much richer, the former country actually appears to be
much happier.
So is happiness decoupled from income?
Is economic prosperity a limited concept?
Well, not so fast.
There are a couple of things driving these findings, and it's not clear that these drivers
undercut the relationship between income and happiness as much as the Easterland paradox
suggests.
First of all, no one, including Easterland, disputes that within countries at the individual
level, income is strongly and positively correlated with happiness.
All of the polls that we're talking about show that at the same time wealthier members
of society are happier than those poorer members of society.
Every survey of individuals conducted demonstrates this finding even if there is variation in
how much happier people are with more income.
The confusion is why this does not show up across countries, or over time within the
same country.
Why is there such a weak relationship when comparing across different countries?
And why aren't people happier today than 50 years ago, despite much higher levels of
per capita income?
One explanation for this is the hedonic treadmill that once basic needs have been satisfied,
people quickly and easily take what they have for granted.
Think about if you're flying in an airplane, and if you normally fly in coach, but then
occasionally you get upgraded to business class or first class.
Business class or first class seems nice, it's a much bigger seat, they give you free
alcohol, that all seems wonderful.
But I bet the first time after you flew at business class and then had to go back to
coach, you somehow felt worse off.
People could be calculating their happiness as a function of relative income instead of
absolute income, which explains the old joke about the two Russian peasants that I used
at the start of this lecture.
There's some evidence to support this argument that accumulating some income makes people
aspire for even more.
Survey analysis by Carol Graham and Matthew Hoover in Sub-Saharan Africa shows that happiness
and optimism about the future are inversely correlated.
The wealthier an individual, the less they think that things will be better in the future.
We also see this with education as well in surveys in Africa.
The better educated in Sub-Saharan Africa are more likely to be less happy and less
optimistic about the future.
Now this finding might be due to greater knowledge being associated with greater wants and desires,
but there also might be something else going on.
It might simply be that wealthy Africans doubt their ability to maintain their standard of
living over time.
Globalization has made this issue of the hedonic treadmill a more salient factor for more of
the global population than ever before.
Think of it as similar to the story Plato would tell about the cave.
Another metaphor about the cave was that someone inside a cave would often only see
two-dimensional images.
They wouldn't understand what color was because they were in a cave and it was so dark.
But then once they escaped the cave, they saw the world in all of its glory, but once
they saw that, they could never go back to the cave, even though they were perfectly
happy there before.
Now in the past, if you lived in a poor country, you might as well have been living in Plato's
cave because you wouldn't have heard or seen any examples of people living affluently in
the developed world.
Poor people in other countries simply couldn't comprehend the possibilities of life in a
prosperous society.
Once someone gains a small increase in income, however, it allows them to imagine what life
would be like with even more income, thus oddly blunting their boost in happiness.
This is particularly true if the increase in income allows them the means to acquire
better information, through a television or a smartphone.
Part of this finding might simply be due to the law of diminishing marginal returns.
This is a common observation in economics.
Think about it in terms of chocolate.
If you like chocolate, then the utility you would get from consuming one candy bar would
probably be pretty high.
The utility you would get from consuming the next candy bar would also be high, but probably
not as much utility as you felt eating that first candy bar.
And as you keep eating bars of chocolate, the marginal utility you gained from consuming
the next unit continues to decline.
The law of diminishing marginal returns can apply to income as well.
The first tranche of income someone earns has a significant effect on prosperity and
happiness, obtaining food, shelter, clothing, and so forth.
After a certain point, however, those needs are sated.
The great psychologist Abraham Maslow talked about a hierarchy of needs, starting with
material wants and desires, and then moving towards more psychological wants, like self-esteem.
It is more difficult to earn the latter simply through the amassing of wealth.
Another economic theory developed by psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky is known as
prospect theory.
It suggests that individuals place greater value on what they already have than what
they might be able to obtain in the future.
Survey after survey shows that individuals are willing to take far greater risks to minimize
losses than they are to try to maximize their gains.
If one applies this to income, then the poorer are less anxious because they have less to
lose.
The wealthier members of society are more anxious and therefore less happy.
But there's another and more simple argument that we can make.
More recent studies suggest that the Easterland paradox might actually rest on weaker foundations
than previously thought.
University of Michigan professor Ron Engelhardt has looked at data over time from the World
Value Survey.
This is a survey instrument that comes from data that's been gathered in periodic rounds
from 1981 onwards across multiple countries.
The current survey covers countries that contain roughly 85% of the world's population.
Between 1981 and 2006, Engelhardt found that more than three-quarters of the 52 countries
for which data is available, measures of subjective well-being rose.
This is a direct refutation of the Easterland paradox.
As these people were getting richer, they were also becoming happier.
More recent cross-national research by Princeton University's Angus Deaton and the team of
Betsy Stevenson and Justin Wolfers at the University of Michigan also suggest that the
Easterland paradox is not persistent.
In comparing per capita income to happiness levels, both of these studies found a strong
and positive correlation between income levels and happiness across countries as well as
over time in the same country.
In contrast to Easterland, these correlations persisted even at relatively high per capita
income levels over time in the advanced industrialized states.
Recent research is also uncovering a link between income and happiness across different
countries.
Now, recall that initial work in this area suggested that wealthier countries were not
necessarily any happier, but research on Cuba has been particularly revealing.
Although Cuba is a poor and undemocratic country, most economists generally acknowledge that
Cuba's health care system is relatively good.
Since health is ostensibly correlated with happiness as we talked about before, it is
an ideal test to check on the importance of income after controlling for health.
Compared with the rest of Latin America, Cubans were significantly less happy.
Cubans demonstrated greater satisfaction than their Latin American neighbors with the quality
of their public services, but considerably lower with respect to their ability to determine
their economic fate, which is not surprising since they were living in a centrally planned
economy.
This jives with other research on Latin America that suggests a cross-national correlation
between income and happiness.
So what happened to the Easterland Paradox?
There are a few possibilities.
One conjecture is that over the past few decades, globalization has allowed even the poorest
of the poor in marginalized societies to become highly aware of the lifestyles of the prosperous.
With that knowledge comes greater levels of aspiration, which means more income actually
does translate into greater and more concrete levels of happiness.
Another possibility is that income's effect on moment-to-moment happiness is not all
that great, but its effect on life assessment of well-being is greater.
When survey questions make respondents think about the moment-to-moment sense of happiness,
people with higher incomes clearly possess a greater sense of well-being about their
position in life.
By the way, this also works with children.
Parents generally when asked whether they're happier tend to be less happy in the moment-to-moment
periods than people without children.
However, if you ask that question in terms of their life assessment, they do wind up
tending to be happier.
The final reason that the Easterland Paradox might not hold is a bit more banal, but it's
likely the best reason.
Simply put, since Easterland came out with his original finding, we now have a lot more
and a lot better survey data and more sophisticated ways of polling in the developing world.
Easterland's Paradox might simply have been an artifact of past polling methods.
So now we know that the correlation between income and happiness is perhaps more robust
and more straightforward than when the Easterland Paradox was first bandied about.
And finally, it is worth noting that income also contributes greatly to these other recognized
drivers of happiness that we've talked about.
For this lecture, we've looked specifically at health, which is one of the most powerful
drivers of happiness.
And there is a very strong correlation between levels of health and levels of income at both
the individual and national levels.
At the individual level, more prosperous individuals are more likely to eat healthier
foods, be protected by better shelter, and partake in preventative medicine.
At the national level, health has a significant public goods dimension.
The more that people are immunized against disease, for example, the lower the likelihood
of even the unimmunized catching that disease.
This might be a correlation rather than a cause.
In other words, it might be that healthier societies become richer rather than vice versa.
Still, on the whole, it would appear that income can also contribute to the non-economic
sources of well-being.
So, after this review of the happiness literature, we can conclude the following things.
First, clearly happiness is not the exact same thing as prosperity.
It is quite possible to be very happy and very poor at the same time.
That said, the notion that there is a happiness paradox has been vastly overstated.
Numerous recent studies demonstrate quite clearly a strong and positive correlation
between income and happiness.
In the past, that correlation was weaker after a certain threshold of income, but in recent
years that correlation has strengthened yet again.
Because many of the non-economic sources of happiness, such as health, are positively
correlated with income, looking at income as the primary ingredient for prosperity is
not a bad first approximation for how to foster the greatest degree of happiness for the greatest
number.
So, for the rest of this course, when I talk about the foundations of prosperity, I will
be talking almost exclusively about the foundations of economic prosperity.
In other words, we will assume that money does indeed buy at least some measure of happiness.
