So let's just refresh your memory. We spent the first two lectures dealing with myths and assumptions about prosperity, and hopefully you've learned a couple of things, in particular two things.
First, you hopefully know that prosperity has been an extremely rare phenomenon until very recently.
And second, you hopefully know that by and large material prosperity does lead to higher levels of happiness and a greater sense of well-being.
So now we need to start thinking about what people can and will do to attain prosperity.
As we discuss the foundations of prosperity, we'll be thinking about it on three different levels.
Now the first level is the individual level.
Given the social, economic, and political structures that people find themselves in, what are the activities and choices that individuals should make to increase their own level of prosperity?
Then there's the national level. What policies can national governments and societies pursue to enhance the national level of prosperity?
And finally there's the global level.
You can have the ableist, smartest individuals operating in a country implementing the wisest policies to promote prosperity.
Even in that perfect situation, those individuals in that country will still encounter tremendous difficulties if the global economy is experiencing a severe downturn or if a world war disrupts ordinary economic activities.
So what needs to be done at the global level to promote prosperity?
Now from this point forward, I've organized the course in such a way that we will deal with each of these levels in turn, starting with the individual, then the national, then the global.
So the next few lectures, we'll explore the foundations of prosperity at the individual level.
Then after that, we'll turn to the foundation of prosperity at the national level, and then finally we'll examine prosperity at the global level.
Before we dive in, however, I need to stress up front that life is just a little bit messier than how I've just ordered these lectures.
I've implied that these different levels are functionally independent of each other, and to be honest, they're not, not really.
The individual, national, and the global all interact and feed back on each other in complex ways that can be difficult to comprehend.
The key point to understand for now, particularly for this lecture, is that individuals respond to incentives, and the rules of the economic and political gain condition those incentives.
So what individuals do is largely conditioned by what national governments do.
What governments do is in turn conditioned by behavior at both the individual and the global levels.
And of course, the global level is very often the sum product of what individuals and what states are going to be doing.
So with that caveat in mind, let's turn to the question, what are the foundations for prosperity at the individual level?
As we'll see in the next few lectures, there are multiple pathways to prosperity for individuals.
However, the path that is most important and the most lucrative is entrepreneurship.
This is defined as the act of taking risk or initiative to organize economic activity with the goal of seeking profit.
The historian, Eric Habsbaum, once noted,
It is often assumed that an economy of private enterprise has an automatic bias towards innovation.
But this is not so. It has a bias only towards profit.
Keep that statement in mind as we talk about the different forms of entrepreneurship that have existed in history.
We'll start with what we think of as entrepreneurship nowadays, which we'll call productive entrepreneurial activity.
The traditional way of thinking about how individuals achieve prosperity in the modern age is that they all act in their own self-interest.
Now, this often makes people feel a little squeamish.
If everyone just acts selfishly, then won't society as a whole then suffer?
The classic rejoinder to this concern comes from Adam Smith.
In the wealth of nations, he famously articulated the position that if everyone acted to advance their own individual interests,
society as a whole would become more prosperous.
Smith acknowledged that in acting this way, any particular individual neither intends to promote the public interest nor knows how much he is promoting it.
In his most famous passage in that book, however, he concluded the following.
By directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain.
And he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention.
By pursuing his own interest, he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it.
The metaphor of the invisible hand remains a powerful one and suggests that the agglomeration of individual aspirations for prosperity
leads inevitably to an increase in national prosperity.
It is worth remembering, however, why Smith wrote that passage in Wealth of Nations.
He was trying in that section to argue against a particular national policy of mercantilism.
Mercantilism is a set of government policies that discriminates against foreign imports in favor of domestic production.
Smith firmly believed that mercantilism as a policy would lower the prosperity of society as compared to the free trade policies that Smith himself urged.
What Smith was advocating for here was that the government construct the rules of the game so that individuals could achieve their utmost by pursuing productive activities.
This category of activities includes things like, let's say, innovating new products.
So when James Watt invented the steam engine, that's clearly an innovation.
Googly Elmo, Marconi, and the invention of the radio.
Even more recently, when Sergei Brin and Larry Page developed Google,
even that stupid segue machine that you occasionally see in tourist areas.
Yeah, I don't like it either, but without question that actually was an innovation, as the cops who use it will tell you.
Another form of innovation includes developing new production processes.
Most people, if they've heard of the name Eli Whitney, know him as the inventor of the cotton gin.
But what Eli Whitney is actually most famous for, or most well known for according to economic historians,
is developing the American system of manufacturers.
Whitney received a contract from the government to create an armory.
And when he did that, he developed the notion of interchangeable parts, which meant that he had a new production system,
whereby the components of one rifle could be used to fix another rifle.
That innovation of the production process was just as important as the invention of the cotton gin.
Or to give another example, most people think that Henry Ford invented the automobile, but he didn't.
He invented something much more important.
He created the means to mass produce automobiles via an assembly line.
This dramatically increased productivity.
Similarly, Jeff Bezos did not invent book selling, but through Amazon.com he invented a new way of distributing books to customers.
Developing new gains from trade and new markets is another form of innovation.
When Steve Jobs developed the iPod and iPhone, there were two revolutionary aspects to it.
First, he outsourced much of the manufacturing costs to China and other Pacific Rim countries, dramatically lowering the costs of production.
And we'll talk about this in a later lecture.
But second, by creating iTunes, he developed an entirely new way to market content.
Music and movie downloads became something that people were willing to pay for rather than simply bootlegging or pirating.
Now, this isn't to say that bootlegging or pirating or ripping DVDs or music doesn't continue.
It obviously does.
But for a large part of society, they can now go to iTunes rather than try to use illegal means to acquire that kind of content.
Another form of innovation is reorganizing existing operations or existing facilities to improve productivity.
One of the reasons for the economic boom of the 1990s in the United States was that the retail sector found new ways to ring efficiencies at a computerized inventory.
Sam Walton, the owner of Walmart, got rich in no small part by ringing as much efficiency out of those computerized inventories as possible.
Now, let's be clear.
These activities, these innovations I've just talked about, do not necessarily benefit everyone at all times.
But they do contain examples of what Joseph Schumpeter referred to as creative destruction.
That's a term we're going to get very familiar with during this course.
This means that the acts of innovation I just discussed might reward the individuals that came up with those innovations,
as well as the consumers that purchased those goods.
But in the process, these innovations often destroy other sectors of the economy.
For example, the growth of Amazon.com, Walmart, and other distribution powerhouses put a lot of so-called mom-and-pop stores out of business.
Think about your local drug store, or for that matter, your local bookstore.
These were put out of business because they were less efficient and cost more.
And this was the theme of the movie You've Got Mail, where the big corporate behemoth run by Tom Hanks destroys the cute little bookstore run by Meg Ryan,
which sounds bad if you want to destroy anything involving Meg Ryan.
The development of the steam engine and the automobile as a means of transport drastically reduced the need for horse ranches,
because horses were no longer the fastest means of moving across land.
The development of the iPhone and digital photography more generally devastated parts of upstate New York,
because that's where the photography firm Kodak was based, and Kodak's almost entire form of operations was based on print photography rather than digital photography.
So even these kinds of productive entrepreneurship can lead to distributional consequences that leave some members of society being made worse off.
Still, in the long run, these kinds of productive activities generate such massive benefits
that they have almost all of the advantages that Adam Smith elaborated on at length in the wealth of nations.
They enrich the individual, but the combination of all activities acting in this way also enriches society.
It's a tribute to the power and influence of Smith's ideas that many of us equate entrepreneurship with the kinds of productive activities I've just described.
Historically, however, there have also been two other modes of entrepreneurial activity that enrich individuals, but do not enrich their societies.
The economist William Baumel called these modes destructive and unproductive entrepreneurship, and now we're going to discuss each of them in turn.
Let's start with destructive activities.
That's the first and oldest category of entrepreneurship.
What are some examples of this?
Well, they would include the seizure, the expropriation, or the commandeering of someone else's assets.
A couple of years ago, I went to an art museum in Shanghai.
It's often thought to be the best art museum in all of China, but in actuality, their collection was not that great.
The reason it wasn't that great is that China doesn't necessarily control some of their greatest art treasures,
in part because a whole variety of port cities in the 19th century were colonized by Europeans.
The Europeans, in turn, expropriated an awful lot of these artistic treasures.
So that's an example where pillaging certainly represents a form of destructive entrepreneurship.
Another example would be coercing other actors into paying some kind of tribute or protection money.
This kind of thing is as old as ancient Greece when imperial Athens forced other members of the Delian League to pay Athens tribute
in order to protect them against Persia, and it's as current as any story you're going to see about organized crime.
The other thing, another example of destructive activity, simple theft and pillaging.
Now these activities are called destructive because they involve either the act or the threat of destructive violence in order for the individual to achieve gains.
For each of these activities, the people engaging in the destructive act do enrich themselves.
They do it, however, at the direct expense or the direct cost of other members of society.
This kind of activity leads to no new wealth creation, but rather a redistribution of existing wealth.
And for that matter, it's often an ephemeral redistribution of that wealth.
Indeed, in some ways, it actually leads to a net subtraction of wealth because of the losses incurred if any destructive activities are used in the redistribution process.
One can easily think of societies in the past where this kind of destructive entrepreneurial activity was valued higher than all others.
In Roman society, the individuals who held the highest level of prestige were the nobles and generals who commanded Rome's provinces.
Their job was to exact tribute from their occupied lands and transfer most of that wealth back to Rome itself.
What we would think of, however, as productive entrepreneurial activity, that was most definitely frowned upon.
Commerce and industry in Rome was largely conducted by former slaves who held the social stigma of being former slaves.
And as for invention, the great Roman historian Pliny the Elder tells a story.
It might be apocryphal, but it's a pretty good story, in his writings about a Roman citizen who invented some kind of unbreakable glass.
Pleased with this invention, he goes to the emperor Tiberius to show it, expecting a reward from the state for coming up with such a nifty new idea.
Instead, Tiberius had the man put to death because the emperor feared that such an invention would reduce gold, the source of the emperor's wealth, to the value of mud.
In the 14th century, in Europe, there existed bands of soldiers called condatieri, bands of mercenary troops that wandered Europe during the wars of Italian city-states
and the Hundred Years War between France and England.
They supported whichever side offered them the most attractive terms, and sometimes switched sides for a better offer.
During temporary lulls of peacetime, some condatieri would roam the countryside and exact tribute on their own.
Others became so renowned that they were made honored citizens of the republic they defended.
In the Age of Empire, Spanish and Portuguese conquistadors were rewarded for organizing their colonies and the indigenous peoples who already lived there into giant gold and silver extracting machines.
In Peru, the Spanish revived an Incan institution called the Mita, or forced labor armies.
These Mita, under Spanish rule, had the single objective of mining gold and silver.
In return, the Spanish provided protection, again kind of like the mafia.
They organized their subjects into these Mita to maximize the extraction of these precious metals back home to Spain.
These forms of organization were brutal for the subjects of these empires, but also efficient at extracting gold and silver.
They were so efficient, in fact, that the English colonies that originally settled in Virginia initially tried to use similar methods,
first by forcing the Native Americans they encountered into hard labor, and then when that didn't work, by impressing the colonists themselves into forced labor.
Only after 12 years of failure and famine did these colonists reject the Spanish model.
Destructive entrepreneurial activity continues today, although it is much rarer in the past.
When Somali pirates seize cargo ships and their crew, they are doing so not for political purposes, but mercenary ones.
They simply want to get paid.
Online cyber criminals will often engage in identity theft to try and strip a person of their financial assets.
For example, this has certainly happened to me, I don't know if it's happened to you, you might be on Facebook or on Gmail,
and then suddenly one of your friends contacts you saying, I've lost my passport, I've lost all my money,
is there any way you can wire me money so I can find a way to get home.
The first couple of times I saw that I was almost fooled by it, but these are certainly examples of destructive entrepreneurial activity.
Now these kinds of predatory entrepreneurial activities sometimes actually inspire genuine innovations.
It's just that these innovations were primarily directed toward finding more efficient war fighting or violence inducing techniques.
Military innovations are more likely in areas when pillaging and other predatory activities are common.
The Kondatieri, for example, were innovative in updating military tactics in particular because they rejected the old chivalric ideas of direct combat
in favor of more indirect tactics like outmaneuvering the enemy so as to avoid the loss of trained soldiers.
Still, on the whole, the net effects of destructive entrepreneurial activity on societies are pretty devastating and by and large reinforce a zero-sum mindset.
So let's focus and turn to the third activity, unproductive activity.
So far we've identified two forms of entrepreneurship, a productive form and a destructive form.
This third kind of entrepreneurial activity is unproductive.
Unlike the destructive entrepreneurship we just talked about, unproductive activities rely on the functioning of the rule of law.
Unlike the productive activities encouraged by Adam Smith, however,
unproductive activities do not lead to dynamic increases in productivity.
In essence, unproductive entrepreneurship seeks to fix the rules of the game to achieve a legal monopoly of some activity.
Unproductive entrepreneurial activities consist of either creating or exploiting legal barriers to entry to secure above-average profits.
For example, suppose I owned a taxi that operated in my neighborhood and you wanted to start a rival taxi company to compete with me.
If I could get the local government to make it very hard for new entrants to enter the taxi market, then I have a monopoly,
which means I can raise my prices and earn monopoly profits.
Now if the market were functioning properly, these kinds of activities would quickly disappear.
Unproductive entrepreneurs, however, find ways to create or reinforce rules that prevent the market from working in such a way.
Another term that is often used to describe unproductive activities is corruption, or even better, rent-seeking.
Now when I say the term rent, you probably think about how much it costs to live in a place that you don't own.
Economists define the term rent in a different way.
They think of rents as incomes earned that are higher than the average rate of profit.
For a company to stay in business, they need to earn a decent rate of return.
Firms that earn very high profits are said to earn rents.
Now ordinarily, sectors where firms earn above-average profits attract new entrepreneurs to enter, thereby driving down profits for everyone as supply increases.
Entrepreneurs engage in unproductive activities when they seek to manipulate the existing rules of the game to prevent new entrants and continue to earn rents.
Unproductive entrepreneurial activities have a long and distinguished history.
In successive Chinese imperial dynasties, the most promising route to prosperity was through entering the bureaucracy via a series of civil service examinations centered around such subjects as Confucian philosophy and calligraphy.
Chinese bureaucrats would often borrow money to study and secure an appointment and then pay back that money through income generated from corruption once they occupied their higher offices.
In the late Middle Ages, the development of professional guilds created rents for guild members at the expense of those who wanted to enter the profession.
A guild by restricting its membership, restricted supply, and thereby increased the price of any member's services.
So for example, if a blacksmith needed to be licensed by a guild in order to legally operate in a city, then the blacksmiths already in the guild will be sure to make it difficult to become certified through a long apprenticeship period, for example, to restrict the supply of blacksmiths, thereby ensuring that they continue to earn a decent living.
Unproductive entrepreneurship even helps to explain the existence of warm English beer.
The erection of high tariffs against French wines in the 16th and 17th century encouraged the creation of domestic substitutes in England, which led to a brewing industry.
Now that in and of itself is not unproductive entrepreneurship. The brewers didn't force anyone to erect the tariff.
However, because brewers knew that they could not compete with French wine, they lobbied furiously to keep those tariffs high even after the end of the Napoleonic Wars,
which meant that the English had to drink weak, warm beer rather than excellent and cheap French wine. That was unproductive in a number of ways.
One could also argue that a lot of the modern financial services industry contains some elements of unproductive activity.
To be sure, for example, one reason for the high incomes of hedge fund managers, for example, is their willingness to bear greater risk.
But another reason, however, is that their earnings, which are also called carried interest of hedge fund managers, are taxed as capital gains rather than ordinary income.
This lower tax rate makes a big difference in take home income.
Now the government could simply try to tax all forms of income at the same rate, but the financial services industry has lobbied furiously to treat those earnings as investment income rather than a traditional salary.
For a final example here, one of the richest men in the world is Carlos Slim from Mexico.
He got that way because he was able to secure the monopoly on telecommunications in Mexico by buying telmex when it was privatized in 1994.
Slim then expanded his telecommunications empire to the rest of Latin America.
Now to be clear, Slim worked very hard to get his billions, but the direction of that effort was to secure protected monopolies, not through more creative forms of innovation.
Clearly, unproductive activities rely extensively on the state to perpetuate their existence.
The larger the state, the greater the incentive to engage in unproductive entrepreneurial activities.
This is because a large government provides more and better opportunities through government contracts, favorable regulation, or preferential tax treatment for unproductive entrepreneurs.
Therefore, a lot of unproductive activity consists of lobbying the state to secure or maintain certain privileges that continue to allow them to earn rents.
Note also that unproductive activities inevitably increase the level of corruption in a society.
The unproductive entrepreneurs often have to bribe or provide kickbacks to public officials to get their legal barriers.
Furthermore, these barriers often encourage black market activity by other entrepreneurs to earn quick profits, which further erodes the rule of law.
Let's step back for a second.
We currently associate entrepreneurship with the kind of productive activities that Smith and Schumpeter extolled in their works.
However, if a society and government set up different incentive systems, then individuals would redirect their entrepreneurial activities away from productive possibilities and towards unproductive and destructive options.
Individuals usually have little influence over the set of institutions and incentive systems in which they operate.
They will simply choose the set of activities that seems the most promising to them.
If, for example, you live in the People's Republic of China and you want to open up a hotel, but the only way to do that, free of government interference, is to give a percentage of ownership to the local party leader, you will likely go along with the system, rather than right it.
In Russia, the oligarchs who resisted Vladimir Putin after his rise to power often found their assets expropriated and themselves thrown into jail on trumped-up charges.
Furthermore, there can be a path-dependent effect of the institutions that reward particular forms of entrepreneurship.
Now, path dependence is a fancy way of saying that history matters.
If a government enacts a law in the present moment, that new law can limit the scope of possible policy reforms in the future.
Today's law is therefore a path-dependent action.
In the case of entrepreneurship, a society that rewards destructive means will often elevate the soldier and the military tactician to the highest economic and social status.
During the 500 years of the warring states era in China, for example, military leaders started off being aristocrats.
Over time, however, war was so constant and the need for good tacticians was so great that even commoners could become generals.
These people have a vested interest in maintaining the system of values.
They will therefore tend to resist any change in societal incentives to reward other kinds of entrepreneurial activity.
Remember the story of Tiberius, putting the glass blower to death during the Roman Empire.
Similarly, a society that rewards unproductive activities will elevate the political wheeler dealer and lobbyist to the highest economic and social strata.
These people often have a vested interest in maintaining the system of values.
They will therefore tend to resist any change in societal incentives to reward other activities.
One can argue that the grand narrative of economic history has been a massive turn away from destructive and unproductive forms of entrepreneurial activity towards more productive forms of activity.
Another way to think about the changes in individuals' pathways to prosperity is to think about the different sources of individual wealth through the centuries.
For the longest stretch of world history, the easiest pathway to prosperity was birthright and inheritance.
The most prosperous people were simply born into wealth.
Furthermore, it was relatively easy for those who excelled at destructive and unproductive activities to train their children to excel at these tasks.
For a lot of unproductive activities, it was a simple exercise for the father to pass on the monopoly to his children.
Nepotism is simply another form of corruption.
The connections required to maintain unproductive activity can be passed from generation to generation.
Productive entrepreneurship, on the other hand, is harder to pass on from generation to generation.
To be sure, family-run businesses are quite common.
Truly innovative activities, however, cannot be accomplished through either political skill or military prowess.
It is more difficult to pass on the gift of invention and industry.
Clearly, destructive and unproductive activities continue even into the 21st century.
But it's interesting to note that a comparison between the top 1% in the U.S. today with the top 1% from a century ago shows the changes in what kind of entrepreneurial activity is rewarded.
In the early years of the 20th century, the top 1% largely earned their income through rent from land and interest from existing capital.
These are the hallmarks of the society where prosperity is largely an inherited trait.
Now, the primary sources of the income of the top 1% come through wages and profit.
These are the hallmarks of the society where individuals need to work hard to earn their living.
This does not preclude the existence of unproductive activities, but it suggests that truly productive activities are the best pathway to prosperity.
When we think about the foundations of prosperity at the individual level, it is the productive form of entrepreneurship that promises the best outcome for the greatest number.
