For most of human history, there has really only been one reliable means through which
individuals achieve prosperity in the world, and that was inheritance.
If one was born into wealth, it was easy to maintain that level of affluence.
For an overwhelming portion of history, your economic status in life was entirely determined
by your family's station.
If you were born into a family of peasants, or serfs, or slaves, you were going to be
a peasant, a serf, or a slave.
If on the other hand, you were born into royalty, you were likely to have a pretty sweet life.
Economic mobility, the possibility of moving up from a position of poverty to one of prosperity
was practically non-existent in history.
Indeed, if anything, mobility was historically downward.
Economic growth was so meager that it was quite possible for middle-class families to
lose everything due to violence, war, or disease.
Being born into a wealthy family is still a pretty sweet deal, but there is more economic
mobility now than there was a few centuries ago.
It is possible now to be born into poverty, but nevertheless still end up in relative
affluence.
In a modern industrialized economy, what we'll call the developed world, that's still a possibility.
As we'll learn during this lecture, there is one obvious pathway to prosperity, and
that is acquiring what economists call human capital, skills and knowledge that increase
a person's productivity.
What we'll call it is education.
Furthermore, as we'll see, the prosperity gap between the educated and the uneducated
has been growing dramatically from about 1980 onwards.
To understand why education is so important, we're going to think about the following questions.
First, how do wages and income get determined in the free market?
Then, what is it about living in the developed world, in particular, that puts such a high
premium on human capital?
And then finally and later, we'll be trying to understand a pretty puzzling phenomenon.
Why have the returns to education increased so dramatically since around 1980?
Now, let's be clear.
Education isn't the only thing that matters.
Luck plays a role as well.
But education is the key factor that people living in the developed world can control
with their own decisions.
To put it another way, if you come to me and say, Dan, how can I earn more money over the
long run, the answer I'm going to give you every time is education.
Why is this true?
Let's start by understanding that as much as I talked about entrepreneurship and profit
in the previous lecture, most people in most developed countries earn their income through
wages, which means we need to understand why a person earns the wage they do.
If the free market works, any individual should be able to earn what economists call a person's
marginal revenue product, or in other words, their productivity.
Now it makes sense that more productive workers should earn more regardless of the task at
hand.
For example, if one salesman at a stereo store is better at interacting with customers and
getting them to buy equipment, he or she will earn a larger number of commissions, which
means that salesman's wages will be higher because they are more productive.
Now this next leads to the obvious question.
What determines an individual's relative productivity?
Now here there are a few important factors, some of which are outside that individual's
control.
The first is public goods provision.
A public good is a good that possesses two qualities.
First, a public good is non-rival, which means if I consume the good, it doesn't appreciably
affect someone else's ability to consume that same good.
A classic example of a non-rival good is information, so for example if I learn algebra, it doesn't
prevent you or anyone else from also learning algebra.
Another quality of public goods is that they are non-excludable.
If air pollution is reduced in a smoggy city, it would be impossible to prevent anyone living
in that city from enjoying the cleaner air, regardless of whether they contributed to
that public good or not.
Now we'll talk about public goods a lot in later lectures, but for now what you need
to understand is that non-rival and non-excludable goods will be under provided in a free market.
This is why they're commonly referred to as public goods.
The idea is that a public actor, like a government or a civic association, has an incentive to
provide these kinds of goods.
Now let's get back to the individual level, and what does this have to do with our salesman?
The less that an individual has to worry about things like protecting one's life, securing
one's possessions, and enforcing contracts, the better.
So more public goods means that an individual can improve one's productivity.
Think about our salesman again.
His or her job is much easier if that person isn't spending too much money protecting
the stereos, let's say, from either looters or thieves.
It's also easier if people come to the stereo store via roads that are potentially built
publicly.
A key advantage of developed countries is that the level of public goods provision is
pretty high.
This frees up individuals to focus on maximizing their individual wealth.
Now let's go to the next component that determines an individual's productivity, which is their
access to physical and human capital.
Individuals are always more productive when they can exploit more capital.
Now when we say capital, there's a tendency to think about big factories or large industrial
robots.
But capital helps all kinds of economic activities.
Let me give you a personal example.
I have a trotious handwriting.
Really, I can't stress this enough.
It's chicken scratch.
If I had to write all of my books, articles, lectures, and correspondence in longhand,
it would be an excruciatingly long and laborious process, and I would weep for those who had
to read it.
But with a computer and word processing software, those tasks are made much easier.
Now computer hardware and software can't write a book for me, but they enable me to
translate my thoughts from my brain to the page far more easily than if I had to use
pen, paper, and my badly cramped hand.
So the computer is the physical capital that helps me maximize my productivity.
Capital is necessary even for the seemingly most uneconomic of professions.
For example, musicians now rely on digital equipment, in other words, capital, for making
and recording songs.
Same with visual artists who engage in digital art.
Now the examples I've provided so far are about how physical capital can improve a person's
productivity, which in turn increases their wages.
But human capital is even more important.
Human capital is know-how.
It permits individuals to perform more complex and skilled tasks, which means greater value
added.
Again, to use myself as an example, I could have the best computer and the best word processing
software money can buy, but if I didn't know what or how I want to write, then my computer
might as well be a really expensive paperweight.
I need to know how to organize my thoughts in a coherent manner, how to present them
in a way that is easily understandable to other people, and to be factually and thematically
precise.
To do this, I had to spend four years getting my bachelor's degree, two years to get my
master's, four years to earn my PhD, and another year as a postdoc.
That took a lot of human capital.
Education is the most obvious form of human capital formation, but it is not the only
one.
For example, many trades and professions have historically required apprenticeships as a
way of developing the necessary physical skills and muscle memory.
The human capital that comes out of this process is a person possessing both the know-how and
the ability to be highly productive in his or her trade.
Almost all pathways to prosperity require human capital development through some combination
of formal education and what we'll call learning by doing.
We've just talked about the importance of physical and human capital.
These kinds of capital are procured through financial capital, which brings us back to
the importance of credit.
All forms of capital are scarce and costly, and ironically, usually those with the greatest
access to it are the same people who don't need it.
Paradoxically, it is those who possess the least amount of financial capital who could
enhance their prosperity the most if only they could acquire the skills and machines
that would help them maximize their own productivity.
But one obvious rejoinder to this is that if individuals could simply learn the importance
of thrift, one can save and invest one's way to wealth.
Benjamin Franklin, writing in poor Richard's Almanac, said, in short, the way to wealth
if you desire it is as plain as the way to market.
It depends on two words, industry and frugality.
Andrew Carnegie agreed, noting in the Empire of Business that thrift is mainly at the
bottom of all improvement.
In fact, Franklin and Carnegie turned contemporary pathways to prosperity on its head.
The real key to improving one's fortune in the developed world comes through access to
capital, but this means access to credit.
Why borrow first rather than save?
Because it would take forever to save enough without the human capital, whereas after earning
the human capital, it's possible to earn more money and pay back the loan.
Let me give you a specific example.
Let's say you want to achieve prosperity by becoming a doctor.
Let's also assume that you have no money to speak of.
Faced with this situation, you have two choices.
First, you could scrimp and save until you have enough money to pay for college and medical
school on your own without borrowing a cent.
Because you don't have that much human capital, however, you won't be able to earn that much
money, which means it can take a very long time to save up enough to become a doctor.
Or you could borrow the money, go to college and medical school, and then pay back the
loans after you graduate.
Because you're a doctor, you're going to be able to earn more money, which should allow
you to pay back your loans more quickly than if you had tried to save the same amount in
the first place.
The reason why access to credit is so important is that it allows those without financial
wherewithal to acquire their needed education, training, and equipment.
So as credit constraints loosen, the road to individual prosperity should be wider and
better paved.
The more accessible credit is to individuals, the easier it is for people without means
to become people with means.
Credit allows people who were not born prosperous to gain a pathway to prosperity over the
span of their lifetimes.
Now there are dangers to easy credit as well, and we'll talk about that in later lectures.
For now, however, credit matters because it allows individuals to borrow to improve their
productivity.
The importance of physical and human capital to determining one's wages remains true.
But since about 1980, a couple of interesting trends have emerged, particularly in the United
States, although generally it applies to most of the developed world.
First, human capital is increasingly more important relative to physical capital.
Second, the returns on education in particular have skyrocketed.
And third, the people at the very top of their fields, the superstars, are doing very, very
well.
Let's look at these trends in turn.
First, let's talk about a shift in the valuable components of capital.
It used to be the case that physical capital and learning by doing constituted the most
important means through which individuals improve their productivity.
That is simply no longer the case.
An increasing amount of human capital formation requires formal education rather than apprenticeships.
Let me give you an example here.
Fire station chiefs increasingly have master's degrees in addition to a BA.
Now, this leads to an obvious question.
Why would a fire station chief need that degree if their job is simply to put fires out?
The reason is that in the 21st century, a fire chief needs a host of new skills and
relatively complex skills at that to be able to do their job properly.
They don't just need to know how to put out fires.
They need to know things like emergency medical training.
In these days, they also need to know things about homeland security and anti-terrorism
detection.
They need to be aware of the science necessary to cope with things like industrial fires.
They have to deal with public relations for things like community outreach and ties to
their neighborhood.
They need management skills for handling the firehouse, for applying for federal or state
grants, and for certainly coordinating with other bureaucracies.
On the whole, being a fire station chief in the 21st century is a much more complex job
than it was in the 20th century.
More generally, consider the changes in manufacturing and agriculture over time.
In the past, both of these sectors relied heavily on brute force, physical skill, and
muscle labor.
Now things have changed a little bit.
First, one of the factors driving this is globalization.
Developing countries now possess a comparative advantage for simple manual labor, either
through offshore outsourcing or through the migration of that labor to the developed world.
The manufacturing jobs that remain in the United States require much greater technical
skill and knowledge.
For advancement in this sector, an advanced degree is usually required.
In agriculture, the popular image that we would see in films or in television of the
hard working family farm is also now, unfortunately, mostly a myth.
What is needed to really be a good farmer is a solid grounding in biochemistry.
Now physical capital is still obviously a necessity, but increasingly, key elements of physical
capital are becoming cheaper and cheaper for individuals, so the relative importance compared
to human capital isn't as high.
Again, we'll talk about it from a personal example.
Consider computers.
As a professor, I need a computer that can be fast and has access to lots of information
for me to do research.
Fortunately for me, the pricing of computing power has declined by a factor of 100,000
fold, even since the rollout of the 1981 IBM personal computer.
So I can increase my productivity with a much less expensive investment in physical
capital than a similar professor could have in 1981.
I still need the physical capital of a computer, but that capital costs much less and is far
more powerful than was the case a generation ago.
Not to mention, I can research and gain a lot more information by accessing the internet,
which was barely available in 1981.
Now let's talk about the education premium.
We can see a lot more evidence about the shifting importance of education in human capital by
examining the gap in wages achieved by educational attainment.
Based on current policy rhetoric, you might think that the returns for education are starting
to dry up.
Some entrepreneurs like Peter Thiel, some policy analysts like Matthew Iglesias, and
some academics like law professor Glenn Reynolds have argued there is a bubble in higher education.
The skyrocketing price of higher education makes the investment seem risky and somewhat
unrewarding.
Indeed, even the price of public higher education, that is, universities at state schools which
are supposed to be cheaper than private colleges, rose by 72% over the last decade.
And furthermore, there are pretty easy narratives to tell of people who didn't have much education,
but nevertheless are hugely prosperous.
Bill Gates, the founder of Microsoft and Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook, are probably
the most famous college dropouts in history, for example.
Now they're billionaires.
So who needs education?
Contrary to popular belief, the data on this is incontrovertible.
The best investment one can make to improve their economic fortunes is to earn a college
degree.
As economists, Claudia Golden puts it, the wealth of nations is no longer in resources,
it's no longer in physical capital, it's in human capital.
To be sure, there was always an earnings gap between those with more education and those
with less.
But the last 30 years have really seen this wage gap explode in the United States.
In 1980, college graduates earned approximately 40% more than high school graduates.
So even back then, there was an education premium.
But by 2010, that figure had more than doubled.
College graduates now earn 83% more than high school graduates.
At present, that translates into an average of an extra $580,000 for a college-educated
worker over a lifetime.
Nor is the gap in earnings only at that divide.
According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, people who have completed a master's degree
earn 22% more than those who have completed only a bachelor's degree.
On average, people who have completed a professional or doctoral degree out earn those with a bachelor's
degree by approximately 50%.
And it's not just about the gap in earnings, but also about the gap in employment.
The average unemployment rate for a high school graduate is nearly double the overall unemployment
rate.
In turn, the unemployment rate for those who are in a professional degree or a doctorate
is just half the level of those with a bachelor's degree.
And what is particularly striking is that the education premium exists across all range
of professions, not just those we would associate with a college degree.
Hair dressers, for example, with a BA, with a bachelor's degree, out earn those with
only a high school degree by 76%.
Child care workers with a college degree earn 80% more than their colleagues who have only
a high school degree.
Studies by the US Census Bureau reveal that education is the single most important determinant
of a person's income, more important than gender, age, race, ethnicity, or the region
of the country that they live in.
Finally, according to a recent study by the Hamilton Project, the average outlay for four
years of college is approximately $102,000, and that's a lot of money.
But they calculated the possible rates of return for investing that money in college
or alternatives, such as stocks, bonds, or treasury bills.
And what did they find?
Investing in a college degree earned a rate of return between 15% and 20%.
Stocks were the best performing financial investment, and they only came in at 7%.
So to sum up, college is the best possible investment for individuals to make before
entering the workforce.
Now education is really important, but as I said at the outset, it is not the only thing
that determines wages and income in the developed world.
So let's get to our third trend, the superstar phenomenon.
The superstar economy has emphasized the role of Fortuna, or what we would call luck.
In 1981, the economist Sherwin Rosen published an article entitled The Economics of Superstars.
He observed that there were a variety of fields in which a very small number of people earned
the overwhelming majority of the income produced by that field.
Now this would include things like most forms of entertainment, acting, or music, or stand
up comedy.
It would also include sports as well.
Indeed, a recent study showed that Olympic gold medalists vastly out-earned the amount
of income after they earned their gold than bronze medal winners.
In all these sectors, the top people in the field earn incomes that fall into the top
1% of all incomes.
The rest of the people in the field, however, earn well below average incomes.
In superstar economies, even small differences in talent or skill can lead to vast differences
in income.
It's the promise or the possibility of becoming the top 1% that leads a lot of people to enter
the field.
Even though the medium income in the field might look respectable, the overwhelming majority
of people in a superstar profession earn meager amounts of income.
This lottery, or winner-take-all phenomenon, is now spreading to a lot of other professions
beyond entertainment.
In many fields, there is a long drawn-out process during which income is relatively modest,
and if the person can survive that long, incomes start to rise dramatically.
This is why so many actors wait tables early in their careers before hopefully they make
it big.
In the academy, this has happened slowly over the past few decades, in which you would take
a long time to get your PhD, a post-doctorate, and then hopefully you would get an actual
position.
An increasingly long period during which you have to gain some kind of apprenticeship before
you get that job.
And furthermore, an increasing fraction of PhDs do not get tenure-track jobs, but rather
very low-paying adjunct and visiting positions.
Those who do make it to the top of the academic mountain, however, earn even greater rewards.
Their base salaries, lucrative book contracts and speaking fees, and more fellowships and
grants.
This winner-take-all phenomenon is true of other professions.
In law firms, junior lawyers have to work pretty hard to make partner.
The same principle applies to accounting firms, and in top consulting firms, the culture is
one in which individuals have a few years to distinguish themselves, after which they
have to move either up or out, much like the military.
Now what does luck have to do with all this?
Presumably this should be a meritocratic phenomenon, right?
The best should make it all the way to the top.
Isn't the superstar phenomenon simply an example of revealing true ability?
Well yes and no, it's a little more complicated than that.
On the one hand, absolutely no one begrudges Michael Jordan or Kobe Bryant or LeBron James,
they're riches.
They're clearly better than even the average professional basketball player.
But on the other hand, in a lot of other professions, the gap between the superstars and the near
superstars is very small, while the gap in pay between them is extremely large.
Let's consider Angelina Jolie.
She's won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, so she's clearly skilled.
She's also quite attractive, which I hear doesn't hurt in the movies.
She has earned $20 million per film and is easily one of the most famous actresses in
the world.
Now consider Jennifer Connolly.
She also has won a Best Supporting Actress Award.
She's also clearly pretty attractive, and she's also an outstanding actress.
While well paid however, she has never earned close to $20 million per film.
She's only earned a fraction of them.
Now the differences between these two actresses are so slight as to be infinitesimal.
Nevertheless, we're earning a vastly greater sum than the other.
No one could reasonably argue that Angelina Jolie is four or five times as talented as
Jennifer Connolly, but her income suggests this to be the case.
This is the role that Fortuna or Luck plays.
This is true in a lot of the fields that experience the winner takes all phenomena.
Just a little bit of luck or slight differences at the beginning of one's career can vault
an individual into the superstar category.
So let's recap.
Education is more important than other forms of capital.
The gap between earnings of education and the uneducated has grown.
And in a lot of professions, there's a superstar phenomenon.
Those at the top are earning far more than those just close to the top, much less those
on the bottom.
Now what explains these trends?
Basically there are three factors that economists talk about to explain this gap.
And I'm not going to talk about them in order of importance, but rather just generally.
No one wants to assign weights to these things.
The first thing is globalization.
There have always been differences in merit, and Fortuna has always played some role in
an individual getting to the top of their field.
These are not new things.
What is new, however, is the rewards that one can receive in a globalized economy from
being the best of the best.
In 1962, Wilt Chamberlain scored 100 points in an NBA basketball game.
But the game wasn't televised.
While it made news, the actual audience for the event was only 4,124 people in Hershey,
Pennsylvania.
When Michael Jordan was at the peak of his basketball abilities, the NBA was broadcast
on global television networks.
The size of Jordan's audience was in the billions.
Winner-take-all economies have always existed.
What's changed isn't the winners so much, is that the all is now much larger.
And so as a result, the rewards for being a superstar are also much larger.
The second thing that's changing is skill-based technical change.
Economists throw this term around a lot.
It refers to a shift in production technology that favors skilled workers over unskilled
workers.
A lot of technological innovation over the past two generations has essentially used
capital as a substitute for both unskilled labor and labor where skills are acquired
through experience.
Between 1983 and 2002, for example, the job categories with the largest decline in the
United States were in areas immune to international trade.
Brick masons and stone masons, shoe machine operators and railroad operators.
Automation has either eliminated or simplified all of these professions, drastically reducing
their wages and the opportunities for employment in those fields.
The final thing to think about is policy shifts.
It's not that individual productivity has shifted for the better educated.
It's that the taxation on those who are earning lots of income has declined considerably.
Since 1980, a series of policy shifts have allowed those earning high levels of income
to keep a larger share of that income.
There's been a reduction in marginal tax rates.
There's been cuts in taxes on capital gains.
And there's been an elimination of the estate tax.
So for all three of these instances, the really well off when they earn money get to keep a
much larger fraction of it, particularly compared to the middle class.
So in conclusion, what are the implications of this lecture?
First, the past to economic prosperity still exists for Americans, but there are fewer
of them than there used to be.
Higher education is increasingly a necessary condition for accomplishing relative prosperity
in the developed world.
In our next session, we'll see whether these same principles apply to individuals trying
to prosper in the developing world.
