In our last lecture, we explored some of the pathways to individual prosperity in the developed
world.
And when people say the developed world, there's a reasonably strong consensus of what that
means exactly.
So in North America, we're talking about the United States, we're talking about Canada,
in parts of Mexico, and Central America.
We talk about Europe, we're talking about almost all of Europe, maybe not including
Russia or most of the Balkan countries.
There's certainly areas of the developed world in the Middle East, the oil-rich sheikdoms
for example, and certainly Israel.
In the Pacific Rim, we can think of Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Australia
and New Zealand.
Most all of these countries are referred to as the advanced industrialized states.
Most of them are members of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, or
OECD.
It's also called the Rich Man's Club, and that consists of the advanced prosperous democracies.
What about the rest of the planet?
That's commonly referred to as the developing world, but just calling it the developing
world masks a lot of variance, both between and within countries.
Even within sub-Saharan Africa, for example, which is generally thought to be one of the
poorest places in the world, there's a range of affluence.
So for example, a country like Botswana has a per capita income of $16,500.
On the other hand, you have the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the per capita income
there is only $300 per person.
Places like China have vastly different ranges of prosperity even within its borders.
So the Tianjin or Guangdong provinces have per capita incomes around $13,000 per person.
But China also has areas of poverty, places like Yunnan or Guizhou provinces.
They approximate about $2,700 per capita income.
Some developing countries have a long tradition of political and ethnic stability, say for
example, Costa Rica.
Others on the other hand, Lebanon, Somalia, and Afghanistan don't have much stability
at all.
Now my point in bringing all of this up is that it is very difficult to make general
statements about a set of countries and regions that are so varied.
The statements I am about to make about the pathways to individual prosperity in the developing
world hold with a bit less force than what we talked about in the last lecture with respect
to the developed world.
That's because the developing world is so heterogeneous.
Bear that in mind during this lecture.
In the last lecture when I talked about the importance of education, I'm pretty confident
about that.
That's a relatively simple proposition.
When we talk about the developing world, we're about to talk about a lot more complex
propositions.
Now, as I said before, one of the conclusions that we could draw was crystal clear about
the developed world.
Education is important.
You would think that this logic should apply to individuals in the developing world as
well, right?
Well, I'm an academic so you know what the answer is going to be.
And the answer is it's complicated.
There are yes and no parts to this answer.
Yes, in the one hand, in the abstract, one would expect the same dynamics to play out.
So higher levels of education should translate into higher incomes in the developing world.
But on the other hand, the answer is also no.
Individuals in the developing world face a completely different set of incentives and
constraints than those who live in the advanced industrialized economies.
These differences make their menu of possible choices different from those that are available
to individuals in the developed world.
We need to understand those differences before we can explain the best route to prosperity
for people living in the developing world.
So let's think about this.
How exactly is the developing world different?
There are several key differences between living in the developing world and let's say
living in the United States.
Two of them that are really important.
The first one is that the rule of law in the developing world is considerably weaker.
Now to understand what I'm talking about, think about this organization called Transparency
International.
TI is a non-profit, non-governmental organization founded in 1993 by Peter Eigen and dedicated
to the proposition of monitoring and rooting out government corruption across the world.
They are best known for devising an index to measure how corrupt different societies
are perceived to be in opinion surveys of both business leaders and policy analysts.
If you look at the Transparency International webpage, you'll find a very pretty color-coded
version of the corruption perceptions index.
Study this index for a while and you'll notice one very obvious correlation.
The countries that have higher per capita incomes also have lower levels of perceived
corruption.
The developed world, on average, is far less corrupt than the developing world.
Now just to be clear, I'm not saying the corruption causes poverty.
It could very well be that the reverse is true.
Greater poverty encourages more corruption.
What I'm saying is that corruption is the more omnipresent fact of life for people living
in the developing world than for people who live in the developed world.
And not surprisingly, countries with higher levels of corruption have far less adherence
to the rule of law.
We can understand this less adherence to the rule of law by looking at a fascinating natural
experiment that supports this point and deals with parking tickets in New York City.
Patients at the United Nations in the 1990s did not have to pay for any parking tickets
issue.
So the only thing that prevented them from parking illegally was their willingness to
adhere to New York City rules.
Otherwise, they would just get the parking ticket and not bother paying it.
Two economists, Ray Feisman and Edward Miguel, thought that this was a great natural experiment.
People tend to obey the rule of law because of both a moral and ethical obligation or
because of the fear of punishment if one gets caught breaking the law.
For diplomats in New York City, only the desire to adhere to the rule of law would matter.
There was no enforcement.
There was no punishment.
When Feisman and Miguel looked at which UN legations racked the most tickets per capita
between 1997 and 2002, they found a very simple but powerful correlation.
The most corrupt countries in TI's corruption perceptions index earned the greatest number
of parking tickets.
In other words, diplomats from societies with high levels of corruption felt less of a need
to adhere to the rules in New York City.
Remember when we talked about productive versus unproductive entrepreneurship in a prior lecture?
Countries with high levels of corruption reward unproductive entrepreneurship, which leads
to lower overall economic growth.
The weaker the rule of law, the greater the transaction costs that individuals face in
trying to engage the formal parts of the economy.
For example, property rights enforcement becomes next to impossible, which means that entrepreneurs
do not have a strong incentive to invest in large-scale physical capital, because if you
do that, there's always a threat that the state might come and appropriate it.
Registering a legal business in the developing world is also extremely difficult.
Peruvian economist Hernando de Sota once conducted an experiment to see how long it would take
to legally and properly register a business in Peru without paying any bribes, without
using any political favors to expedite the process.
It took approximately two-thirds of a year, and even then there were times where they
had no choice but to pay a bribe in order to accelerate the process.
So we know that developing countries usually have higher levels of corruption than developed
countries.
This leads to the second big difference.
Capital markets are less sophisticated and more repressed in developing economies than
in the developed world.
For financial institutions to function properly, there needs to be a strong commitment to the
rule of law, as well as a strong degree of trust among economic agents.
If you think about it for a second, the only way that institutions like banks can properly
function is through trust.
I have to trust the bank when I deposit money that they will not abscond with my funds.
Similarly, the bank has to trust the people it loans the money to, that they will by and
large repay it.
Now there are other reasons that presumably the bank is not going to abscond with my money
and that people will repay their loans, things like laws or collateral, factors like that.
But the more that financial actors trust each other, the better that financial markets can
operate.
This is why, for example, the Bernie Madoff scandal, involving his fund in which he ripped
off almost all of his investors, was thought to be so scandalous.
Then trusted Madoff, and Madoff exploited that trust to run a scam.
We've already discussed that the rule of law tends to be weaker in developing countries.
These countries also have traditionally had a trust deficit.
In the World Value Survey that I've talked about before, citizens from across the world
are asked whether they agree with the proposition that most people can be trusted.
In the Scandinavian countries that were surveyed between 2005 and 2008, an average of 67% gave
a yes to this answer.
In the Sub-Saharan African countries that were surveyed at the same time, only 25% said yes.
Three quarters of the respondents said instead that you can't be too careful.
That's a trust deficit.
Without high levels of trust in legal order, there is much less incentive to offer financing
to people that lack either personal or political connections.
If you do not trust the people you are lending money to, you will either not lend as much
to them, or you will demand far more collateral in return.
Because of a lack of trust in these financial institutions, they will have to hold more
reserves to hedge against defaults.
Banks that are not trusted fear a run on them, a simultaneous withdrawal of deposits from
all of their depositors.
Now by holding more reserves or cash on hand, they can try to reassure everyone else that
the bank won't collapse.
The problem though is that when a bank holds more reserves, that's money that they can't
lend out.
It reduces the amount that the bank can loan out.
It means less credit creation.
In these circumstances, the developing country government might also interfere to try to
control and allocate scarce capital.
If the capital is scarce, then politicians will want to make sure that it gets allocated
toward key political supporters.
For example, one source of the political unrest that started in Syria in 2011 was the way
that the Syrian government allocated resources.
Its president Bashar al-Assad came from a minority Alawite sect that comprises less
than 15% of the Syrian population.
Nevertheless, Alawites, along with the Christian minority, dominate the Syrian economy, the
government, and the military.
Governments like having control of this kind of capital.
It's a powerful tool of policy and politics.
They will have an incentive to resist any kind of liberalization of their capital markets
because that removes a tool of political patronage for them.
And remember this about politicians.
I've got a PhD in political science, so I know this.
The primary goal of politicians, more than anything else, is to stay in power.
And in the developing world, having access to that capital is one of the ways in which
they can stay in power.
The financial sector in developing countries therefore looks pretty different from the
developed world.
Bank finance is far more important than either stock markets or venture capital in the developing
world.
In the developing world, you'll also see far higher levels of state ownership of firms
than would occur in the developed world.
And finally, access to capital is far more closely linked to either political, ethnic,
or familial ties.
Because capital markets in the developing world are repressed and restricted, most developing
countries have much lower capital labor ratios than the developed economies.
Now recall from our last lecture that capital is crucially important for workers to be productive.
In the developed world, high capital to labor ratios mean that workers are often extremely
productive.
In the developing world, low capital to labor ratios means that workers are less productive,
which means that their wages are understandably lower.
So we know that the rule of law is weaker in developing countries and that these countries
possess lower levels of capital.
There is one other significant difference, which is that public goods provision in the
developing world is far weaker than in the developed world.
Now this is true for both supply and demand reasons.
Let's start with the supply.
Remember that our last lecture, when we introduced the concept of public goods, obviously governments
need to pay for these things.
Governments need resources to be able to provide public goods, like infrastructure, information,
or potable drinking water.
Governments in the developed world have reasonably fair and effective systems for collecting
the tax revenue that makes the provision of these public goods possible.
Also, by and large, citizens trust the government a sufficient amount to pay those taxes.
By and large, if you ask, let's say in the United States, the IRS, to try to enforce
tax collection among all of its citizens, the IRS wouldn't be able to do it.
The only way the governments like the United States or Japan or Western Europe are able
to finance themselves is in the faith that citizens in the end will pay their taxes because
they think that's the thing they should do.
But as we've seen in the developing world, the levels of corruption are often high and
the levels of trust are often very low.
This makes it very difficult for developing country governments to collect the necessary
tax revenue to finance public goods.
So that's the supply side problem.
On the demand side problem, a government's incentive to supply public goods is a function
of who the selector it is.
The selector is a term from political science that political scientist Bruce Wendell de Mosquita
came up with.
It refers to those individuals who decide when they should replace a leader.
In the democracies of the developed world, the voters are the selector.
But in more authoritarian countries, which we often find in the developing world, the
selector is a much smaller group.
In China, for example, the selector would likely be members of the Chinese Communist
Party.
In Saudi Arabia, it would be even narrower.
That's the members of the Saudi royal family.
For authoritarian states, the incentive to provide public goods is smaller than the incentive
to offer narrower rewards to one's political base.
As a result, authoritarian countries tend to rely on extractive institutions rather
than inclusive institutions.
With extractive institutions, the idea is that the state will try to extract resources
from broad masses society and then reward their selector it.
With inclusive institutions, they will also extract resources from the broad masses society
but then presumably provide public goods that also benefit the broad masses society.
So we know that developing economies look a little bit different from developed economies.
Now let's go back to the individual level.
What are the implications of these differences for individual decision making?
There are actually a few very big macro differences.
The first is that individuals in the developing world have to focus their time and their energy
on issues that most people in the developed world would take for granted.
In the developed world, things like immunization against disease, potable drinking water, sewage
systems, education for children and public safety are taken for granted.
These goods and services are either mandated by law or provided at reasonable cost to citizens.
In the developing world, these are under provided or under enforced, which means that households
have to decide for themselves whether and how to purchase them.
The problem is another public good that is radically under provided in the developing
world is information.
Very often poor households in the developing world are uninformed or misinformed about
the value of key goods.
Let's consider education or healthcare as examples.
The combination of a low information environment and the need for citizens to make decisions
on whether to provide basic goods that developed countries take for granted can lead to very,
very inefficient or uninformed decisions.
Research by Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Dufloh shows that many impoverished people living
in India and sub-Saharan Africa prefer expensive inoculations and vaccines over, let's say,
basic hydration therapy when confronted with diseases that basic hydration therapy would
take care of.
Even if those expensive approaches don't really work, it appears that poor people still want
them, even though this would take up a larger fraction of their income.
Because those expensive vaccines are more expensive, a lot of poor people take the price
as a signal that these remedies will work better.
It's thought that if they're expensive, they must be good.
Poor families in the developing world will also send some children to school, but not
others, because parents mistakenly believe that a lot of education is necessary for prosperity.
In actuality, even basic education matters a lot for future prospects, even in the developing
world.
So poor people, as a result of poor information, are making bad investment decisions on things
like health care and education.
So many in the developing world have to focus on issues that people in the developed world
take for granted.
Another difference is that families in developing countries have an incentive to have more children.
In the developed world, individuals can rely on pensions, individual retirement accounts,
social security, or other savings and welfare programs to provide and plan for retirement
at old age.
In the developing world, these programs or savings options are not as well developed.
As a result, individuals have an incentive to view their children as their investments
for their own future.
By taking care of them as children, the implicit contract is that some of them will take care
of their parents later in life.
Of course, having more children also implies fewer resources per member of a household.
So for example, there are studies that show that there is an inverse relationship between
family size and the amount of savings per household.
So in other words, the larger that a family is, the less that family has been able to
save.
Mothers in large families are also far more likely to be undernourished than mothers in
smaller families in the developing world.
The more resources are devoted in the developing world to socially observable rituals like
christenings, dowries, and weddings.
These take up a huge fraction of a poor person's income in the developing world.
So in addition to having larger families and devoting more time and energy to providing
basic needs, individuals in the developing world are also likely to make smaller investments
in human and physical capital, but more investments in social capital.
Because capital markets are repressed, access to credit is more restricted, so even if households
are interested in making capital investments, their opportunity to do so will be restricted.
Because the rule of law is weaker, there is less incentive to acquire large amounts of
immobile physical capital that leaves one vulnerable to coercion from the state, which
can always threaten to expropriate those assets.
For example, in 2012, a high-ranking Chinese official named Bo Xilai was suspended from
his position as party chief in the city of Chongqing.
Allegations emerged that Bo and his police chief arrested and tortured private real estate
developers so that they would sell their assets to state-owned enterprises linked to Bo and
his cronies.
The result is a very large informal or gray market sector in developing economies.
These businesses do not have a license or registration.
They're usually relatively small, but they can start up and shut down quickly.
The best example I can give of this is from my time living in Ukraine, unlicensed taxi
drivers.
Basically, if you were a citizen in Ukraine and you had a car and you were a citizen in
Ukraine and you needed a ride somewhere, you would simply stand out on the street and
raise your hand.
Rather than a taxi necessarily coming to get you, anyone with a car would stop and drive
you from point A to point B in return for some extra pocket money.
Because a shorter time horizons, which living on one or two dollars a day will produce,
the incentive to invest in human capital is also a lot less.
Data from UNESCO for 2006, for example, shows that roughly 30 percent of OECD citizens get
a college education.
In Latin America, the average is only 11 percent.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, it's less than 8 percent.
The logic here is simple.
Why invest in education if it takes years for the payoff?
This is why child labor makes rational economic sense in some countries.
The immediate payoff for that family from the child labor is more important to them than
the long-term potential that's created from education.
Because of how capital is repressed, individuals have an incentive to develop strong ties to
politically connected members of the selectorate in the developing world.
This increases their odds of getting access to scarce capital, scholarships for education,
and so forth, but it takes time and it's therefore relatively expensive.
So what are the drivers for individual prosperity in the developing world?
We've identified some of the distinctive characteristics of economies in this part
of the world and we've begun to see how those characteristics limit and shape the decisions
people can make.
Now let's address another question.
Given this kind of operating environment, how do individuals living in the developing
world try to escape poverty and attain prosperity?
Studies of the poor in the developing world reveal a few strategies that do seem to work.
The first is agricultural diversification.
A large fraction of the developing world's population still engages in agriculture as
a means of earning a living.
By diversifying their agriculture, things like planting different crops or raising different
forms of livestock, individuals are better prepared to weather shocks to one particular
agricultural sector.
This prevents a descent back into poverty, which we'll talk about in a later lecture.
Another way out of poverty for these people is employment in the informal sector.
The quickest way for individuals in the developed world to exit poverty is through a formal
job.
Surveys in the developing world, however, reveal that only a small minority exit poverty
that way.
The easier way in the developing world is to take a job in the informal sector, the gray
market sector that I talked about before.
These jobs require less education and fewer connections.
In survey work in poverty-stricken areas on three continents, employment in the informal
sector was the most popular means of exiting poverty.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, informal work accounted for more than 90 percent of all jobs created
between 1995 and 2005.
Another strategy that individuals can pursue to try to improve their prosperity is household
diversification.
Families will often send one member into an urban area for an informal job, while others
would stay in rural areas to continue with agricultural work.
The combination of agriculture and non-agricultural employment is a crude form of portfolio diversification.
What's equally interesting is what seems to be less important in affecting the pathways
to prosperity.
So for example, consider manufacturing.
There's a powerful myth in the developed world that all the manufacturing jobs are going
to the developing world.
But although industrialization is commonly associated with prosperity, modern manufacturing
actually generates little in the way of employment.
Productivity is increased so rapidly that output can rise while employment falls.
In 1995 and 2002, for example, 22 million manufacturing jobs were lost globally, but
industrial output increased by 30 percent at the same time due to increases in productivity.
As a result, very few people escape poverty nowadays through manufacturing work.
The second thing that you would think the developing individuals would want to do but
don't necessarily do is education.
It's not that education is unimportant for prosperity, it's that education alone cannot
do much.
It is only when education is combined with other complementary inputs that the benefits
from higher education become significant.
The best trained PhD in engineering, for example, can't do much with that degree unless he has
the infrastructure to exploit his education.
Unless skilled entrepreneurs can gain access to capital and don't need to worry about losing
their property, they can't do much.
Now before I wrap up today's lecture, I'd like to make two important closing notes.
First, the individual pathway out of poverty in the developing world is not necessarily
a sustainable path towards true national prosperity of that developing country.
Informal work and small agricultural plots do not have that high of an income ceiling
even though they're raising their floor.
Paradoxically, the quickest and most effective paths out of poverty are also the ones that
limit both the individual and the national ascent to genuine prosperity.
Second, there is one unique pathway to prosperity that is less available for individuals in
the developed world, but quite available to individuals in the developing world.
And that's cross-border migration.
Historically, for many individuals, the ability to cross borders has been a prerequisite for
achieving prosperity.
Immigrants to the Western Hemisphere during the age of discovery, for example, that was
how they improved their lot in life.
Waves of immigration during the 19th century into the United States was also thought to
be a great example for how people improved their income.
And then contrary to myth, a lot of these migrants earned their fortune and then returned
back to their country of origin.
The same is true with today's economic immigrants.
Mexican immigrants very often do agricultural work in the Southwestern United States and
then send that income back to their home country.
Indian software entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley profit because of H-1B visas.
North African and Middle Eastern immigrants in Europe also work and send money back home.
And even South Asian workers in the Gulf Sheikdons, when I visited Dubai, you saw people there,
the service workers there, did not come from the United Arab Emirates.
They came mostly from South Asia.
These migrants send remittances to their families at home, which promote prosperity in multiple
ways.
Income remittances are pretty big business now.
The World Bank estimates that $375 billion in remittances flowed into the developing
world in 2011.
For some countries, remittances boosted their per capita income significantly.
Remittances equaled 12% of Bangladesh's GDP, and remittances into Mexico were 150% greater
than foreign direct investment flows.
By 2012, remittance flows are roughly equal to combined portfolio investment and official
development assistance flows combined.
These flows have also demonstrated greater resiliency to shocks like the 2008 financial
crisis.
At the household level, remittances forced families to enter the formal financial system
because income is often sent via bank accounts and wire transfers.
This makes it easier for individuals to access both information and formal credit markets
and thereby make longer-term investments.
So a few takeaways from this session.
The first is that developing economies lack a lot of the capabilities, things like large
capital investments, public goods, and even simple trust that are taken for granted in
the developed world.
And second, these differences in national attributes have profound effects on what individuals
will do to achieve prosperity.
In the developing world, this leads to behavior that improves short-term prosperity for individuals,
but in ways that can stunt long-term prosperity.
Finally, individuals in the developing world have one additional and attractive option to
improve their lot in life.
They can migrate to more developed parts of the globe.
