As I mentioned toward the end of our last lecture, one of the best ways for individuals
in the developing world to attain prosperity is to migrate to the developed world.
This raises a rather important point.
There are wildly divergent levels of national prosperity, and they have actually gotten
more divergent over the past century.
This brings us to the key topic for today.
What are the foundational principles for improving overall prosperity at the national
level as opposed to the individual level?
Now as we move from the individual to the national level, the instinctive response
might well be, so long as individuals do what they should to achieve their own prosperity,
then the country will be prosperous as well.
This goes back to Adam Smith's notion of the invisible hand again.
If everyone simply pursues their own self-interest, society as a whole will benefit.
But things are not that simple.
If economic and political institutions are a skew, talented individuals might decide
to pursue what we call destructive or unproductive entrepreneurship rather than productive entrepreneurship.
In the developing world, a lot of what individuals will do to achieve prosperity might be good
for the short term, but it probably will not lead to a sustainable pathway to prosperity
over the long haul.
Even in the developed world, the collection of individual choices does not necessarily
add up to a recipe for national prosperity.
For example, we know, and I've hammered home this point, that education is critical to
individual prosperity in the developed world.
It's the safe, risk averse choice for individuals to enhance their own prosperity.
At the national level, however, education alone is insufficient.
There need to be risk takers, whether they are educated or not.
Entrepreneurship is a riskier choice at the individual level, but a necessary choice at
the national level for prosperity to survive and thrive.
In both kinds of societies, institutions and public policies play a very important role
in determining individual strategies and choices.
Public goods alter the costs and benefits of different kinds of private decision making.
Let me give you a few examples of this.
If a country imposes high barriers to both importing and exporting, then individual firms
in that country will naturally focus more on catering to their home market, their domestic
market, rather than importing factors and exporting finished goods.
Or if a country invests in basic scientific research, it lowers the cost for private sector
firms to invest in related applied research and, as a result, leads to more overall investment
in research and development, which leads to a more innovative economy, which leads to
a more prosperous national economy.
My point here is that if you're concerned about national prosperity, your answer about
what should be done can't simply be leave it to individual initiative alone.
If national institutions either do too much or don't do enough, then individual incentives
are distorted in such a way as to stunt national prosperity.
The explosion of economic divergence in the 20th century between the developed and the
developing world is all the evidence you need for this.
So what are the keys to promoting national prosperity?
To answer the question, we first need to know how to measure prosperity at the national
level and then explain the different ways in which governments can harness the engine
of prosperity to benefit their populations.
So first, we need to be clear what we're talking about when we talk about national prosperity.
The simplest measure of national wealth and power is gross domestic product, or GDP.
This measures the value added produced by an economy for an entire calendar year.
In other words, this figure measures the total value of all final goods and services produced
by an economy and then subtracts the cost of the inputs that goes into producing those
goods and services.
What remains, what's left behind, that's the value added.
Let's be clear here.
The GDP is a measure of flow and not stock.
It doesn't measure the value of a country's assets or its wealth, rather it's measuring
the income produced by those assets.
Now this can lead to some funky attributes of measuring GDP.
For example, one of the oddities of GDP is that let's say a destructive hurricane, like
Hurricane Katrina, the devastated New Orleans, can actually oddly lead to a boost in GDP.
The reason is, is that even though Katrina destroyed massive amounts of infrastructure
in New Orleans, it also led to a building boom in that part of the world.
As a result, GDP only measures the new investment.
It doesn't measure the loss in existing investment.
So as a result, there are occasions where GDP isn't quite getting what we want.
For that said, GDP is calculated in a number of different ways, and I'm not going to bore
you with the details, but when I say GDP per capita or per capita income, they mean the
same thing.
And by and large, this is the best measure we have of figuring out things like national
prosperity.
That said, GDP per capita masks important differences between countries.
One of the ways that countries can grow, for example, is from a surge in a working age
population.
More workers means an increase in one factor of production, labor, which can mean a larger
GDP.
This growth, however, does not necessarily translate into greater prosperity at the individual
level.
In other words, it's possible for GDP to grow while GDP per capita remains stagnant, or vice
versa.
Indeed, as we noted in our first lecture, if one uses only GDP, then China seems almost
as prosperous as the United States.
Therefore, we have to use GDP per person or per capita to accurately measure national
prosperity.
So what can countries do to increase their per capita income?
There are, broadly speaking, four ways for a country to improve its prosperity relative
to the status quo.
Let's talk about them in turn.
The first method is the simplest, which is simply put to eliminate stupid or counterproductive
policies.
Now, this might sound like pure undistilled common sense, but even over the past century,
there have been a whole host of government policies that don't make a whole lot of sense
when it comes to promoting prosperity.
This naturally leads to the question of why these policies exist in the first place.
In some cases, the counterproductive policy is being implemented for reasons other than
promoting prosperity.
Consider the phenomenon that's called the dictator's dilemma.
Lots of authoritarian countries have strong controls or restrictions placed on internet
activity or even just computer activity.
Indeed, in some dictatorships over the last decade, it was actually illegal to own either
a personal computer or a modem.
In other authoritarian states, places like China or Singapore, massive investments are
being made in state censorship tools.
So even as people might be able to surf the internet, if they try searching for certain
items on the internet, they're going to get blocked because the state doesn't want them
to know about it.
Given the potential of the internet to expand business opportunities, this might be surprising.
After all, repressing the internet in some ways represses economic growth.
But because political leaders in these societies prioritize political control over economic
growth, they will restrict and regulate the internet to maintain political control rather
than exploit it to the fullest to maximize economic growth.
Policies that retard prosperity are not limited to authoritarian countries.
They exist in the developed world in the advanced industrialized states as well.
In the interest of protecting the economic security of individuals, a lot of governments
have imposed serious barriers to private firms being able to fire workers.
In France, for example, a fired worker has the ability to file a complaint with a conseil
de putte-home, which is an industrial tribunal.
Because these proceedings can drag on for years, French firms are extremely reluctant
to fire someone without ironclad proof of incompetency.
The unintended consequence of this law is that it makes firms extremely reluctant to
hire workers in the first place.
After all, once they're hired, they're probably going to be there for life.
Even if the national economy is booming, firms might be wary that they won't be able
to shed some of their workforce if a recession occurs.
French employment law is designed to protect current existing workers.
But it also retards job growth, which slows down economic growth, which harms the unemployed
and future workers.
Some social democracies are OK with this, because they tend to emphasize economic security
as a possible trade-off for economic prosperity.
But in other cases, the bad policies were implemented because someone thought they would
promote economic growth, but it turns out otherwise.
So, for example, the greatest famine in the 20th century was caused by Mao Tse Tung's
Great Leap Forward.
Now, it was implemented between 1958 and 1961.
It was a policy designed to collectivize agriculture and promote rural industrialization in China
as a means of spurring economic development.
The policies when they were implemented, however, were an abject disaster.
Both small-scale manufacturing and industry in rural areas were horribly inefficient,
sucking up lots of resources with very little to show for it.
At the same time, agricultural collectivization dramatically reduced China's food output,
leading to mass famine.
The Great Leap Forward led to negative economic growth during all the years it was in place.
Some estimates indicate that as many as 45 million people died as a result of Mao's
policies.
After the Great Leap Forward, Mao engineered its sequel, the Cultural Revolution, a 10-year
effort to maintain China on a revolutionary footing through a series of purges and attempts
at maintaining ideological rigor.
Now, the Cultural Revolution wasn't as deadly as the Great Leap Forward, but it did kill
an estimated 3 million people.
Part of the reason Chinese economic growth was so rapid in the 1980s was the simple fact
that Mao, who died in 1976, was no longer in charge of economic policy.
Simply put, anything was going to be an improvement on the economic policies yielded by the Great
Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution.
So once more, the first method to promoting economic prosperity at the national level
is to eliminate counterproductive policies.
The second method is to expand the opportunities for commercial activity.
To quote Adam Smith from The Wealth of Nations again, the division of labor is limited by
the extent of the market.
What he meant is that as a market grows in size, firms and individuals have an incentive
to hone in on the narrow set of activities that they are best at doing.
As each firm does this, the productivity of all firms increases, which then increases
overall prosperity.
In general, countries have two ways of expanding the opportunities for commercial activity.
The easiest one is to eliminate internal barriers to exchange.
That is to say, to make it easier for a producer to service the entire national market.
Now, there are lots of different kinds of restrictions at work when we talk about internal
market restrictions.
The first would be geographical limitations.
Historically, many countries have imposed internal tariffs, regulations or restrictions
which created barriers to exchange within a single country.
Prior to the French Revolution, for example, France had very high internal tariff rates
because that was the only way that France could raise revenue for the government.
These tariffs restricted the size of the internal market.
Another way was through regulatory limitations.
There might be certain spheres of economic activity that the state has decided to restrict
or regulate heavily.
Now, in many cases, those restrictions are justified.
For example, no one wants to bring back the slavery market or allow smoking to be completely
unregulated.
In other cases, however, the restrictions on economic activity might be more questionable.
For example, zoning laws often place restrictions on what kind of business activity can be conducted
where.
The reasons for these laws might be valid or not.
Let's say a school doesn't want to necessarily have an adult bookstore right close by.
Nevertheless, they constitute a restriction on commercial activity that does limit the
growth of prosperity.
For an even more extreme example, discrimination is morally wrong, but it also functions as
a form of inefficient economic regulation.
So, for example, laws that allow employers to discriminate based on race or gender reduce
overall welfare because they deny people of superior ability and productivity the chance
to perform these tasks.
The other way to expand commercial activity is to liberalize trade and exchange with the
rest of the world.
By opening up to international exchange, firms can focus on servicing global rather than
national markets and specialize in sectors where they possess a comparative advantage.
Trade expansion was the very reason Adam Smith wrote the Wealth of Nations.
He argued that free trade spurred greater productivity through a better organized division
of labor, thereby boosting national wealth.
This effect is particularly powerful for smaller countries, since they benefit even more from
catering to global markets.
It's not surprising, therefore, that the most prosperous small countries think Denmark,
Switzerland, or Singapore, for example, are also the countries most open to international
exchange.
Okay, so far we've looked at two ways that a country might enhance its overall prosperity.
First, it can eliminate counterproductive economic policies.
And second, it can expand opportunities for commercial activity, both internally and internationally.
Now these first two ways of enhancing prosperity are about increases in static efficiency.
In other words, these measures take the given inputs of land, labor, capital, and technology,
and try to enact policies that maximize the efficiency of these uses of resources.
Increases in static efficiency tend to be one-off improvements, meaning if a policy
is enacted, there is a one-time improvement in prosperity.
But no further increases after that.
While increases in static efficiency are valuable, increases in dynamic efficiency are even more
valuable.
The best way to explain the difference between static and dynamic efficiency is to imagine
a curve called the production possibilities frontier.
The production possibilities frontier represents the maximum possible output that an economy
can generate given existing inputs.
Any point in that curve is possible, but any point beyond it is impossible.
Steps that increase static efficiency help push the economy from something inside the
production possibilities frontier, some inefficient level below it, to the production possibilities
frontier itself.
Steps that increase dynamic efficiency, on the other hand, actually push out the production
possibilities frontier curve itself.
Measures that can expand the frontier are the policies or actions that can be true game
changers for national prosperity.
There are two principle ways to expand the production possibilities frontier in ways
that benefit per capita income or per capita GDP.
First, economies that engage in greater capital accumulation should increase their level of
output as well as their productivity per worker.
As we have talked about in previous lectures, there are two kinds of capital relevant to
boosting prosperity.
There's physical capital, investment in machines, equipment, and structures that allow for large
scale production.
And then there's human capital, education and training embodied in the labor force.
Simply put, the more that an economy invests in these kinds of capital, the greater the
long run growth potential of the national economy.
As we talked about in a previous lecture, more capital per worker means that each worker
is more productive.
This in turn should increase individual prosperity for workers as well.
Now, higher levels of investment would seem a pretty straightforward proposition, but
there are a few conditions and caveats that need to be mentioned.
First, unless countries can borrow from the rest of the world, there is a trade off.
Investment is inherently limited to national savings.
This means that a lot of countries face a trade off between consumption and investment.
More investment improves growth possibilities for the future, but it also reduces the amount
that individuals can consume in the present.
China's economy is booming, but Chinese personal consumption as a percentage of GDP is ridiculously
low.
It's something like only 35%.
In contrast, in the United States, it's closer to 70%.
There's also a law of diminishing marginal returns to investment.
Countries with less capital, in other words developing countries, gain a lot from greater
amounts of capital investment.
Countries with high amounts of capital per worker, however, might not benefit as much.
So in other words, capital investment should lead to higher growth in, let's say, India
than in the United States.
Finally, and most important, the assumption that capital accumulation will improve prosperity
assumes that the capital investments will be made in a way that maximizes profits.
Historically, this has not always been the case.
For example, the USSR, the Soviet Union, actually during its existence had one of the highest
investment rates in the world, but the investments were so woefully inefficient that they didn't
help much.
To give an example, at a lot of Soviet factories that manufactured trucks, these trucks that
were built were some of the heaviest built in existence.
The problem is that, of course, a heavy truck burns a ridiculous amount of fuel and can't
go necessarily fast.
So why were the trucks built so heavy?
Because the centrally planned mechanism measured output literally by the weight of the truck,
not by its quality.
Even China, which is a far more market-friendly country than, let's say, the Soviet Union,
has a problem with this.
China has invested large sums of money in places that are called ghost cities, which
is to say they've got all the physical investment.
Just no people actually live there because it's not terribly practical.
We'll talk about those in a later lecture.
Nevertheless, it remains true that increasing capital investment is one way that a nation
can raise prosperity by expanding its production possibilities frontier.
The second way that national economies can expand the production possibilities frontier
is through technological innovation.
Joseph Schumpeter developed the key categories of innovation.
We talked about this before, but just to review, here are a few of those key categories.
Product innovation is inventing or popularizing a new kind of good or service that consumers
have not encountered before.
The invention of the telephone would be an obvious example of this.
Process innovation is developing a new and better means of producing a particular good.
Boeing's method, for example, of computer-assisted design to create new planes would be an excellent
example of this.
Organizational innovation, this means devising a new form of economic organization to best
access either new markets or new customers.
Detailers reorganizing their inventory systems to exploit their customer databases would
be an example of this.
In most of our lectures, we've talked about labor productivity or output per worker hour.
The kinds of innovations I just talked about help to increase total factor productivity.
In other words, both labor and capital increase their efficiency.
This enhances prosperity for everyone.
So let's review.
We've identified four ways by which states can try to boost their national prosperity.
First by eliminating counterproductive policies.
Second by expanding the boundaries of commercial activity.
Third through greater capital investment.
And fourth through technological innovation.
A few things to note about these approaches.
First, these are not mutually exclusive strategies.
It is possible for governments to attempt all of these strategies at the same time.
There are certain policies that promote growth through more than one of these channels.
For example, if developing countries liberalize their capital markets, then they potentially
boost economic growth through three different mechanisms.
First, liberalization expands commercial opportunities.
Second, liberalization allows inward flows of investment and that increases capital accumulation.
And third, if that inward investment contains technologically sophisticated capital equipment,
then innovation is imported as well.
As previously noted, entrepreneurship is key to some of these growth opportunities.
Expanding commercial opportunities leads to nothing unless entrepreneurs try to exploit
the new markets that become available.
Innovation is risky.
It requires entrepreneurs willing to fund or engage in such activities.
So which engines are the most important?
The answer here depends crucially on whether the country is developing or developed.
For developed countries, the key is technological innovation.
To understand this, you need to think about the effect of the other three policies on
these countries.
Developed countries tend to be developed because there are fewer radically counterproductive
policies in place.
Moreover, there is a very high correlation between economic development and openness
to economic exchange.
So once again, developed countries will already have reaped many, if not most, of the benefits
to be gained from expanding commercial activities.
As for capital accumulation, it is certainly helpful for growth, but developed economies
by definition are already capital rich.
Given all of this, it's not surprising that most econometric studies find that technological
innovation is responsible for anywhere between 60 to 85 percent of economic growth in the
developed world.
Technological innovation is the way in which the developed world becomes more prosperous.
For developing countries, by contrast, the key has less to do with technological innovation,
but rather the other three methods of raising prosperity, particularly capital accumulation.
Developing countries are more likely to have counterproductive policies in place.
So by eliminating these policies, like China did beginning in 1979, developing countries
can jumpstart economic growth.
Developing countries are more likely to have higher barriers to international exchange
and government monopolies on various domestic spheres of activity.
Therefore, as these countries start to liberalize, as say India began to do in the 1980s and
1990s, these countries can start growing more quickly.
Technological innovation would be another possible source of growth, but it is somewhat
expensive and definitely duplicative.
Developing and research and development is great if it pays off, but potentially wasteful
if it doesn't.
Developing countries can innovate more quickly by adopting technologies from the developed
world.
Following the developed country's technological roadmap is quicker and cheaper.
We'll talk about this more a little bit in later lectures.
This leaves us with capital investment.
Developing countries, as I've talked about before, are usually capital poor.
More investment in both physical and human capital in these countries, as South Korea
did starting in the 1960s, leads to much higher growth.
This explains the large number of economic studies that show the most important source
of growth in the developing world is capital investment.
These findings by economists are pretty free of controversy, so the keys to national prosperity
seem clear.
There are, however, a few issues that need to be addressed.
First of all, not all capital accumulation is the same.
Lots of countries have increased their economic growth through sustained levels of capital
investment.
Remember that example of Soviet trucks I gave before.
Unless that investment is truly productive, however, the prosperity benefits are only
short-term.
This is why, by the way, most cities hosting an Olympic Games don't gain all that much
in the way of long-term benefit.
Since a lot of this investment is for large stadiums that have little post-Olympics purpose,
the chief benefit that comes from hosting Olympics comes from the initial burst in building
them.
There's no long-term boost in economic growth in those cities.
Second, eventually developing countries will encounter a transition problem.
Once they have implemented decent policies and accumulated significant amounts of capital,
they will have to switch to being a more innovative economy.
This is much easier to say than to do, however, as China is currently discovering.
Innovation can yield great gains in prosperity, but it is also much harder to do.
This is why economists like Barry Eichengreen have observed that countries, once they hit
middle-income status, often fail to attain the prosperity level of the developed countries.
Eichengreen and his co-authors have dubbed this the middle-income trap.
Finally, there is a very important question to ask.
If the recipe for prosperity is straightforward, why don't most countries pursue it?
In the past, it might have been due to a lack of knowledge, but not today.
The recipe I just talked about seems pretty clear.
That will be the topic for our next lecture.
