What you hopefully learned from the last two lectures is that for good or ill, governments
play a crucial role in establishing the right economic incentives and institutions.
Bad governments, the one that will promote prosperity, they presumably provide public
goods, avoid public bads, and they align economic incentives to reward individuals for productive
economic activity.
Bad governments?
Bad governments pretty much do the exact opposite.
They're going to fail to provide public goods.
They're going to commit serious policy errors, such as protecting inefficient sectors or
tolerating too much inflation or too much unemployment.
And they'll structure economic incentives to reward either corrupt or destructive
entrepreneurial activity.
So this state plays a significant role in laying the foundation of economic prosperity.
This leads to the obvious question.
What forms of political organization are best suited to make sure that government officials
support the provision of necessary public goods and refrain from policies that result
in public bads?
The first thing to realize, and this is pretty important, is that no form of government is
perfect on this score.
All governments make mistakes, just like all firms and all consumers make mistakes.
Whether a political system is presidential or parliamentary, federal or unitary, authoritarian
or democratic, all political institutions have the capacity to subvert the prosperity
engine.
Still, there is a general rule with respect to political institutions and prosperity,
a rule that Derren Asimoglu and James Robinson have stressed in their book Why Nations Fail.
On the whole, polities with broad-based representative institutions, what we'll call inclusive institutions,
tend to make fewer mistakes than polities with narrow representative structures, what
they refer to as extractive institutions.
Or to put it another way, democracies tend to contribute more to prosperity over the
long run than autocracies.
At first glance, the easy way to demonstrate this general rule is to just look at the most
prosperous countries in the world and see what their regime type is.
Now, if one measures prosperity strictly by GDP per capita, then 15 of the top 20 countries
are democracies.
So that seems like a pretty strong correlation.
But if one measures prosperity more broadly, the number of democracies goes up even further.
You'll remember that in lecture two, we talked about the various indices that go beyond GDP
in measuring a country's prosperity.
One of those indices was the Legatim Institute's Prosperity Index that incorporates beyond
things like GDP per capita, things like measures of social capital or environmental friendliness.
And according to the 2012 edition of this index, 19 of the 20 most prosperous countries
in the world are democracies.
But we could go beyond Legatim.
According to the United Nations Human Development Index, all of the 20 most prosperous countries
in the world are democracies.
Now, these statistics would certainly seem to support the contention that when it comes
to laying a strong foundation for prosperity, democracies do a better job than autocracies.
But still, we might be confusing correlation for causation.
In other words, rather than democratic governments causing prosperity, it is possible that the
reverse is true.
Maybe citizens demand democracy once they become truly prosperous.
Indeed, that arrow of causality is the working hypothesis for those who advocate for the
United States to trade more with China.
The logic behind that is that if the U.S. trades more with China, China eventually becomes
richer.
As China eventually becomes richer, China will ostensibly become more democratic.
Furthermore, there are many examples that seem to contradict the general rule I just
described.
And let's go back to China.
The People's Republic of China has experienced the highest average growth rate in the world
over the past decade.
No one would describe that country's regime as anything close to democratic.
Since the 2008 financial crisis, it's actually been the advanced industrialized economies
that have suffered from sluggish or negative real economic growth.
Some commentators like to talk about the concept of the benevolent dictator, the competent
wise ruler who can implement the right economic policies that promote prosperity.
The argument here is that authoritarian leaders can enact policies much more quickly than
democratic governments because autocracies, by definition, have fewer checks and balances.
In 2010, the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman wrote that autocracy certainly has
its drawbacks.
But when it is led by a reasonably enlightened group of people, as China is today, it can
also have great advantages.
Even Francis Fukuyama, the author of The End of History, the man who argued that in the
end there is no model for promoting prosperity other than liberal capitalist democracies,
has argued that China's authoritarian leadership is probably the most competent in the world.
Commentators will also point to Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew or Chile's Augusto Pinochet
as examples of ruthless strongmen who nevertheless paved the way for national prosperity in their
countries.
Even further back in history, one can point to countries that have thrived economically
under autocracy more than democracy.
Let's think about the case of Germany.
Germany in the late 19th century was a pretty authoritarian state ruled by a Kaiser.
It nevertheless caught up with Great Britain in terms of both economic output and technological
sophistication.
This was in no small part because the German government wisely invested very heavily in
both technical education and transportation infrastructure.
On the other hand, Germany in the 1920s was ruled by a democratic regime, the Weimar Republic.
That regime plunged the German economy into hyperinflation and anemic economic growth,
paving the way for the Nazis to rise to power in the 1930s.
So how can we be so sure that autocracies are worse at promoting prosperity than democracies?
There are a few ways to respond to this question.
First of all, as I noted at the outset, there is no denying that all governments can destroy
prosperity.
What I'm making during this lecture is a probabilistic assertion.
This means that the odds of attaining a good life are better in a democracy than in an
autocracy.
In the world of political economy, there simply is no sure thing.
I'm just telling you the odds are better in a democracy than in other forms of government.
Second, while many authoritarian governments have produced rapid rates of growth, you need
to have some context to understand how that is possible.
As bad as autocracy might be, it is often replaced in even worse form of government.
For example, most of the monarchies in Western Europe in the 16th and 17th century were pretty
rigid autocracies that practiced mercantilism as their economic doctrine.
These economies nevertheless grew more quickly under this autocratic rule than in previous
centuries.
This was because these monarchies were able to centralize their political control over
their territories.
Compared to feudalism, centralized autocracies were in fact a superior form of economic organization
because they eliminated a lot of internal barriers to trade.
But even if a centralized state is better than feudalism, it's not necessarily better
than democracy.
Extractive institutions are not necessarily better than inclusive institutions.
Advanced autocracies are located in the developing world.
And developing countries also can usually manage comparatively higher rates of economic
growth, all else equal.
Furthermore, all governments can boost economic growth for short to medium periods, particularly
in the developing world.
Why?
Well, these developing countries have a technological roadmap for the future.
They don't need to innovate on their own.
They can simply copy the technologies practiced by the developed governments.
Developing country governments can make crude allocation decisions that also improve output.
For example, simple things like greater investment in physical capital can certainly generate
growth in capital poor societies.
Remember that even the Soviet Union and even North Korea manage decent rates of economic
growth for some period of time because they engage in such massive amounts of capital
investment.
These governments also have a greater capacity to borrow from global capital markets and
use that money to fuel both consumption and investment, as Latin American economies did
in the 60s and 70s.
These bursts of growth are almost always temporary and frequently lead to prolonged busts afterwards.
So yes, some autocracies have grown rapidly, but they have not outperformed democracies
on the whole.
In fact, the consensus from a lot of political scientists and economics research is that
autocracies do not grow faster than democracies.
However, the variance of economic growth among autocracies is much greater, which is to say
that autocracies by and large will have more wildly fluctuating growth rates than democracies
which are sort of slower but steadier.
The volatility itself, however, is bad for economic prosperity.
Even if average growth rates are relatively close between democracies and autocracies,
research shows that greater growth volatility places massive stresses on a population.
And the volatility highlights an important perception issue.
Those who advocate the benevolent autocrat argument focus on the successes, but the failures
are pretty epic, however.
Uganda's Idi Amin, North Korea's Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il, Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe,
the Khmer Rouge leadership in Cambodia.
The haul of shame for bad autocrats is very long and very deep.
And despots make far, far bigger policy errors than democracies.
There is one final argument in favor of the link between democracy and prosperity.
As we've noted before, a key driver for prosperity is technological innovation.
And the simple fact is that during the last two centuries of technological takeoff, democracies,
particularly Great Britain in the 19th century and the United States in the 20th century,
were the host states for most of these innovations.
We'll explain why that's the case in a little bit later in this lecture.
So while some autocracies might experience higher growth some of the time, the simple
fact is that over the long term, democratic, inclusive political institutions are the better
bet.
To understand why democracies generally outperform autocracies in providing prosperity, we need
to think about how politics is different from economics.
In economics, we tend to assume that what individuals want to do is maximize their income.
In politics, we have to make a different assumption.
We assume that what politicians want most of all is to acquire and retain power.
Regardless of the political system, for politicians to stay in power, they need to cater to their
selectorates.
Now to refresh your memory, a selectorate is the set of individuals that determines who
will be the leaders of a country.
In democracies, registered voters are the selectorates.
In military dictatorships, the officer corps tends to be the selectorates.
In communist countries, it's the party members who are the selectorates.
Two important factors distinguish authoritarian or extractive political institutions from democratic
or inclusive political institutions.
The first is the size of the selectorate.
In the former, it is usually a very narrow slice of the overall population.
Extractive political institutions have narrow selectorates.
In the latter, democracies, it is usually at least a majority of the overall population.
The second factor that distinguishes authoritarian from democratic institutions has to do with
the way that power is transferred.
In democracies, there are regularly scheduled elections.
There can be routine forms of power transfers in authoritarian countries as well.
China, for example, has pretty much routinized its transfer of power from one generation
of leadership to the next.
But there is also a greater likelihood of an extra-legal transfer of power by a coup d'etat,
assassination, violent overthrow, or revolution.
The Arab Spring in 2011 demonstrated the wide variety of ways through which autocratic
rulers can fall.
Despite these distinguishing factors, politicians in both systems will try to keep their selectorates
happy by providing what all individuals want, greater levels of security and affluence.
Now, with this crude model of politics, we have a better explanation for why democratic
countries should provide the better foundation for long-term prosperity.
First, democracies tend to adhere to the rule of law far more closely than authoritarian
states.
Most democracies operate on implicit or explicit constitutions that are not easy to change.
Social scientists, like myself, often call them the rules of the game, the laws and norms
that define politically acceptable and unacceptable changes to the system.
A democratic system also contains more checks and balances.
Laws, once they're passed, will be more durable.
It will be far tougher for governments to amend or change them.
Courts in democratic systems can also act as independent arbitrators.
Now, even if authoritarian governments wanted to enact good policies, they'll often find
it more difficult to credibly commit to those policies.
Because their leaders are, by definition, authoritarian, they have far fewer checks and balances.
So if they want a reverse course in the future, they certainly can.
A great example of this is how Russia has dealt with foreign direct investment in its energy
sector since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
There's been a very interesting pattern with how Russia deals with Western multinational
oil companies.
When energy prices are low, Russia practically begs these companies to come in and assist
them in terms of extracting their oil.
However, when energy prices get high and Russia feels richer, the Russian government tends
to put the screws far more heavily on Western multinationals.
Private actors are aware of this absence of a credible commitment from the government.
This makes them far more risk-averse and far more likely to devote effort and resources
to pleasing an authoritarian government.
In other words, private actors will engage far more in unproductive rather than productive
entrepreneurial activity.
As we've already discussed, economies are far more likely to thrive when operating
with a clear rule of law and well-enforced property rights.
Entrepreneurs and individuals have stronger incentives to make long-term investments.
In addition to the long-term economic benefits of the rule of law, a second reason democracies
tend to be successful at promoting prosperity relates to the nature of capitalism itself.
One of the keys to why capitalism works reasonably well is that it allows failures to, well,
fail.
Inefficient or ill-conceived enterprises go out of business all the time, leaving behind
only presumably the most productive and the most competitive firms.
Systems that do not punish failure are at risk of a systemic breakdown as failures accumulate.
In thinking about political systems, democracies share this important feature with capitalism.
Voters tend to fail.
Because politicians need to confront voters on a periodic basis, true incompetence usually
get voted out of office.
Indeed, the exceptions to this rule in democracies often confirm the rule itself.
It's in one-party democracies, places like urban political machines, Tammany Hall in New
York City in the late 19th century, or Richard Daley Chicago in the mid-20th century, where
corruption and failed governance are at their most prominent.
The lack of political competition allows this to happen.
On the other hand, autocrats who are incompetent at economic policy can often keep their grip
on power indefinitely.
Autocratic leaders are far more likely to hold onto their office until they are forced
to leave in a violent manner.
And that manner is extremely violent.
Think about the fates of Italy's Benito Mussolini, Romania's Nicolai Ceausescu, or
Libya's Muammar Gaddafi.
Authoritarian leaders understandably fear for their lives if they lose power.
And because for these leaders, the costs of losing power are greater, they're not just
losing power, they could potentially lose their life, they will invest in more coercive
capacity, military, paramilitary, and police forces to ensure their control.
And these investments, by definition, are both destructive and unproductive.
So long as autocratic leaders reward their selectorate, they can pretty much ignore the
rest of the population.
Because their selectorate is much narrower, leaders can do this with private goods rather
than public goods.
For example, during the Soviet era, Communist Party members were able to shop at special
stores that had a far wider variety of consumer goods than ordinary citizens could get access
to.
For another example, the political scientist Robert Bates has noted that multiple sub-Saharan
African authoritarian states offered generous subsidies to their urban populations.
This was because city dwellers, rather than farmers, represented these leaders' political
base, so they were perfectly comfortable with screwing over the farmers at the benefit
of their own selectorate.
This leads to the third reason democracies lay a stronger foundation for prosperity than
autocracies do.
One of the ways governments retard national prosperity is to confer corrupt benefits on
narrow interests.
Autocracies are certainly vulnerable to interest group pressure, but autocracies only have
to rely on the support of a narrow coalition.
Rewarding this coalition with private benefits allows autocrats to stay in power, but harms
the prosperity of everyone else.
So as a result, autocratic governments are far more likely to protect economic sectors
that are filled with political supporters from going out of business.
Whether this protection takes the form of trade restrictions, producer subsidies, access
to scarce capital, or rig bidding for government contracts, the result is the same, a very
inefficient allocation of resources.
Now corruption goes both ways, of course.
Businesses also have an incentive to line the pockets of officials in order to make
sure that the state protects them.
Another way that autocratic governments can reward the selectorate is by offering consumption
subsidies to its members.
They might be able to procure, let's say, better health care, or have their children
gain access to better schools.
Members of the selectorate will often find it easier to travel abroad to access global
markets rather than as opposed to ordinary citizens.
For example, one of the reasons that the Duvalier family was able to stay so long in power in
Haiti, despite a truly atrocious economic record, was that the Haitian elite found it
easy just to fly to Miami to procure luxury goods that were scarce in Port-au-Prince.
If the autocratic government is controlled by the military, all of these effects are
even worse.
Rewarding the selectorate means providing resources for defense, which is an even more
inefficient allocation of resources than corruption in the private sector.
An inefficient factory can potentially be retooled and improved.
A tank is just a tank.
A military-led government means also that the officer corps wields significant influence
over the national economy.
This gives, as I said, the private sector an incentive to curry favor with powerful
individual officers.
This in turn encourages corruption in the military.
For autocrats, it is much cheaper to offer these kinds of private goods than the more
expensive public goods that benefit society.
Because the selectorate in democratic states is so much larger, however, democratic governments
have a stronger incentive to provide genuine public goods.
Some of the strongest evidence for this argument comes from, of all places, China.
China actually does permit elections at the local and village level, but there is a wide
variation in how competitive these elections really are.
In some cases, it's pretty obvious there's just a single Communist Party official running.
In other cases, there's genuine competition.
Studies have shown that in the areas where political competition is fiercest, the local
governments provide better public services.
And here is yet another reason why autocratic governments typically fail to secure long-term
prosperity.
Such regimes will be far more reluctant to permit genuine innovation in the economy.
Technological innovation relies a lot on basic scientific research, which is a public good.
Autocratic governments are less likely to provide this unless it helps key sectors which
retards the incentive of private firms to do applied scientific research.
The Soviet Union, for example, was very generous with research funds for its military and aerospace
research and development, but not so much with computers.
The Soviet regime feared that any technology that made it easier to store or spread information
would also be a threat to their own regime, and as it turned out, they were right to fear
that.
Now, assume that a firm is nevertheless able to develop a key innovation.
If that innovation puts an autocratic regime at risk, it will likely be repressed or contained.
Now, how would an innovation do this?
If it puts a more favored economic sector at risk or enriches people outside the electorate,
then it is an innovation that threatens an autocrat's political coalition.
For example, in the 19th century, Russia's czars resisted the creation of banks that
would loan to industrialists because such banks would have diverted capital and credit
away from their political base of large landowners.
If it empowered individuals at the expense of the state, then it's a threat.
Russia clamped down particularly hard on industrialization and railway construction after the revolutions
of 1848 swept across Europe.
Tsar Nicholas I was worried that railways would make it easier for the Russian masses
to congregate in Moscow.
He limited factory construction near Moscow for the exact same reason.
He feared the concentration of workers outside of his control near the capital.
Even if an autocratic state is interested in science and technology, it is far more
likely to fund white elephants than a democratic state.
And by that I mean high profile cases where the technology doesn't necessarily yield
any fruit.
Private sector firms have been able to demonstrate that they are making progress or they lose
their funding.
That's the way the private sector works.
If bureaucrats are in charge of deciding which sectors are worthy of investment, however,
they will be reluctant to abandon a project even if it fails.
No bureaucrat and no politician ever wants to admit failure.
Furthermore, the sector that's enriched by the government's money will lobby to keep
the government as their primary source of funding.
For example, North Korea has invested heavily in its nuclear and ballistic missile program.
No one knows for sure exactly how much investment they've made, but estimates range from 5 to
15 percent of their GDP has gone to that sector.
Based on evidence in 2011 and 2012, however, they certainly haven't mastered either technology
terribly well.
The cost of this program, in terms of periodic famine in North Korea, has been truly appalling.
Finally, long term prosperity seems to languish in authoritarian countries because autocratic
governments are more likely to use or invite coercive violence as a means to maintain control
and advance their own personal prosperity.
Autocrats, when faced with a threat to their power, are willing to resort to more extreme
measures in order to stay in power.
Research by political scientists Hein Gohmans and Giacomo Ciozza show that autocratic governments
are far more likely to launch diversionary wars.
These wars, as I've said before, are not necessarily in the national interest.
But by declaring war, the autocrat can use nationalism, the fact that people will naturally
rally around the flag during a war, to crush dissent and dispatch discontented military
members of the selectorate into the front, sending them into battle and putting them
at much greater personal risk.
Another option that autocratic elites have is to foment domestic ethnic tensions in order
to ensure the loyalty of the selectorate.
Ethnic groups that form a majority in the selectorate, the minority in a country's population,
will inevitably feel compelled to stick with an unpopular leader.
This is one of the things that Slobodan Milosevic did during the breakup of Yugoslavia in order
to stay in power.
The result fomented ethnic cleansing in the Balkans for nearly a decade.
Autocrats will also use force as a destructive form of entrepreneurship.
Conquering and looting neighboring countries is a way to enrich an elite.
Some autocrats might even be tempted to act in a belligerent fashion in order to invite
multilateral economic sanctions.
In this instance, sanctions by other countries simply functions as another form of protectionism,
empowering the state by giving them access to very scarce resources.
While in power, Saddam Hussein actually used violence in all of the ways I just described
to stay in power.
Saddam acted in a bellicose manner to trigger a war with Iran and consolidate his grip on
power.
Saddam was merciless with the Shiite majority living in Iraq in order to ensure that the
Sunni minority would stay loyal to him.
Saddam invaded Kuwait in 1990 to expropriate assets and to avoid having to pay back loans
made during the Iran-Iraq War.
Saddam used the post-Gulf War sanctions to cement his grip on power, using control of
food to reward cronies and punish the rest of the parts of the Iraqi populace.
Autocratic leaders are comfortable using destructive entrepreneurship to stay in power.
Unfortunately, the use of coercion, violence and war are also ways to retard national prosperity.
In conclusion, if the foundations of national prosperity are about getting the institutions
right, then the political institutions matter as much as the economic ones.
Authoritarian political institutions can, at times, lead to short bursts of prosperity.
In the long run, however, more inclusive forms of government are more likely to provide the
necessary foundations of prosperity.
