Living when and where you do, it's easy to take prosperity for granted.
Prosperity has been a fact of life for your entire life.
However, most people from most of human history have not experienced anything close to prosperity.
As Nathan Rosenberg and Ellie Birdsell put it in their book How the West Grew Rich,
most of human economic history is a story of almost unrelieved human wretchedness.
All of economic history can be boiled down into one simple hockey stick graph,
tracking per capita income over time.
Now this graph consists of two parts.
The first is the very long, flat part of the stick.
From basically the upper Paleolithic era to about 1800 AD, per capita incomes barely moved.
Indeed, the Malthusian Trap guaranteed that per capita income couldn't rise by all that much.
What's the Malthusian Trap?
Well basically, any increase in per capita income naturally led to an increase in the population.
Because people were better off, they could afford to have more children.
And because they could purchase more food and better shelter,
those children were far more likely to survive into adulthood.
But a lack of sustainable agricultural productivity growth, however,
meant that the same amount of food was being produced pretty much regardless of the population.
So when you have more people, but the same amount of food,
you're obviously going to have less food per person.
Due to famine, war, disease, or just simply delayed marriage,
which meant that women didn't start having children until later in life,
and therefore had fewer children overall,
the population would thin back to sustainable levels.
Now over the years, there were occasional fluctuations due to really big wars or really big plagues.
But by and large, population was largely static.
This is why, by the way, European incomes rose after the Black Death.
Fewer people meant it was possible for per capita incomes to rise,
given that the food supply stayed roughly unchanged.
Because there was little technological innovation during the time of the Black Plague, however,
this temporary rise in per capita incomes
did not lead to a permanent increase in sustainable growth.
This, by the way, explains the historical popularity of mercantilism
as an economic policy in the 16th and 17th centuries.
Mercantilists believed that the pathway to economic growth
lay in running a trade surplus, and then hoarding the gold earned from that surplus.
Now this sounds a bit silly now, but in a world of fixed wealth,
the only way for one country to enrich itself was to grab a bigger slice of the pie.
Adam Smith described this mentality in The Wealth of Nations,
as nations having been taught that their interests consisted of beggaring their neighbor.
Each nation has been made to look with an invidious eye
upon the prosperity of all the nations with which it trades,
and to consider their gain as its own loss.
When the Industrial Revolution began,
and economics began to seem more like a positive sum game,
then mercantilism makes less sense.
This brings us to the really steep part of the hockey stick.
After 1800, the Industrial Revolution begins, and per capita incomes explode.
This is the moment when the hockey stick goes from the flat part to the steep incline.
According to the economic historian Gregory Clark,
per capita income in 1800 England was roughly the same as it was in 500 BC England.
England's per capita income in 2000 however,
was 12 times greater than it was in the year 1800.
So we know for a fact that the Industrial Revolution clearly started in England,
and then spread to the rest of Europe and North America,
and then slowly across to other parts of the world, the Pacific Rim and so forth.
England in the 19th century was the seedbed of a phenomenon,
mass prosperity, that has since spread across the globe.
What we don't know, and what we're going to talk about for the rest of this session,
is why the Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain.
Why England?
It could have happened in many other places.
Just to name three other possible starting places.
The first would be France.
France actually had a lot more scientific innovations than London did in the 18th century.
It had a much larger market and a much greater population.
Second possibility would have been the Ottoman Empire.
The Ottoman Empire controlled much of the Middle East and the Balkans in Europe.
It was the epicenter of long range trade between Europe and the Far East for centuries.
It was a formidable naval power, far more powerful than most of the other European states at the time.
And also the Ottoman Empire was actually far more tolerant of religious diversity
than most of the European countries,
which in turn could have theoretically allowed for a greater diversity of ideas to spur innovation.
And the last obvious contender would be China.
In 1500, China was the largest, most populous and most technologically sophisticated economy in the world.
China invented gunpowder and the printing press long before those inventions appeared in the West.
In the early 15th century, the Chinese Admiral Zhang He led expeditions to India, Arabia and East Africa,
which could have easily sparked the beginning of an expansive trade between China and those other regions.
So it would seem that there are equally favorable conditions in France, China and the Ottoman Empire for industrialization to take off.
And yet there wasn't a hint of the Industrial Revolution in any of these places.
So let's return to our question.
Why was England the place where the Industrial Revolution took off?
There is unfortunately no one settled answer to this question.
Worse, it's actually pretty hard to parse out exact causes of an event that occurred so long ago.
In many cases, the key events that economic historians talk about might have actually occurred a century or more before 1800.
Lagged effects happen all the time with significant innovations.
After all, it took a generation for the effect of computers to be reflected in economic productivity statistics.
Now with that caveat, we still can rule out a few weak or invalid hypotheses and then explore a few hypotheses that seem to be more compelling.
Let's start with what we can pretty much rule out.
The first argument would be the laissez-faire argument.
This is the claim that England had a smaller state than other great powers.
And if Great Britain was the country to pioneer the spread of free trade,
then perhaps England prospered because it allowed the market to triumph, right?
There's just one problem with this argument.
The British state was actually quite large in comparison to its European peers.
In fighting so many wars during the 17th and 18th centuries, the English crowned taxed and spent a lot of its citizens' money.
In fact, English taxes in the 18th century were between 12 and 18% of GDP.
That was higher than any other European country except the Netherlands,
which by the way was also one of the most sophisticated economies in Europe.
By 1815, the Napoleonic Wars led Great Britain to have a debt-to-GDP ratio of 250%.
In comparison, Greece in 2012 only had a debt-to-GDP ratio of 145%.
And here's a second hypothesis that doesn't hold up.
That the Industrial Revolution took off in 19th century England only because of imperialism, slavery, and colonial exploitation.
This is the standard Marxist critique that the West grew only at the expense of the rest through slavery and outright expropriation of natural resources.
Kenneth Pomerance has made a much more sophisticated version of this argument more recently in the Great Divergence.
But there are some problems with this hypothesis.
First of all, slavery simply wasn't possible on the factory workflow,
and it's the creation of large factories where you really see the Industrial Revolution take off.
Also, if this hypothesis really was true, then the Industrial Revolution should have started in Spain or Portugal,
because those were the first two countries to really colonize other parts of the globe.
But there is no correlation between the size of empires and the speed with which these countries adopted the Industrial Revolution.
Also, the raw materials that mattered most for the Industrial Revolution, such as coal, were already indigenous to England.
Finally, a third hypothesis that we can very quickly discard.
This hypothesis places Karl Marx's Asiatic mode of production with Max Weber's Protestant work ethic.
Crudely put, the argument here is that all of the non-Western cultures and societies were somehow too crude or disdainful of industry
to exploit the benefits of capitalist institutions.
The claim here is that only England had the necessary value system that rewarded thrift and industry without condemning material wealth.
Simply put, this is really, really bad sociology and history.
The Middle East, India, and China all had more sophisticated market institutions in 1500 than Europe.
And the claim that Chinese and Indians were somehow not hardworking or industrious,
this seems particularly absurd in the modern era.
China in particular was far further advanced technologically than the rest of Europe, which is why this is such a puzzle.
So when it comes to the question why England, those are a few of the typical explanations that we can safely rule out.
Now let's turn to a few other explanations that are somewhat more plausible.
You might remember that we talked about how analysis can proceed at the individual, national, and global levels.
The three explanations that we're about to discuss can be divided pretty neatly along these three levels.
So let's start with the individual level explanation.
This is one that's been put forward by Gregory Clark in his book, A Farewell to Alms.
His argument is that there was an endogenous change in the English population that created a citizenry
that was primed to exploit the ideas of the Enlightenment and the institutions of the free market.
The demographic Darwinian argument is that economic success led to reproductive success.
In a Malthusian world, more affluent segments of society will live longer and also have more children.
So Clark noticed that based on an examination of wills and probate records,
those dying within a state of less than 25 pounds had on average fewer than two children.
Those dying within a state of more than 500 pounds had, on the other hand, on average four children.
The more economically affluent in England were the most prosperous farmers and tradesmen, not aristocrats.
The latter group were the most affluent in other countries in Europe.
And because those aristocrats tended to meet more violent ends, they tended not to reproduce as much.
So over time, a growing percentage of English society descended from these births from the richest of Englishmen.
So as a result, the argument is that more and more of English society possessed traits that turned out to be pretty symbiotic to market-based society.
There is decent evidence that by 1800, the English population had developed qualities that made its society most amenable to industrial life.
According to contemporaneous observers, there was a strong decrease in interpersonal violence in England during these years.
Between 1700 and 1850, there was a particularly sharp decline in both violent crime and property crime.
Now the data on this is pretty obviously crude, but according to Clark, the homicide rate in England fell from 0.3 persons per thousand per year to something like 0.02 persons per thousand per year by 1850.
There were also very few riots or protests in Great Britain, particularly after 1700.
The British population didn't cotton to either the 1789 French Revolution or the European-wide revolutions of 1848.
At the same time, the literacy rate among the English population rose significantly during this period.
By 1800, it was roughly estimated to be 60% of males and 40% of females that were literate, far better than France.
Increasing numeracy among the same population was also observed.
By this, I mean a greater comfort with numbers and arithmetic, which would seem to be necessary for things like engineering to thrive.
To understand the growth in numeracy, consider that in Florence, in the Renaissance, only 32% of the population knew their exact ages.
On the other hand, in a typical English village in 1790, 92% of the citizens knew what their age was, because they could count that high.
There was, at the same time, an increase in average working hours per day, which implies that English laborers were disciplined enough to work that long.
So, a distaste for violence, a capacity to work long hours, and a greater facility for words and numbers.
These are middle-class mores, mores that Deirdre McCloskey talked about in her book about the bourgeois society,
which had little to do with public policy, but potentially had a lot to do with making England amenable to the Industrial Revolution.
The great jurist William Blackstone famously described British citizens as a polite and commercial people,
and the genetic argument that this happened because of this slow-motion genetic process.
So, one of the counterarguments to this, well, the first is that the data for these observations that Clark made
are pretty sketchy and biased, because they're based largely on either wills or probate records that have survived, or on impressionistic contemporary reports.
It's possible that this argument vastly overestimates the human capital of the English population.
For example, both the Germans and the Dutch were both more literate and had better schools than England during this period.
The both the Chinese and the Japanese also experienced a surge in literacy between 1600 and 1800.
And there's also little evidence that English numeracy really increased all that much in the 18th century.
Another problem with this argument is that England's demographic boom started in 1750, three generations before the Industrial Revolution took off.
Why didn't this surge in the population across the social classes dilute the genetic trends that Clark's talking about?
Another problem with this argument is that it fails to explain why other stable societies like China did not have similar demographic transitions.
For example, with the Confucian Civil Service exams that I've talked about before,
China had a similar incentive structure to reward positive traits, and yet you don't see the same kind of Industrial Revolution take off there.
It's also possible that Clark was overestimating England's domestic stability.
England actually suffered a fair amount of disruptions in the 500 years prior to the Industrial Revolution.
The Black Plague in 1348 killed off a third of England's population.
Then there was the War of the Roses between 1455 and 1485.
The English Civil War between 1640 and 1660 and the Great Plague of London of 1665 and 1666.
Each of these events killed large numbers of English citizens and led to major social upheavals.
Finally, if England was really that demographically unique, why were other countries so able to quickly catch up?
Why were Germany, the United States and France able to catch up to Great Britain in terms of industrial and technological sophistication by, let's say, 1900?
A genetic or demographic argument would lead one to assume that Great Britain should have held on to its technological and economic lead for far longer.
So while the demographic Darwinian explanation may be more plausible than some other explanations,
in the end we have to say that this approach only gets at a small part of the story.
So let's go to our second possible explanation.
This one for the Industrial Revolution starting in England operates on the domestic level.
The argument here is that England managed to develop the proper institutions of domestic political economy that allowed for the Industrial Revolution to take place.
So what kind of institutions are we talking about?
Well first, there were economic institutions that permitted growth in commerce and the expansion of trade and exchange.
At the firm level, there were innovations that allowed for larger organizations, like the creation of the Joint Stock Corporation,
or simple accounting things like double entry bookkeeping that allowed for firms to become larger.
At the market level, there were also innovations that allowed for the expansion of credit and risk taking.
The invention of bills of exchange, for example, was a way for firms to use short term credit by trading debts owed to each other in order to engage in market operations.
Insurance markets also allowed for the hedging against risk, which was particularly important for maritime expeditions since those expeditions actually did have a large amount of risk.
It's worth remembering that Lloyds of London, the most famous insurer in the world, began in 1688 as a coffee house.
Great Britain also saw an evolution of its political institutions that provided for the public goods necessary to spur economic growth without crowding out private entrepreneurial activity.
So, institutions like stronger patent laws to protect innovations.
Even more important were the political restraints put upon the British state,
innovations that converted Great Britain from having extractive political institutions to more inclusive ones.
The 1688 Glorious Revolution put constraints on the Crown's ability to act without parliamentary approval.
This ability of the British government to credibly commit allowed for a significant decline of interest rates on British government debt.
So, after the Glorious Revolution, government interest rates fell from 14% to 6%.
And this allowed government debt to go from 3% of GDP to 40% of GDP and for that debt to shift from short-term instruments to long-term ones.
At the same time that British institutions were becoming more exclusive, the British state was also becoming rationalized.
You saw a shift from confiscation to taxation as a way of raising revenue.
Rent-seeking, the kind of unproductive entrepreneurial activity that I've talked about before, was kept to a few well-defined sectors, like English breweries.
This allowed for relatively efficient taxation.
And while taxation was significant, it was also relatively fair and not all that corrupt, which aligned incentives towards productive entrepreneurship.
Domestic political interests were also favorable for innovation takeoff.
Land and gentry were not threatened by innovations.
The gentry had an incentive to restrain the power of the Crown, but they weren't threatened by these innovations.
Other forms of unproductive entrepreneurship that were kept to a minimum, things like guilds or internal barriers to trade.
And Parliament acted as an efficient coordinating mechanism that was absent in France or other potential rivals.
After 1688, the state served commercial interests, which was not the case in France, China, or the Ottoman Empire.
So what are the counterarguments to this?
Well, the first is that some of the institutions that essentially were so important in actuality weren't that important.
So take that patent law that I talked about before.
On the whole, it was weakly enforced and expensive to use.
Therefore, it wasn't nearly as important then as it is to current and modern innovation systems.
The profitability of innovating firms actually wasn't all that great.
And with respect to interest rates, while it's true that public interest rates declined, private interest rates stayed pretty high.
And that's kind of important because private interest rates were the key to explaining the Industrial Revolution.
If it was still expensive for firms to borrow, then it means it was expensive for them to innovate.
Furthermore, the British government's extraction from the economy, as I pointed out before, was actually larger than that of the French.
So even if the British state was more inclusive, it was still pretty big.
And to accept this argument fully, one has to believe that institutional innovations from more than a century earlier were the key drivers for the Industrial Revolution.
That's possible, but there's no way to be sure about it.
So we've discussed the evolution of English citizens and the development of British institutions as plausible stories for why the Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain.
Our last serious explanation comes from the international level, namely that the distribution of power in the global political economy
made it likely that England would be the epicenter for innovation.
The key to this argument is that Europe was politically decentralized.
Despite the best efforts of the Habsburgs, it was next to impossible to conquer all of Europe, which meant multiple and competing centers of political authority.
In a world of fierce military and political competition, it was impossible for productive but inconvenient ideas to be suppressed.
If, say, France refused to consider the value of seagoing exploration, then England would be more than happy to embrace the idea.
Now this was not the case in, let's say, Ming China, which was vastly more powerful than all of its neighbors.
After Zhang He, for example, the Ming Emperor simply decided not to finance any more seagoing expeditions, and so as a result, none of them took place.
No single European leader had that monopoly of power.
Bear in mind also that the Industrial Revolution might not have happened if it had been subject to a vote.
This goes back to this notion of creative destruction that Joseph Schumpeter talked about.
Outdated professions, like, let's say, weavers, facing a more industrialized way of creating textiles, would naturally form political resistance to innovation.
Indeed, the term Luddite has its origins during this period because artisans who feared obsolescence because of technological innovations, like the cotton loom,
protested their implementation in factories.
Political competition forces an acceptance of new ideas and states and societies had to adapt or die.
Trade then becomes a source of dynamic wealth.
As we've talked about in previous sessions, trade expanded the market, as well as the rewards for specialization and naval power.
Exploration increased both the variety and the demand for new goods.
This was epitomized in a 1769 letter from industrialist Matthew Bolton to inventor James Watt about the latter's steam engine.
Bolton wrote, it is not worth my while to manufacture your engine for three countries only, but I find it very worth my while to make it for all the world.
The Anglo-Dutch rivalry for trade routes suggested both countries believed trade to be strategically important,
and British victories in those wars spurred more naval innovation, which made sea transport much easier.
British victories also drastically reduced piracy, increasing freedom of the seas.
British preferences for openness matched its military capabilities.
It was trade that allowed England to specialize and exploit its own comparative advantages,
because it could import massive amounts of raw materials and foodstuffs, cotton from the southern United States,
timber from the Baltic countries, and food from pretty much everywhere.
And England in particular occupied the sweet spot in world politics.
England was relatively secure from invasion, in fact it had not suffered a foreign invasion since William the Conqueror in 1066.
And as previously noted, it had a reasonably tranquil domestic situation for the previous 700 years.
Now while Great Britain might have had the security of the English Channel, it was still clearly part of the European state system.
So its rulers were cognizant and wary of rising powers on the continent, and therefore could not dismiss innovation so quickly.
Contrast this with other countries. France had far too many land-based threats to worry that much about investing in public goods.
China, on the other hand, had too much security, and the Ottoman Empire had too many internal and external threats.
So what are the counter-arguments to this?
Well first, you should be pointing out there were plenty of other regions in the world.
Let's just say South and Central Asia for example. There were also politically segmented and splintered, but didn't necessarily have similar forms of adaptation to it.
Also, other countries had similar levels of security to England, but took radically different policy directions.
As we noted before, Russia purposefully stunted efforts at industrialization through much of the 19th century, because those innovations were perceived as a domestic threat.
Indeed, Japan took the exact opposite course of action from Great Britain.
It rejected almost all dealings with the outside world, until the United States forced that country to adopt a different policy in the middle of the 19th century.
The Industrial Revolution took off at exactly the moment when trade was heavily circumscribed by wars, high tariffs, the American Revolution, and the French Revolution.
This gives rise to an awkward question. Was trade really that important?
So let's conclude. We've now looked at three plausible explanations for the question.
Why was England the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, and of the mass prosperity that followed?
And we've seen that each explanation faces challenges and counter-arguments.
What are we to make of this?
No single argument is right. There's a reason that this debate has not been settled.
And also, it should be pointed out that these arguments are not mutually exclusive. They can all work at the same time.
In fact, some aspects of these arguments feed off each other in a complementary manner.
The demographic change in the English population towards a more moderate temperament facilitated the institutional changes in Great Britain that empowered parliament at the expense of the Crown.
These institutional changes, in turn, created policies that encouraged the desire to truck, barter, and exchange.
Or, consider that the domestic institutional changes in Great Britain altered the country's national policy preferences.
Relatively speaking, Great Britain was more of a law-abiding republic than France, China, or the Ottoman Empire.
Its more inclusive institutions altered British perspectives on trade and innovation in contrast to these other countries.
And these policies, in turn, rewarded dormant characteristics in the English population.
Or, consider that Britain's international economic openness and the British desire for hegemony forced the government to rationalize its domestic institutions as a way to increase its national wealth,
so it could hold its own with larger and more militaristic adversaries.
The point is, each of these causes created feedback effects that reinforce the original cause.
One closing thought on the mystery of England. Do not underestimate the feedback effect of ideas.
As the economic historian Joel Mokir has observed, there's a reason the Enlightenment preceded the Industrial Revolution, rather than vice versa.
British thinkers like David Hume, Jeremy Bentham, Adam Smith, and David Ricardo observed and reinforced the societal trends that were already taking place.
The division of labor on the factory floor, free trade, and democratic representativeness were all enhanced by the ideas of these thinkers.
They were not the cause of the Industrial Revolution, but their ideas amplified its effect in the Anglo-Saxon economies.
In contrast to Great Britain, the economic ideas that developed on the continent led to very different domestic political economies in those countries.
In Germany, for example, Gustav Schmaler and Friedrich List advocated policies that called for much greater levels of state action.
These ideas had some beneficial short-term economic benefits, but also stunted economic and political liberalization across the continent.
And then there was Friedrich Engels and V.I. Lennon, who argued in favor of a dictatorship of the proletariat, which in terms of economic policy meant state ownership of all firms.
This led to even more disastrous economic policies.
So why England? By now you should appreciate that the easy answers aren't true, and that the actual answer is pretty complex.
The mystery hasn't been completely solved, and it might never well be.
Bear this in mind when you hear or read about gurus saying they have the answer for how to trigger another technological revolution.
Anyone who tells you that they have a simple recipe for this is likely selling you something.
