So far, we've been talking about prosperity and what individuals and countries will do
to try to attain it.
As we now know, however, prosperity has been the exception rather than the rule in world
history.
So in order to understand why more people are not prospering right now, it might be
good to gain a better understanding of the flip side of prosperity, which is to say poverty.
As we've talked about in previous lectures, despite the increase in mass affluence, there
remain a disturbingly large number of poor people and poor countries in the world.
According to the World Bank, approximately one and a quarter billion people still live
on less than a dollar and a quarter a day.
More than two-thirds of all people living in Sub-Saharan Africa live on less than two
dollars a day.
These facts of life raise a number of questions.
What does it mean to be living in poverty?
Does poverty itself prevent these people from rising to prosperity?
Are people born poor or do circumstances make them poor?
This is a particularly important question for those who believe in a meritocratic society.
If poverty is a function of one's birth, then it undercuts the meritocratic mantra of ability
leading to accomplishment.
How can individuals lift themselves out of poverty?
And what policies can help people alleviate poverty?
Let's start by defining our terms.
First, how do we define poverty?
Poverty refers to whether an individual's standard of living falls below some defined
level of income necessary to meet minimum subsistence.
That level of income is often referred to as the poverty line.
The percentage of population living below the poverty line in a country is defined as
the poverty rate.
In the United States, for example, the poverty rate in 2010 was 15.1 percent of the population
was living below that poverty line.
The poverty line is much higher in the United States than in, let's say, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example.
According to the United States Department of Health and Human Services, in 2012, an American
household of four is living under the poverty level if they are living on less than $23,050
a year, or $15.79 a day per person.
In the developing world, on the other hand, as I previously noted, the World Bank defined
poverty in 2008 as living on less than $1.25 a day per person.
How can an American be living in poverty if that person is earning 12 times the World Bank
poverty line?
The reason is that different countries have different price levels.
Goods that are traded across borders tend to have a single price, but there are a large
category of goods and services that are not traded, and the cost of these goods vary widely
from place to place.
So let's say a haircut will be far more expensive in New York City than Nairobi, Lima, or Hanoi.
This variation in services means that what might be a livable wage in one country is
a pauper's income in another country, and vice versa.
We know from the previous lecture that for most of human history, poverty was the norm
and not the exception.
Over the past 200 years, however, there has been a drastic reduction in the percentage
of the global population living in poverty, even though the world's population has increased
by a factor of 8.
So in thinking about how to create prosperity for all, we need to examine the causes of current
poverty.
The explanation that is commonly proffered for why people are poor is that they simply
make bad decisions.
For example, rather than saving for the future, some argue that poor people choose to allocate
their scarce income towards unnecessary consumption, such as sweets, alcohol, or narcotics.
From this perspective, people living in poverty only have themselves to blame.
Another explanation is that poor people immiserate themselves by having too many children.
Now, as I noted in a previous lecture, large families tend to have less savings.
Large families with too few breadwinners are likely to sink into poverty.
After all, as a general rule, as societies get richer, birth rates tend to fall.
If so, facto, a higher birth rate must contribute to poverty.
This particular piece of conventional wisdom has proved to be so powerful that it's caused
a lot of extreme policy statements and extreme policies themselves.
In 1976, the Indian government authorized local governments to draft compulsory sterilization
laws for the impoverished.
Since 1978, China has been implementing a relatively draconian one-child policy, making
it very difficult for families to have more than one child.
This belief is so powerful that in 2005, an economist named Al-Wanyang argued that the
AIDS epidemic was really a blessing for sub-Saharan Africa because it would reduce the fertility
rate in that part of the world.
Now, as it turns out, these explanations do not hold up terribly well.
First of all, addictions play at best a marginal role in explaining poverty.
You might surprise you to know that survey evidence suggests that drugs, factors like
drugs or alcohol addiction, do in fact play an extremely small role in poverty.
In one cross-national survey of families living in poverty, conducted by Arundhu Krishna,
for example, addiction was mentioned less than 5% of the time as an explanation for
why those individuals were poor.
The other thing to consider is that there is no shortage of people who are not living
in poverty, but are nevertheless themselves addicts.
The difference is that those who are better off can afford to do such things, or rather
they can afford the losses in income and wealth that come from a chemical dependency.
For those living in poverty, these kinds of addictive decisions are on exhibit.
As for large families or poor family planning, this factor has at best a modest effect on
poverty rates.
On average, larger families are slightly poorer, but the effect is not consistent across different
countries and the observed effect is pretty small.
For example, Paul Schultz and Shireen Joshi conducted one such study in Matlab Bangladesh,
a place where family planning was intensively promoted by the government and by non-governmental
organizations.
Their study revealed no difference in the height, weight, or school enrollment for children
from small families versus children from large families.
So it would seem that family size doesn't have that profound an effect on what people
can do with their children in terms of future generations.
Now, don't misunderstand me.
Clearly individual decisions can sometimes lead individuals and their families into poverty,
but as we'll see, there are also other factors at work.
So let's turn to some of these other possible factors for poverty in a modern world.
And first, let's ask a very important question.
Is poverty itself self-perpetuating?
One argument put forward by development economists is that there is an income or wealth level
below which it is impossible to break out of.
Economists refer to this as a poverty trap.
In a poverty trap, people are so poor that nothing they can do on their own will lift
them out of poverty.
Future income is always less than current income if one is living in a poverty trap.
Now, rags to riches stories happen all the time, however.
So how can someone be so poor that they have absolutely no hope of ever rising out of poverty?
Well, the logic here is relatively straightforward.
If someone is so poor that they earn less than what they consume, eventually they will
deplete their savings.
Now, most individuals will draw down from their savings when times are tough or for emergencies
in the expectation that they will be able to save enough to make up for it later once
they're more prosperous.
Those living in poverty, however, might not be able to earn more in the future.
There are situations when someone living in poverty, even if they do everything absolutely
right, will still stay trapped in poverty.
This has less to do with who the poor are than with the environmental and structural
conditions that affect how the poor live.
Consider something like aerogyography.
According to the World Bank, approximately 75% of those people living in extreme poverty
live in rural areas, basically trying to live off their own subsistence farming.
But not all of these areas are as conducive to agriculture.
So intensive farming or more intensive forms of farming fails to generate any more food
or income for those families.
Another issue is physical isolation.
Frequently places that are the least hospitable to agriculture are also physically remote.
This reduces the range of possible alternatives for poor people to lift themselves out of
poverty.
Beyond agriculture, they can't necessarily find any other job.
It reduces the number of possible income opportunities as a result.
It also raises the transaction costs of trade because it makes consumption more expensive.
You have to travel further in order to be able to buy goods and services.
Another possibility is political violence.
Violent conflict is more likely to break out when resource scarcity is at its most extreme,
which is the case in areas with very large pockets of extreme poverty.
Such conflict can lead to anarchy, which makes it even more difficult to escape poverty.
As we've talked about before, the lack of the government providing security for individuals
makes it harder for them to earn more money.
Indeed, the poverty trap I've just described sounds an awful lot like the Malthusian trap
that governed the entire globe prior to the Industrial Revolution, which I talked about
in the previous lecture.
People stuck in poverty traps cannot escape them without external assistance.
How big of a problem is this?
Economists like Jeffrey Sachs believe that it is huge, covering most of tropical Africa,
the Andean region of South America, and much of South Asia.
But there are reasons to doubt this kind of geographical determinism.
A generation ago, the swaths of the globe in which a majority lived in extreme poverty
were much, much larger than they were today.
If poverty has declined dramatically, this suggests that areas with concentrated amounts
of poor people are not necessarily living in poverty traps.
Economists have begun to do things called randomized control trials at the village level, in places
where poverty traps are expected and predicted to be.
What is surprising is that the results suggest that large numbers of poor people do not behave
in ways that a poverty trap would suggest they should behave.
For example, if people were really stuck in a poverty trap, you would expect these people
to maximize calorie consumption in their food choices.
Because that way they would do everything possible to ensure their caloric intake was
high enough so they don't suffer from malnutrition.
Instead, based on these trials, it appears that poor people living in these areas actually
have enough money to choose their food based on taste as well as nutritional value.
Another contradictory data point is that people living in extreme poverty, presumably, would
not be able to save money for the future.
If they were trying to burn through their income right now, they wouldn't be able to
afford any kind of savings.
And yet the data suggests that in fact poor people do save.
Now clearly, there are some parts of the globe where poverty traps exist.
But there are a lot of poor people in the developed world, the Middle East, Latin America, and
the Pacific Rim, who are not suffering from a poverty trap.
They're just suffering from poverty.
So what else makes people poor?
The first and most important trigger at the individual level for descending and staying
in poverty is bad health outcomes.
This is true across the developed and the developing world.
Sickness, injury, and prolonged illness have powerful negative effects on individual income.
Community level surveys in the United States, India, Uganda, Peru, and Kenya are pretty wide
assortment of countries.
Community surveys all show that more than 60% of respondents attribute bad health outcomes
as a cause for descending or staying in poverty.
Now why is getting sick so calamitous?
Well for poor people, getting sick is a financial disaster because it hits income at two different
points.
First, any illness incapacitates a potential wage earner, which therefore reduces the
amount of income coming in.
If the primary wage earner is sick, then clearly they're not going to be able to earn any money
while they're sick, particularly if that sickness is particularly severe.
Second, any illness also requires an extraordinary set of purchases of health care, which means
income is also going out as well as not being earned as much.
Now contrary to what you might believe, a lot of the health care that exists in the
developing world, particularly the health care for the most impoverished places, is
actually fee for service, which means you only get as much health care as you pay for.
Even if those fees are subsidized, they can represent a huge fraction of a poor person's
income.
Furthermore, epidemics and illness will exacerbate poverty traps because the costs of health
care go up further in geographically remote areas.
So the poorest individuals often have to pay even more for health care.
Illness is the one overarching factor that contributes to poverty, but there are other
factors at work, and we're going to look at four of them for the rest of this lecture.
The first is poor credit markets, the second is poor information, the third are the unique
challenges that female headed households face, and finally, cultural traditions play
a role here as well.
First let's look at credit markets.
As I've discussed in previous lectures, access to credit is an extremely important factor
in individuals acquiring capital to improve their position.
Banks however only like lending to individuals when they believe that they'll be paid back.
In other words, those who possess high levels of income who can offer collateral or who
have some sort of close ties to the banker.
So banks are most willing to lend money to people who don't need it.
This leads to some potentially perverse outcomes.
For example, the founders of the Indian multinational corporation Infosys could not initially get
a business loan when they applied for it because as a services firm, those founders had no
collateral whatsoever to offer the bank.
Now it's a fact of life that very few poor people have access to banks or other financial
institutions.
Only 7.5% of poor Indonesians have bank accounts, for example.
Less than 1% of the poor in Brazil, Panama, or Peru have such accounts.
Now this doesn't mean that the poor can't get access to capital, indeed people living
in poverty borrow money pretty frequently.
But it does mean that the cost of capital is greater for poor people, the interest rate
that's usually charged.
This is true regardless of whether the poor person is living in the developed or the developing
world.
So in the developed world, for example, the poor can borrow but they tend to be restricted
to forms of borrowing that are far more expensive.
So for example, the simplest and easiest form of borrowing in the developed world is through
the use of credit cards.
Credit card's a great invention.
It's basically a way of getting a short term loan in which you use it and then eventually
of course you have to pay it back.
Now most people, when they have credit cards, actually let their credit card debt pile up.
But the interest rate on credit card debt is much higher than one would get on a standard
bank loan, in some cases at least 10 times higher.
Now in poor areas of the United States, one can see offers for things like payday loans
in which people can borrow money off of an impending paycheck.
Now these rates are even higher than credit card debt.
They have an annual interest rate that approaches 400%.
If the poor are blocked in the developed world from these two routes, they can always borrow
under the table from informal lenders that might be associated with let's say organized
crime.
This definitely leaves them vulnerable to high interest rates and rather unsavory means of
enforcement if they don't pay.
In the developing world, poor people also have opportunities to borrow, but these opportunities
are more costly.
In some cases, individuals borrow from informal lenders.
These lenders act like banks in making loans and charging interest, but they aren't registered
as legal businesses.
They therefore do not rely on the legal system to enforce contracts.
Poor people who can't get loans from banks will often turn to these informal lenders.
In other cases, groups of individuals form what are called saving clubs, where each member
chips in money when they need, and then a rotating member of the club gets the pot after
each month.
So basically if you're part of a savings club, you will get that pot once out of however
many members there are in that savings club.
Now there are two problems with these kinds of credit.
First, the loans that are available from these more informal kinds of credit are pretty small,
which means there's only so much that poor people can do with the money that they borrow.
And second, they can be pretty expensive.
The advantage of informal lenders is that poor people can get a loan.
The disadvantage is that the interest rate that's charged is often higher.
In India, for example, the average annual interest rate for informal loans for the poor
range from 40% to 200%.
So credit markets don't work as well for poor people as they do for everyone else.
This leads to the second problem that those living in extreme poverty face, a problem
that I've talked about in a previous lecture.
Because the poor are so busy trying to find ways to survive, they are often operating
on extremely poor information.
That lack of accurate information leads to some very poor decision making.
Poor people, for example, tend to be uneducated about health, so they are more likely to demand
expensive solutions, assuming that drugs that are expensive must work.
Now, this might sound odd or bizarre, but it's really actually an extension of a concept
that's often referred to as the Shiva's Regal Effect in the developed world.
The Shiva's Regal Effect refers to a scotch that wasn't selling necessarily all that well.
And as a result, the owners of Shiva's Regal went to consultants to try to figure out how
can we boost our income.
The consultants came back with two recommendations.
First, make the bottle look fancier, and then second, raise the price of the scotch by $2.
What happened then was that when consumers went into liquor markets and they saw the
more expensive scotch, they interpreted it as the price reflecting quality, even though
they weren't necessarily aware of it.
The Shiva's Regal Effect is powerful when buyers don't know that much about the product
they are buying.
And poor people tend to have very poor information sources.
The result is that those living in poverty are more likely to be conned by fake doctors
and pay too much for inappropriate medicine.
Now in contrast, poor people generally are fully aware of the benefits of education.
They know and they want their children to get a better education than they have.
But they're not entirely aware of how those benefits operate.
Families suggest that the poor believe that only lots of education translates into higher
income levels.
In actuality, the reverse is true.
The greatest income gains from education come from the first few years of school.
But as a result of this misperception, families often focus on sending one of their children
all the way through secondary school, at the expense of their other children, to optimize
the income possibilities for all their children, and as a result for the entire household,
they would actually be better off sending each of them to get a primary education.
So the poor have problems getting access to credit and getting access to reliable information.
The third issue that a lot of poor families face is that they are a female-headed household,
and female-headed households are at greater risk of living in poverty.
Now the reasons here are relatively straightforward.
Female-led households are far more likely to have one rather than two adults of working
age.
This severely crimps the possible income streams for that kind of family.
The second reason is even more straightforward.
Discrimination against women imposes an additional barrier for female-headed households.
It is often more difficult for women to get a job and for them to keep that job in a market
in which they are discriminated against.
Finally, even though we have talked about how the role of culture is exaggerated in
explaining gaps in economic development, it is true that cultural and societal traditions
can play a role in forcing the poor to spend scarce capital on activities that do not improve
their standing.
For example, some cultures emphasize the importance of elaborate funerals, lavish wedding rituals,
or dowries.
These large lump sum payments do not generate income in return and can actually wipe out
savings.
This is particularly true of funerals, especially if such a death is followed by a prolonged
illness.
In surveys in the province of Gujarat in India, more than two-thirds of those respondents
who descended into poverty had to pay out for such elaborate funeral rituals.
This problem has also been reported in places as diverse as Uganda and Peru.
The easy response is that these families on the brink should not bother with such customs.
But the whole point of cultural norms is that one feels bound to honor them.
It is extremely difficult to change such societal norms.
Think of it this way.
It's a very strong cultural norm in the United States for men to propose marriage with a
very, very expensive diamond engagement ring.
Even if this norm doesn't make much economic sense nowadays, after all, young couples should
be saving for a home, or for furnishing that home.
What would happen if an individual bucked this trend?
So to review, poor people face a lot of challenges.
They lack access to credit.
They operate in an information poor environment.
They often face the harsher aspects of gender discrimination.
And cultural norms can bind them in a more powerful way.
Is there anything that can be done about this?
Are there any policies that can help?
Now, it would seem that the best ways to alleviate poverty are straightforward tackling the biggest
causes.
Let's say the creation of a comprehensive health system, a guaranteed minimum income
for all people, the promotion of mass education, and ensuring better access to credit even
for poor people.
The problem is this is much more difficult than it sounds.
Healthcare, social welfare programs, and primary education are inherently expensive public
goods requiring scarce amounts of both human and financial capital.
Developing countries often cannot afford them on their own.
Healthcare in particular is pretty much expensive everywhere.
One recent trend has been to promote microfinance as a cheaper and faster way to lift people
out of poverty.
Microfinance offers small loans, smaller than most banks would be interested in, to collective
groups of borrowers.
These borrowers in turn pressure each other to repay the loans in full, thus allowing
social ties and customs to make sure the microfinanceeer gets paid back.
Muhammad Yunus won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role in creating and developing the Grameen
Bank, a premier microfinance lending institution.
Unfortunately, the first empirical studies are starting to come back on the utility of
microfinance, and the news here is decidedly mixed.
On the one hand, the results are positive.
Those individuals who could take advantage of microfinance were on the whole better off.
On the other hand, there are some negatives.
Microfinance borrowers weren't that much better off.
It was just a marginal improvement in their per capita income compared to those who didn't
take microfinance loans.
The other interesting finding was that a large swath of families did not want the microfinance
loans, even if they were on offer.
Why?
Why would they reject such offers?
Well, microfinance operates on the premise that all of the poor are entrepreneurs.
And there is some truth in this assumption.
But the fact is, most of the poor are reluctant entrepreneurs.
They operate one person businesses primarily as a source of employment, not profits.
These businesses might generate a high rate of return, but the overall income of these
businesses is small.
A surprising number of poor entrepreneurs, when surveyed, actually demonstrate a preference
that their children draw a government salary when they grow up.
The reason is that they want their kids to have the income security that they themselves
lacked.
If there's nothing else you should have learned from this lecture, it's that poverty is not
an easy problem to solve.
A lot of the barriers to escaping poverty are costly or difficult to eliminate.
Some of the solutions being touted in recent years, like microfinance, are well-intentioned
but limited in their effects.
So how can poverty be reduced?
The best way is for developing countries to become developed so they can afford the public
goods and physical capital that would help the poorest of the poor.
In our next lecture, we'll look at how good development economics has been at getting
poor countries to become less poor and more prosperous.
