Now, in our last lecture, we talked about some of the causes of poverty.
This is a problem that won't disappear anytime soon, despite the increases in mass affluence.
According to the World Bank, more than 20% of the world lives on less than $1 a day.
More than 40% of the world lives on less than $2 a day.
And almost half of sub-Saharan Africa lives in extreme poverty.
Africa in particular has become relatively poor for centuries.
In 1800, Africa accounted for 9% of global output, which is essentially the combined
GDP of all the countries in the world.
By the year 2000, that figure had fallen to 4%.
Prosperous nations have both ethical and economic incentives to find ways to spread prosperity.
To quote the great economist Jagdish Bhagwati,
If reducing poverty by using economic analysis to accelerate growth and therewith pull people
up into gainful employment and dignified sustenance is not a compelling moral imperative,
what is?
As Bhagwati points out, a lot of social ills can be cured through the poverty reduction
that comes from economic development.
Bhagwati basically posits a two-step argument.
As people become richer, they start demanding changes in their society, things like reducing
gender discrimination, eliminating the tradition of child labor, and improving environmental
protections.
Poor people and poor countries care about each of these things.
But they also tend to view them a little bit like luxuries.
As countries and individuals become richer, they start to think about things other than
simply maximizing income.
But stating that we want to reduce poverty by promoting economic development is one thing.
Actually accomplishing the aim is quite another.
This leads to one of the biggest mysteries in the world.
How do you promote economic development?
You would think that economics would have an answer to this incredibly important question.
And for economics, I can report back that it's kind of a good news, bad news story.
The good news is that economists do indeed have answers for how to promote economic development.
The bad news is that economists have provided way more than one answer.
And sometimes these answers contradict each other pretty badly.
The two most prominent thinkers on this question right now offer diametrically opposed recipes
for economic development.
In one corner you have Jeffrey Sacks, director of the Earth Institute at Columbia University.
He argues that the least developed world needs massive infusions of aid and capital to promote
economic growth.
In the other corner you have William Easterly, a former economist at the World Bank and now
a professor of economics at New York University.
His argument is that aid is irrelevant or worse in terms of promoting economic development.
What truly matters are the political institutions in the least developed world.
Now how can there be such a divide?
As you're about to discover, the history of development economics is a history of fads
and trends that don't ever completely pan out.
So in this lecture we're going to give you a brief history of these developmental approaches.
First, let me define what I mean by development economics.
It's the subfield of economics devoted to how to promote growth in the developing world.
Now as we've talked about in prior lectures, markets function differently in the developing
world for a variety of reasons, less capital, a weaker provision of public goods and a more
uncertain adherence to the rule of law.
What many development economists focus on is how to get these countries to grow sufficiently
so that they can look and function more like the advanced industrialized economies.
Now it's important to note at the outset that this subfield is very young.
In fact, only with the creation of the World Bank, known formally as the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, in 1944, did any international institution exist to
think seriously about economic development.
In the roughly 70 years since the World Bank's founding, the discipline of development economics
has generated a series of big ideas, capital B, capital I.
We don't have time to go through all of them today, but we will hit the highlights.
One of the most important and influential of these ideas is sometimes been called the
Big Push Model.
In 1960, Walt Rostow published a book entitled The Stages of Economic Growth, a non-communist
manifesto.
In that book, Rostow argued the following.
He first noticed that poor societies lacked the capacity to save enough to invest in the
public goods necessary for rapid economic growth.
Rostow further noted that capital labor ratios in the developed world were much higher than
in the developing world, a fact that I've mentioned in previous lectures.
Rostow went on to argue that once those investments are made, growth can take off on its own.
Therefore, he argued that foreign aid from the richer countries should be focused on
making large-scale capital investments in things like public infrastructure.
Here we're talking about roads, bridges, ports, airports, and so forth.
This approach became quite popular in the early 1960s during the days of the Kennedy
administration.
But what were the policy effects of this Big Push approach?
Well, on the one hand, you did see certainly an increase in levels of foreign aid from
both the United States and the international financial institutions, namely the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, to the developing world.
Now, Rostow, it should be noted, was Kennedy's national security advisor.
He thought of this as a way of waging the Cold War.
The subtitle of his book, A Non-Communist Manifesto, makes this pretty abundantly clear.
Another outcome of this Big Push approach were a lot of so-called white elephant projects,
which I've talked about before.
These are investments that look great, big and massive, but weren't necessarily all
that efficient.
Now, even though they weren't all that efficient, less developed governments love these projects.
Why?
Well, because they tended to be highly visible, which are great for politicians to highlight.
They can point to these projects as tangible accomplishments.
Also, it was easier for the politicians in charge to reward construction contracts to
key supporters, regardless of their competence.
The resulting effects, however, in the aggregate were pretty disastrous.
As a result of this Big Push approach, you saw a lot of these white elephant projects.
But as a result, the opportunity cost of these bad investments were pretty large.
That money probably could have gone to better investments that would have done a much better
job of alleviating poverty.
There were also massive corruption problems.
Too much of this aid led to serious debt repayment problems as well.
Even at low interest rates, the premise was that these governments would eventually pay
back loans that were made from the World Bank.
And this triggered a truly bizarre pattern of lending, in which some development loans
were used to simply pay down older development loans.
As we'll see later, the legacy of the Big Push thesis is still with us.
Still, by the late 1960s, developed countries were scaling back on the foreign aid necessary
to finance it.
And newly decolonized countries in the developing world were also rejecting it in favor of a
more indigenous approach called ISI, or Import Substitution Industrialization.
The ideas behind ISI had pretty much coalesced by the year 1950.
Raul Prébish, an Argentine economist and the head of the United Nations Commission
on Latin America, published the Economic Development of Latin America and its principal
problems to explain why that region remained underdeveloped.
Prébish, being from Latin America, had direct experience with developing economies.
Now, Prébish's basic argument was based in part on what he observed during the Great
Depression, which was that the comparative advantage of developing countries was in the
export of raw materials.
And for economic development to occur, Prébish concluded that this needed to change.
But why?
Well, first, Prébish argued that industrialization had positive spillover effects, both economic
and non-economic.
In the non-economic realm, Prébish argued that industrialization meant cities.
Cities mean greater opportunities for social interaction, which he argued leads to more
social cohesion, which can lead to a sense of nationalism in the developing countries,
which often didn't have the same sense of nationalism that existed in Europe at that
time.
Furthermore, at the time Prébish wrote, industries were composed of vertically integrated firms.
Ford, for example, used to actually mine the steel it would use to then make its own cars.
Prébish argued that industrialization in one sector, such as cars, would lead to industrialization
in related sectors, like steel to make the cars, and chemicals like rubber or paint to
put the finishing touches on those cars.
Furthermore, Prébish argued that the commodity markets that provided export revenue for developing
countries seemed to function a little bit differently than markets for manufactured goods.
Over the long term, the prices for agricultural and raw materials seem to be constantly falling
in price.
Prébish argued that that was because these goods were produced in competitive markets
and that the availability of substitutes, corn instead of wheat, for example, kept producers
from raising their prices.
In downturns, lack of demand would cause prices to fall.
Manufacturing sectors, on the other hand, seemed to work like oligopolies.
Fewer producers and more inelastic demand meant that the prices for these goods tended to
stay relatively high, no matter what.
This means that according to Prébish, in times of crisis, there's a worsening terms
of trade for developing economies.
And by that we mean that each developing country needs to export more of the same good to pay
for key imports, because the prices of developing country exports, those raw commodities, fall
relative to the price of what it is they're importing, manufactured goods.
Because developing countries weren't competitive in making industrial goods, Prébish concluded
that the only way out of this trap was the protection of infant industries and import
substitution.
So if export revenues were reinvested into domestic indigenous industry and that domestic
market was protected from imports, then infant industry protection allows these domestic producers
to build up, and then presto, industrialization commences.
By the early 1960s, the effective tariffs on manufacturing across Latin America were
pretty high as a result of this.
In Brazil, those tariffs were as high as 184%.
So what were the policy effects of ISI?
Well, they were pretty mixed.
On the one hand, there is no denying that there were very impressive growth rates for
some countries that practiced ISI in both the 1960s and the 1970s.
Brazil's industrial output increased eightfold between 1945 and 1973.
Furthermore, ISI undeniably created urbanized industrialized economies in Latin America.
These economies simply began to look a lot like the economies in the developed world.
The problem was, is that even though these economies looked like the developed world,
they were operating at still only one-third the per capita income levels of those OECD
economies.
Furthermore, other ISI countries like Argentina and Chile did not grow as fast as Brazil in
the 1960s.
Another problem with ISI was the ridiculously uncompetitive sectors that were created.
In 1960, Brazil's manufacturing sector was so weak that it exported less than one-half
of one percent of its entire manufacturing output.
These protected industries failed to become competitive.
Instead, you saw the growth of political cronyism, and these cronies would request their sector
stay protected as a source of political patronage, in other words, as a source of unproductive
entrepreneurship.
You also saw the misallocation of capital as a result of this.
Furthermore, domestic consumption increased, but not necessarily for domestically produced
goods.
Even though those tariffs on imported goods were pretty high, consumers still preferred
them to the domestically produced goods.
This led to the build-up of significant foreign debts to subsidize growing consumption, and
eventually a collapse in the 1970s and 1980s as external debts became unsustainable.
The result in Latin America was pretty serious.
You saw a chronic balance of payments crises, inflation, riots, coups, and repression.
In the 1970s, Juan Perón lost power in Argentina via a military coup.
In India, Indira Gandhi tried to declare a state of emergency as a way of ending democracy.
And by the 1980s, the Argentine junta invaded the Falkland Islands to divert attention from
the faltering economy.
And finally, Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, and Argentina all experienced hyperinflation during the
1980s, a serious legacy of the ISI approach.
So far, we've seen two of the big ideas that emerged out of development economics,
Rostau's stages of growth or takeoff model, and the ISI model of Raul Pribysh.
In the late 1980s, a third big idea emerged in the wake of a resurgent U.S. economy and
a collapsing Soviet Union, and was called the Washington Consensus.
Now, we'll talk about this in greater depth at a later lecture, but for now, let me give
you a brief overview.
The Washington Consensus was originally proposed by the economist John Williamson as a description
of policies the Washington, D.C.-based institutions, both the U.S. government and the international
financial institutions of the World Bank and IMF, seemed to be promoting.
The focus was on Latin America, which had just experienced, as I said a moment ago,
a lost decade of growth due to the after-effects of the ISI model.
The Washington Consensus argued that too much focus in previous developmental arguments
were concentrated on government intervention.
There was not nearly enough focus on getting markets to work properly.
The Washington Consensus argued that capital should earn the greatest returns in places
where it's scarce, provided market conditions are good.
So therefore, the goal should be to allow markets to function properly.
The Washington Consensus also advocated the use of policy conditionality to make this happen.
By that I mean, when countries came to either the IMF or the World Bank to borrow money,
these institutions would only agree to the loans if these countries agreed to implement
policies consistent with the Washington Consensus.
So what was the Washington Consensus?
It basically consisted of three broad policies.
The first was the idea of prudent macroeconomic policies.
The idea of governments running balanced budgets, so government finances could not distort or
distract from private sector growth.
Second, something like international market liberalization, so globalization can improve
productivity and countries can benefit from freer trade.
And finally, the retreat of the state from microeconomic policies, so market prices reflect
the cost of goods given the producers the right incentives.
So what were the effects of the Washington Consensus on economic development?
Again, like the ones we've talked about before, the effects were pretty mixed.
There were some clear success stories, for example Chile under Augusto Pinochet or India
after 1991 when Mohammed Singh implemented a series of liberalization policies.
There was solid economic growth in the developing world in the 1990s and the 2000s.
On the other hand, the Washington Consensus did not work terribly well in the rest of
Latin America outside of Chile.
And during the 1990s, the peak of the Washington Consensus, there were more currency and banking
crises in the world than at any time since the Great Depression.
And this was partly due to the capital account liberalization that the Washington Consensus
advocated.
As countries integrated themselves into the global market, there was also a marked increase
in income inequality.
So by 2011, the IMF was acknowledging that parts of the Washington Consensus no longer
applied.
An IMF staff economist report, for example, acknowledged that capital controls were a
thoroughly proper part of the development toolkit.
The fourth and final economic development idea I'd like to discuss is the good governance
model that emerged in the 2000s.
This model still appreciated the economic policies advocated by the Washington Consensus,
but it also contained an acknowledgement that it can't just be about markets.
Political institutions can't just retreat from the market.
They need to also make sure that markets function reasonably well.
For example, the rule of law is extremely important for markets to be able to function
properly.
Now, studies of foreign aid effectiveness suggested that the reason there was no overall
positive effect from foreign aid on economic development was that there was a key intervening
variable, governance.
Aid to relatively non-corrupt governments seemed to pay off pretty well, whereas aid
to corrupt badly governed countries often made things worse.
So understandably, the conclusion for this was to promote good governance mechanisms
in the developing world.
Things like democratic elections, independent central banks, independent judiciaries, anti-corruption
measures.
In other words, measures that would turn governments into the more inclusive political
institutions that we've talked about before.
How were they promoted?
Through the same kind of multilateral aid conditionality and bilateral aid conditionality
that I talked about previously with the Washington Consensus.
For example, the U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation offers aid conditional on transparent
governance, economic freedom, and investments in human capital.
It relies on official and NGO data across 17 indicators, such as freedom houses, measures
of civil and political liberties, the World Health Organization's measure of immunization
rates, and UNESCO's measure of public investments into primary education.
Another tool through which good governments was ostensibly implemented was through free
trade agreements or preferential trade agreements with both the United States and the European
Union.
Very often, these agreements included things like the provision or protection of intellectual
property rights or the protection of human rights.
So how well did the good governance model work?
Not surprisingly, the policy effects were mixed.
Very often, there was reform in name, but not substance.
Indeed, even stars of the good governance approach, like, let's say, Uganda, saw their
regimes look more and more corrupt over time.
Uganda's leader, Yauri Musovini, was hailed as a reformer in both the 1990s and 2000s.
By 2012, however, Musovini seemed busy trying to groom his son through the ranks of the
military in order to designate his son as his own successor.
Building democracy turns out to be just as hard as promoting economic development.
So looking back on all four of these big ideas, we'd have to say the story of economic development
over the past 50-plus years is largely one of failure.
As Gregory Clark concludes, the West has no model of economic development to offer the
still poor countries of the world.
There is no simple economic medicine that will guarantee growth, and even complicated
economic surgery offers no clear prospect of relief for societies afflicted with poverty.
But this raises an obvious question.
Why did none of these ideas work?
Well, as we've already noted, development economics is a pretty young discipline.
It's worth remembering that economics as a discipline started in both Europe and North
America, and these were places with relatively developed economies and a pretty strong rule
of law.
Initially, there was not a lot of understanding about how societies or markets worked in places
that were relatively impoverished or less stable.
And remember that it was only with the creation of the World Bank in 1944 that an international
institution existed dedicated to the issues of economic development.
And even the World Bank was initially focused on rebuilding war-torn Europe, not with development
elsewhere.
So it shouldn't be that surprising that some of the first models and theories didn't
work terribly well.
The second reason for the failure so far of these big ideas is selection bias.
Now, this is a fancy social science term, but it reveals a really important problem.
The idea behind a lot of development models has been to look at cases of successful development,
see what the key factors were in those cases, and then try to implement those factors in
other countries.
The takeoff and Washington Consensus policies look to the west as the template for success.
The ISI approach, look to the Soviet bloc for some extent.
There are, however, a few problems with this approach.
The first is that some of these plans were not necessarily generalizable.
It's possible that the pathways to development are radically different across regions or
across time.
Looking at British or American economic development might not be useful to apply to places with
radically different pre-industrial histories.
Another issue is that some of the successes that were pointed out were also illusory.
The Soviet pathway to industrialization, for example, was incredibly inefficient, but initially
all anyone cared about were the growth rates that they would continually report.
And the good governance models also saw backsliding, so countries that seemed like stars and
in terms of good governance wind up looking more like the rest of the world now.
So even if the formula mimicked the exemplar case, these failures suggest there was a problem.
Furthermore, focusing only on successes means that economists didn't investigate properly
to see whether those same policies failed in other countries at the same time.
For example, Japanese industrial policy was often trumpeted as a key to success, and we'll
talk about that in a later lecture.
But those successes overlooked the fact that many other countries pursued industrial policies,
and almost all of them failed miserably.
And here's a third reason the big ideas of development economics have often failed to
produce the desired outcome.
Development is really, really hard.
It requires lots of coordinated and synchronized policies.
Prior models suggest that there are a whole panoply of policies and institutions that
need to work correctly, things like public goods provision, capital markets, and political
institutions, macroeconomic policies, trade policies, and so forth.
It is incredibly difficult to get all of these interlocking policies aligned just right
at the same time.
And it's also far from obvious what the sequencing of these policies should be.
Furthermore, as time has passed, a lot of the low hanging fruit of economic development
has well developed.
The remaining pockets of poverty are the really tough cases.
Finally, even the best ideas of development economics sometimes fall short because of
the political economy of policymaking.
Even if the policies are correct, the incentives of all the development actors, the aid agencies
in the developed world, the World Bank, the recipient countries involved, are skewed against
success.
The incentive for developing countries and aid donors work a bit differently than the
economic model suggests.
So for recipient countries, governments want to stay in power.
Government capacities are weaker in terms of things like tax collection or the enforcement
of rules.
Leaders will therefore pursue policies that reward their political base and that can be
implemented.
This very often leads to a bias towards urban elites, their selectorate, even if that selectorate
is a minority of the overall population.
There's also a bias towards collecting border taxes because that's easier than let's say
collecting income taxes.
And certainly scarce capital in these countries will be allocated towards favorite allies,
again members of their selectorate.
What about the incentives of donor countries?
Who are the donor agencies, like the U.S. Agency for International Development or Great
Britain's Department for International Development trying to please?
It's not the poor people in less developed countries.
They're not the ones giving the money.
It's the taxpayers in rich countries.
And there are always other political factors involved with aid.
If you take a look at lending, let's say by the international financial institutions
in the 1990s, it's pretty obvious that the lending isn't based on either Washington
Consensus policies or Good Governance policies.
Rather, it's often based by how closely these countries were allied with the United States,
Great Britain or France.
Aid also goes, very often, not from the Western world to the developing world, but to consultants
who are Americans or members of the developed world.
Different interest groups in the United States, like development experts or social conservatives,
also influence the direction of aid.
As for IGOs, IGOs have an incentive to look relevant and a need to look successful.
Therefore, there is a strong reluctance by the World Bank or the International Monetary
Fund to admit failure in their lending programs.
So, all of this rather sobering news about the shortcomings of economic development in
theory and practice.
Where are we now?
What are we currently thinking about?
Well, essentially there's the Saxeasterly debate.
On the one hand, you've got Jeffrey Sachs, author of an End to Poverty.
Sachs argued that poverty can be reduced with an infusion of money.
Really poor states are stuck in a poverty trap, especially those countries that have
been poor since 1985.
They are still poor and can't escape.
Sachs argues that poor geography and poor public goods renders some societies incapable
of the key long-term investments.
Sachs further suggested that there were six kinds of useful capital.
Human capital, business, nature, institutional, infrastructural, and knowledge capital, all
of which had to be invested from outside sources.
And only some of these forms of capital can be provided by private markets.
So, what was his solution?
Well, first, he offered technocratic measures financed by rich countries, funding things
like fertilizer or anti-malarial bed nets or cell phones.
Now, this is pretty inexpensive stuff, but according to Sachs, it would still cost about
$150 billion a year, and it would be implemented and administrated by the United Nations agencies,
which among other things hire Jeffrey Sachs as an advisor.
Now, lest one laugh at Sachs' grandiosity, he can point to successful examples of grand
global programs.
The elimination of smallpox is a disease.
The Green Revolution, which boosted agricultural output in places like India.
And pilot projects at the village level show potentially some process, promise, for Sachs'
model.
Now we get to Bill Easterly, author of the Elusive Quest for Growth and the White Man's
Burden.
Easterly thinks Sachs is a planner, and what is needed are more searchers.
So, for his example, he offers anti-malarial bed nets.
This was something that Sharon Stone used at the Davos Economic Forum to get large-donated
donations for this program in 2005.
But in studies, malarial bed nets tend to spread because they're sold.
There's a sense of ownership, and therefore there are strong incentives to use what you
pay for as opposed to free malarial bed nets.
And in Malawi, you saw an instance where you went from 8% coverage to 55% coverage of children
because the malarial bed nets were sold rather than offered.
Furthermore, Easterly argued that Sachs' poverty trap logic doesn't really hold all
of her time.
The poorest countries that were in 1950, like China, have grown pretty well.
Same with the poorest countries in 1975.
The poverty trap logic only works if one uses 1985 as the starting point.
But even there, 11 of the 28 poorest countries in 1985 were not in the poorest fifth back
in 1950.
They declined from above.
They weren't always poor.
In studies that considered initial poverty and bad government in determining low growth,
bad government is the causal factor according to Easterly.
And he argues that Sachs really doesn't want to deal with bad governance, which is a big
problem.
Bad governance changes the issue from at least $150 billion a year will do something to $150
billion a year spent wrongly is worse than doing nothing.
So how are we now in terms of this debate?
Well, one of the ironies of this debate is that it might very well be overtaken by events.
One of the issues here is that the debate itself is meaningless because in some ways
the premise relying on it is that these developing countries will rely on aid from the developed
world, groups like the OECD Development Assistance Committee or the IMF or the World Bank.
However, increasingly developing countries aren't getting their money from these sources.
Rather, they're getting them from places like China.
China, for example, is actually providing more aid now to Africa than the rest of the
Washington Consensus countries.
So as a result, they don't need to listen to the World Bank, the IMF or the United States.
So as a result, it's possible that this debate over development economics hasn't necessarily
amounted to all that much because these poorer countries aren't listening anymore.
But going forward, we'll take a look and see what recipes these developing countries have
pursued in order to try to find their own pathway out of economic poverty and into prosperity.
