I want to start today's lecture with a pop quiz. So here's my question. What is the
fastest growing economy over the past four decades? Now take a few seconds to think about
it. I'll wait. I bet you answered China, or India, or some other Pacific Rim Tiger.
The actual answer is Botswana, a landlocked nation in Southern Africa. When it became
independent in 1966, its GDP per capita was only $80. Foreign aid was responsible for
more than 60% of its budget. Its current per capita income is more than $16,000, one of
the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. And it relies on foreign aid for less than 2% of its government
budget.
And here's another story that might surprise you. In 1960, South Korea had roughly the
same GDP per capita as Ghana. 50 years later, South Korea's per capita income is 10 times
that of Ghana's, and it is now a member of the G20 and the Organization of Economic Cooperation
and Development, also known as the Rich Man's Club.
In our last lecture, we talked about all the development formulas that have been tried
since the Second World War, and about how most of them hadn't worked terribly well.
It is the examples of Botswana and South Korea demonstrate during this same period, numerous
countries have started out in poverty, and have actually become prosperous nations.
These two success stories highlight two very different pathways to prosperity.
So in this lecture, we're going to discuss both of these pathways because they're pretty
different. We're also going to explain why, when, and under what conditions they appear
to work. Then we're going to examine the countries that have actually succeeded in
implementing these strategies. But then we're going to do something else. We're also going
to discuss the risks involved in these development approaches.
And finally, we'll tackle the most difficult question of all. Is it possible for the entire
developing world to pursue either of these approaches?
Let's begin by discussing Botswana. In a continent filled with disaster stories about
development gone wrong, what exactly did Botswana do right?
Well, in 1967, a year after its independence, large diamond deposits were discovered in the
country. The government was able to use the revenues from diamond exports to invest in
the country, leading to an annual growth rate of 7% a year for more than 40 years. The Botswana
case demonstrates one viable development strategy, which is the full exploitation of a country's
natural resources. Now, some economists, like Raoul Prebish, the author of the ISI model
that we talked about in the last lecture, have argued that developing countries cannot
rely on commodity exports, either food or raw materials, to lift themselves into prosperity.
The reason is that, ostensibly, these markets tend to be fiercely competitive, which means
that over time, these exporters face worsening terms of trade compared to those who export
more sophisticated, manufactured goods. Now, just to review, terms of trade refers to how
many exports are needed to pay for a country's imports. If a country's terms of trade weakens,
it means they need to export more in order to pay for the same amount of imports.
Commodities are generally thought to have worsening terms of trade over time, because
among other things, developed countries find new technological means of substituting away
from those commodities, and also find ways of increasing their output, which lowers the
price. There is a very important exception, however. There are some commodities exports
that have two things in common. The first is high price inelasticity of demand. In plain
English, goods with high price inelasticity are those that face high levels of demand even
when the price of the commodity increases. These goods, in other words, are much less
sensitive to prices than more basic commodities. Now, the obvious example of a price inelastic
commodity is oil. Because modern economies need energy to power them up, oil prices can
go up by a fair amount before short-term demand really slackens off. Other commodities that
are necessary for industrial production, like, let's say, platinum or Botswana's diamonds,
fall into this category as well. If there are few enough producers, then all of the national
exporters of the commodity can try to band together to form a cartel, which would allow
them to act as a group, like a monopoly, restrict their output, raise their prices, and thereby
earning additional export revenue. And the most obvious and successful cartel in history
is the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC. In 1973, they managed
to quadruple the price of oil. This price spike turned impoverished Gulf shakedoms into
very, very rich countries. Now, the other example of a successful cartel is diamonds.
One of the questions I love to ask my students when I'm teaching about this is, which multinational
corporation has been the most powerful in history? Now, inevitably, when I ask this,
the students will think about it, and they'll give an answer like General Electric, or General
Motors, or some kind of oil company. The answer, hands down, is De Beers. For a century, De
Beers operated as a monopoly seller of diamonds. And in doing so, kept the price of these jewels
well above what the market price would otherwise have been. Now, for this development strategy
to work, the state in question has to manage the wealth created by the commodities boom
pretty wisely. They have to take the money from these exports and invest it in the public
goods that can help modernize the rest of the economy, the kind of public goods we've
talked about in previous lectures, things like more education, transportation and information
infrastructures, particularly financial services to manage the surplus. One recent example
of this is the Emirate of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. Dubai is going to run out of
oil pretty quickly. But what they've done is they've taken a lot of their current oil
revenue and invested it so that Dubai can become a professional tourist and financial
hub in the region. And if you go to Dubai, you'll see lots of new skyscrapers, and it
seems to work reasonably well. Commodities tend to get depleted. So the state also has
to pursue long-term strategies to make sure that whatever income they get now in the present
will be able to pay off in the future. So they're going to engage in innovation, in
exploration to extend the half-life of their commodity exports, find new ways of extracting
whatever resource it is that they're trying to export so they can expand the size of their
proven reserves. Another thing they're going to do is try to create a sovereign wealth
fund. A sovereign wealth fund is essentially a government-run mutual fund that buys a diversified
portfolio of assets in order to generate a long-term revenue stream. Now sovereign wealth
funds have existed for quite some time, and even developed country governments have them.
In fact, the state of Alaska has a sovereign wealth fund. A sovereign wealth fund allows
future generations to profit from the current commodity boom. This also helps to smooth
out income fluctuations that come from shocks to the commodity price. Now there are some
significant success stories beyond Botswana that have used the exploitation of natural
resources to do reasonably well. Of the top 20 countries in the world by per capita income,
five of them, Gutter, Norway, Kuwait, Brunei, and the United Arab Emirates, are energy exporters.
In the year 2000, Western analysts were pretty convinced that the Russian economy was doomed.
A steady increase, however, in the price of oil and natural gas led to an explosion of
export revenue, which also led to growth rates of over 6% a year in the Russian Federation
for six straight years. But on the other hand, there are also many countries that highlight
the perils of this growth strategy. Numerous oil exporters should have profited from the
oil boom in the first decade of the 21st century. Many of these countries, however, have turned
out to be economic basket cases. Let's take Iran. Iran has some of the world's largest
proven reserves of oil. But because energy has been traditionally subsidized by its government,
Iran also consumes a vast amount of what it produces. Indeed, Iran's per capita energy
use is 15 times that of Japan. And some estimates project that Iran will actually become a net
importer of oil by the year 2020. In 2004, Nigeria earned about $20 billion a year from
its oil exports. But Nigeria's anti-corruption minister that same year stated unequivocally
that 40% of those earnings were lost due to theft, corruption, and mismanagement. Even
relative success stories like Dubai have had their difficulties. When I visited Dubai,
it was after the 2008 financial crisis. And one of the striking things about it was that
there were so many service workers in places like the Mall of Dubai, and yet not a lot
of customers, which suggested that their projections for what they would have in terms of market
demand didn't actually match what actually happened. And it's further worth noting that
Botswana is only the only Sub-Saharan diamond exporter to successfully avoid either mass
poverty or civil war. On the whole, far more countries have wasted their commodity wealth
than prospered from it. So why? Well, the answer is that there are a number of pitfalls to
this kind of development strategy. The first one is called the Dutch disease. Now this
was named after what the Netherlands experienced in the 1970s after it found large offshore
oil deposits. As a country exploits its commodity, it starts to run up a trade surplus. That's
understandable. Countries with trade surpluses, however, see their currencies appreciate over
time because if you're running a trade surplus, it means that more buyers are trying to demand
your currency than the reverse. The problem is, as the currency appreciates, other export
sectors, with more price elastic goods, become less competitive. And here I'm talking about
export sectors inside the country. So for example, in the case of Botswana, while the
diamond export sector might be thriving, other export sectors, let's say textiles, begin
to suffer because the price of their goods is too high in the global marketplace.
Eventually, the rising currency price forces out all other sectors, except the commodity
producing one. The end result is an economy that relies almost exclusively on the key commodity
to generate income. In other words, almost the exact opposite of the diversified, developed
economy that governments and societies tend to seek. Now there are ways to ameliorate
this problem. A sovereign wealth fund, for example, can take the foreign exchange earned
from commodity exports and simply keep it abroad by investing it overseas. That reduces
the pressure on the domestic currency to appreciate. This is why so many commodity exporting countries
have sovereign wealth funds. But this can lead to a different problem, however, which is weak
state institutions. A country that secures all of its revenue from commodity exports
does not need to tax its citizens. This sounds great, but it creates a couple of political
economy problems. One issue is the development of the rentier state. This is a government
that has little incentive to consult with its own citizenry because it doesn't rely upon
its population for either taxes or national service. This is why energy exporters are
the exception to the rule that richer states tend to become democracies. Because basically
speaking, these countries can often resist pressure from their citizens because they
don't rely on their citizens for anything else. Not surprisingly, therefore, four of
the top five energy exporters in the top 20 of the per capita income countries that I
talked about before are still autocracies. The disconnect between the government and
the citizenry means the state also has fewer constraints on how to spend the money. This
could mean that it spends it very wisely on long-term investments like education or infrastructure.
Or that it spends it on luxuries that reward high-ranking government employees or key political
allies. All you need to do to know this is look at the spending habits of oil-rich leaders
to understand what I'm talking about. Consider one example. In the 1980s and 1990s, the brother
of the Sultan of Brunei, who also happened to be the finance minister at the time, was
alleged to have blown through more than $14 billion on expensive cars, very extravagant
travel, and ridiculously fancy parties. The Sultan himself owns 17 private jets and thousands
of luxury cars. Here's another example. The Venezuelan state-owned oil company, PDVSA,
more than doubled its employment between 2003 and 2012, which sounds great, except during
the same time its oil output dropped by 20%. Business analysts agree that the company is
actually becoming increasingly inefficient. So what's going on? What's going on was that
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez used PDVSA as a place to basically hire loyal members
of his electorate. If the state is particularly corrupt or incompetent at using the bounty
from commodity exports, it might actually inspire armed rebellion. Both politically
disaffected groups and just out-and-out profit-seeking actors might have an incentive to seize control
of either the territory or the infrastructure necessary to produce the resources as a means
of seizing control of the government. This is how the term conflict diamonds came into
being. Civil wars in Sierra Leone and Angola had been fueled by diamond exports. This also,
by the way, explains why Nigeria has such a tough time capturing its oil exports. It's
because it has to deal with rebels who occasionally sabotage its oil facilities. The fact is,
a surprising number of energy and resource exporters suffer from civil wars and insurrections.
Yet another pitfall with pursuing the Botswana development strategy involves commodity price
shocks. There is no guarantee that the price of the exported commodity will stay high.
A global economic shock can depress commodity prices, even those that are highly pricey
and elastic, which is why Botswana suffered a 9 percent economic contraction the year
after the 2008 financial crisis. Furthermore, over time, importing countries
can find substitutes for the high-priced imported resource, which is how the price of oil declined
so dramatically from the early 1980s to the late 1990s, and why shale oil and gas became
so popular in the 2000s. The cartel can also break down, which would eventually also lead
to a dramatic fall in price. This happened for OPEC after 1986, and it's been happening
in diamonds over the past decade, as new discoveries in Russia, Canada, and Australia have weakened
to Beers Monopoly. So for this strategy to work, a developing
country needs to count on three things. First, it has to be lucky enough to possess a price
in elastic commodity in the first place. Second, it has to possess the institutions to wisely
invest in the bounty generated by the commodity exports and not lose that bounty to corruption
or graft. And third, it has to hope that global economic circumstances don't lead to a crash
in demand or a crash in the price. Now what about countries without natural
resources? What do these countries do? Well, this is the approach that South Korea adopted,
which we'll call export promotion. Now like the natural resource approach, this strategy
also relies on exports. Unlike what we'll call the Botswana model, however, this strategy
stresses manufacturing and high-end value-added goods. Now these kinds of goods also tend
to be priced in elastic. These goods also do tend to produce spillovers, benefits to
related sectors in the supply chain that allow for even more economic growth. So for example,
if you're export good as a computer, then you could in theory also develop sectors in
upstream products like semiconductors and downstream products like software or computer
animation. Now so far, this probably sounds a lot like
the import substitution and industrialization or ISI approach that I talked about in the
previous lecture. And while there is a small amount of overlap, in point of fact the two
operate quite differently. So how does export promotion work? This approach combines a number
of policies. First, there are certain targeted sectors that are protected in the domestic
market giving firms in those areas a guaranteed source of profit. Now so far that sounds pretty
much like ISI, but now we get to the differences. The other thing that an export promotion strategy
does is provide subsidies designed to incentivize firms to enter the global marketplace, which
South Korea did starting in the 1960s. In contrast to the import substitution and industrialization
approach, these firms in an export promotion strategy become globally competitive because
for them to succeed, they have to become truly world class producers. Another component
of this strategy is that labor unions are kept in check to prevent wage increases from
causing these firms to lose their competitiveness over time. Also, in terms of macroeconomic
policy, the government will pursue policies designed to ensure a relative balance of trade
surplus. This means an undervalued currency which makes exports more attractive and imports
more expensive. It also usually means placing restrictions of some kind on personal consumption
and trying to guarantee that the government runs a budget surplus if possible. The success
stories of the export promotion approach extend well beyond South Korea. Indeed, starting
with Germany and Japan following the end of the Second World War, and then also South
Korea was just one of a crop of countries called the NICS, or newly industrialized countries
that followed Japan's path. The other jurisdictions that were NICS were Taiwan, Hong Kong and
Singapore. The island country of Mauritius converted itself to an export processing zone
to adopt this strategy, and it succeeded pretty well. And now pretty much the entire rest
of the Pacific Rim is now adopting variants of this export promotion strategy, including
most prominently China. The export promotion path is far and away the most successful
pathway to prosperity for developing countries, particularly those without natural resources.
That said, this approach also has numerous failures. Other countries, like let's say
Indonesia, tried to adopt this mix of industrial policies and export promotion, and yet failed
to create world-class competitors. Even countries that have successfully adopted the export promotion
strategy, such as Japan, have found it difficult to maintain that strategy in recent years.
So what are the risks to an export promotion strategy? They're actually pretty numerous.
First, as with resource exporters, countries pursuing this strategy have to ensure that
their currencies do not appreciate due to the trade surpluses they're generating from
an export promotion strategy. Again, like resource exporters, many of these countries
over time have developed sovereign wealth funds to keep their surpluses invested overseas
and thereby preventing their currencies from appreciating. Singapore, for example, has
been extremely successful at using its sovereign wealth funds to promote its own economic development.
During the initial stages of export promotion, labor also has to be prepared to accept a
minimal share of the growth benefits. If unions are strong, this won't work terribly well.
And if the government tries to crack down on labor, this can create a backlash that reduces
foreign direct investment or reduces domestic firms' productivity. The sweet spot appears
to be weak enterprise unions that won't be too demanding during the first phases of this
export promotion strategy. Most important, for this approach to work,
the government has to be able to pick which sectors and which firms within those sectors
are worthy of export promotion, and it is far from guaranteed that governments can do
this well. Even Japan, which is thought to be the exemplar
of this approach, got it wrong. The Japanese government, for example, discouraged Honda
from entering the automobile market, thinking that it couldn't cut it. Obviously, they were
wrong. Some sectors also might not seem promising
or seem promising at the beginning, but not pan out over time. One example of this would
be HDTV, High Definition Television. In the late 1980s and early 90s, everyone thought
that HDTV was going to be the next big thing, and there was a scramble among European, American,
and Japanese producers to try to develop a technological edge in HDTV.
It turned out that HDTV, while it's now pretty common, didn't develop the kind of spillover
effects that the export promotion strategy assumed. Unless the policy analysts making
these decisions are insulated from politically powerful sectors, what starts out looking
like an export promotion strategy can wind up becoming crony capitalism.
In Indonesia, for example, it was not a coincidence that the firms that prospered in the 1980s
and 1990s had relatives of Suharto, the leader of Indonesia at the time, in charge.
But another pitfall of the export promotion approach is that it relies on import markets
that will not have a problem with this strategy. The effect of export promotion strategies
on large market importers is to naturally increase their trade deficits. Now, in terms
of consumer welfare, this isn't necessarily a bad thing. It is, however, a politically
unpopular outcome. Generally speaking, countries don't like to run trade deficits. So large
importers have to either be committed to laissez-faire trade policies or care enough about non-economic
factors to tolerate the export promotion strategies of developing countries.
The United States during the Cold War met both of these criteria. It was committed to
free trade as an ideology and as a policy. And it wanted to support the growth of non-communist
countries as a means of containing the Soviet Union. Both of these factors have been weakened
since the end of the Cold War.
And here's another risk that comes with the export promotion approach to national prosperity.
Once a country becomes more prosperous, transitioning away from this strategy is very, very difficult.
For example, export promoting countries become developed, which means they lose their statuses
emerging markets, which means they can't ask for things like special and differential
treatment from the World Trade Organization. They have to open up their domestic markets.
There will also, almost always, be entrenched political resistance to changing the export
promotion approach. Eventually, rapid economic growth will put upward pressure on wages unless
the exporting firms can also move upwards in the supply chain. That is to say, focus
on goods with even higher value added. They will lose their profitability.
For example, right now, many firms are looking at Vietnam over China to base their production
locations because the labor costs there are that much lower.
Another problem is that mature economies rely far more on domestic consumption than exports
to drive their economic growth. But countries that repress their consumption for decades
wind up developing habits that are extremely difficult to break.
Despite two decades of policy efforts from 1985 on trying to encourage personal consumption
in Japan, that country's consumption as a percentage of GDP remains the lowest among
the group of seven economies. In the United States, personal consumption
as a percentage of GDP is close to 70 percent. In Japan, it hovers closer to 55 percent.
China is an even more extreme example of this. Consumption as a percentage of GDP there
in 2010 was approximately 35 percent, which is low even among export promoting countries.
Another issue is that the closer export promoting countries get to the technological frontier,
the less of a roadmap they possess about which sectors are worthy of investment. It's
easy as a technologically backward country to look at prior development paths and pick
the appropriate sectors to emphasize. But no country on the technological frontier can
be sure which sectors will take off and which will have minimal spill overs for the rest
of the economy. Remember the HDTV example I talked about before.
This is why export promotion as a strategy tends to peter out as the country catches
up technologically. So as with resource exploitation, export promotion requires a few key prerequisites.
First it requires a strong and non-corrupt state that can to some extent be able to pick
winners and losers in the marketplace. But unlike resource exporters, export promoting
countries must also count on a few other factors. A disciplined labor force that is
willing to take fewer wage gains now in return for greater economic prosperity in the future.
Developed country importers have to be willing to tolerate quasi mercantilist strategies.
When the developing countries are small like Singapore, these things aren't that big of
a deal. When these developing countries are large like China or India, it's not clear
that the developed world can tolerate their export promotion policies for long.
So the good news is that there are tried and true ways for a country to move from developing
to develop. The bad news is that each of these approaches also has drawbacks and is far from
clear that every country can pursue either approach at the same time.
