One of the older approaches to explaining the past is called the Whig Theory of History.
It takes its name from the British political party and traces its roots back to the 18th
century.
Whig History looks at the past and sees an inexorable march of economic progress, scientific
advancement, and personal liberties.
Crudely put, the Whig Theory of History argues that every day, in every way, the world keeps
getting better and better.
This might sound absurdly optimistic, but if we think about the history of prosperity,
it does seem to have a ring of truth to it.
For the past two centuries, at least, an ever greater percentage of the globe has lifted
itself out of poverty and towards prosperity.
Rapid technological advancements have dramatically improved the productivity of the average worker
in the world, and a far greater fraction of the world lives in free societies now than
was the case 200 years ago.
So were the Whigs correct?
Not necessarily.
In the previous lecture, we talked about some of the challenges that developed societies
faced in maintaining steady growth in prosperity.
Still, there was an implicit assumption that prosperity, once achieved by a country, can
be maintained indefinitely.
Is this actually true?
Will countries that are prosperous now be prosperous for the indefinite future?
As it turns out, there have indeed been reversals of prosperity in recent history.
And by and large, there are two ways that this can happen.
The first is through man-made disasters, policy disasters.
And the second are natural disasters, but even those have a fair amount of policy involved.
We'll talk about cases and both from both of these categories, but they do suggest that
for most countries, most of the time, the Whig theory of history actually will hold.
Prosperity, once attained, is possible to keep with a modicum of good sense.
But for now, let's focus on how you can lose prosperity and we'll start with man-made disasters.
Historically, the easiest way for a country to have squandered its prosperity was to decisively
lose a war.
Countries or civilizations decisively defeated in combat were not necessarily treated with
mercy by the victors.
Colonization, plunder, destruction, and even out and out genocide were common.
The Aztec and Incan civilizations were destroyed by Spanish conquistadors in the 16th century.
Russia's defeat in World War I, combined with the October Revolution, devastated that country.
In 1920, Russia had only one-eighth of the industrial capacity that it had possessed in 1913.
Even recently, Saddam Hussein's Iraq in the mid-1980s was actually thought to be a moderately
prosperous, moderately progressive society.
After invading Kuwait in 1990, however, the country was placed under a full economic embargo.
Iraq then lost the 1991 Gulf War, was placed under additional comprehensive multilateral
economic sanctions, and then invaded yet again in 2003.
As a result, despite its massive oil wealth, Iraq's GDP per capita in 2005 was the same
level that it was in 1990, despite massive improvements in prosperity across the rest
of the globe.
But these are extreme examples, and they're unlikely to be repeated.
Outright colonization, for example, or for that matter, genocide, is considered pretty
much a taboo activity by sovereign states.
It would be very hard to conceive of the United States, or China, or Germany, or Brazil to
let's say conquer an African country and declare it to be a colony in the 21st century.
As for sanctions causing an economic collapse, the sanctions that were imposed against Iraq
were judged to be so harsh that the United Nations reformed its sanctions machinery to
reduce the number of goods that would be subject to an economic embargo.
Now devastating wars are certainly possible in theory, but as we'll discuss in a later
lecture, the likelihood of such wars taking place has actually become increasingly rare.
Even asymmetric terrorist attacks, like let's say the September 11th terrorist attacks,
cannot really slow down an economy as large as the United States.
Those attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were in many ways the most successful
terrorist attacks in history, creating costs in the hundreds of billions of dollars.
And yet the sum total of these attacks cost less than 2 percent of America's annual GDP,
and indeed U.S. economic growth rebounded pretty quickly after those attacks.
So if colonized is being colonized as a non-option, if being sanctioned isn't as severe as it
used to be, if war is rarer and less costly, and if terrorism can't cause countries to
collapse, are there other ways that national policies can destroy prosperity?
History does provide at least one cautionary tale, and that's the country of Argentina.
If I had asked you to name the 10 richest countries as measured by per capita income
from 100 years ago, I bet you would have likely got most of them pretty easily.
Countries like the United States, or Switzerland, and Germany are still prosperous.
What might surprise you, however, is that a century ago, Argentina was actually one of
the 10 richest countries in the world, as measured by per capita income.
In fact, between 1860 and 1914, Argentina experienced spectacular economic growth, largely
centered on three factors.
The first was the export of rurally produced agricultural goods, wheat and beef.
If you can never get an Argentine steak, I highly recommend it.
The second was a massive influx of British foreign investment to develop Argentina's
infrastructure and expand its agricultural output.
In fact, by the year 1913, foreign investors owned about half of the Argentine economy.
The third factor was a massive influx of European migration.
Population in Argentina more than doubled between 1890 and 1913.
That was primarily due to such large immigration inflows.
By 1913, Argentina's per capita income was higher than that of Germany and France, and
its real wages were higher than that which existed in southern Europe.
One Britain, describing the capital Buenos Aires in 1913, wrote, nowhere in the world
have I seen such a display of expensive motocars, thousands of them, which were pretty rare
in 1913.
In the 21st century, it is safe to say that the country has seen better days.
According to data from the World Bank, in 2010, Argentina ranked 54th in the world in
GDP per capita.
Argentina's per capita income now is on a par with, let's say, Russia, and it's lower
than either Portugal or Equatorial Guinea in Africa.
Argentina has also defaulted on its foreign debts twice in the past 30 years.
By 2012, the inflation rate in Argentina was at 25%.
Greater levels of tariffs and capital controls had been imposed.
And Argentina's government was rating its central bank and its public sector pension
funds in order to maintain its level of spending.
Yeah, Argentina is still part of the G20, but it's now thought of as a developing country,
whereas a century ago, it was thought of as developed.
One economic historian described Argentina's past century of economic history as one of
decline unparalleled in the annals of economic history.
So this raises the obvious question, what happened to Argentina?
This is actually a matter of some debate, as you wouldn't be surprised to hear.
Everyone agrees that Argentina today is much less prosperous than it used to be, but what
not everyone agrees about is the precise causes.
There is rough consensus, however, that the following factors did contribute to Argentina's
downfall.
The first factor was the cut off of foreign markets.
One of the key engines of Argentina's economic growth was the 19th century era of globalization.
The country benefited from an influx of labor and capital from overseas and the export of
agricultural goods to those markets as well.
But the start of World War I both cut off export markets and dramatically halted the
inflow of British foreign capital.
The effects on Argentina's economy were pretty severe.
Foreign borrowing went down and interest rates went dramatically up in the 1920s compared
to the pre-war period.
Americans were far more reluctant because the United States was the largest economy
in the world after World War I.
Americans were far more reluctant to proffer loans to South America than the British had
been.
During the 1920s, investment in Argentina's capital stock, machines and factories that
we talked about before, took a brutal hit.
The growth rate in the capital stock fell by more than 50 percent as a result of this
foreign cut off.
As a result, growth in per capita income fell by almost two-thirds between World War
I and the Great Depression.
A second factor that contributed to Argentina's downfall was a very low rate of national savings.
Compared to similar economies like, let's say, Australia or Canada, Argentine domestic
saving rates were only at one-third the levels of those other two countries.
The influx of foreign capital and labor in the late 19th century had multiple effects
on Argentina's economy and in part explains the low savings rate.
It encouraged a low domestic savings rate because there was no necessity to save when
foreign money was pouring in and boosting asset prices.
Generally speaking, when asset prices go up in a country, savings rates tend to fall.
Furthermore, the large influx of migrants changed the demographic profile of Argentina
in such a way as to depress the savings rate.
You see, most of these immigrants were young, with little pre-existing savings, but a lot
of children.
Combined, this led to less savings over time.
Furthermore, these migrants were such a large part of Argentina's population that they
depressed the savings rate for the entire country.
So the combination of low savings and a foreign cut off meant a drastic decline in investment,
which put Argentina well behind other rich countries of the period.
Finally, in addition to the cut off of foreign markets and the low rate of savings, we have
to consider the effect of bad policies and bad political institutions.
Other economies, like I said before, Australia and Canada had similar kinds of factor endowments
to Argentina.
They were also agricultural exporters.
And indeed, they also suffered somewhat after the start of the First World War.
Unlike those economies, however, Argentina never truly recovered from its post-World
War I slowdown.
The question is why?
The answer appears to be because Argentine political institutions were not as robust,
and the government's policy responses to the economic slowdown worsened over time.
Now, even prior to 1930, voter repression and electoral fraud were endemic problems
in that country.
And in 1930, a coup d'etat deposed the Argentine government.
A new government was formed, but significant amounts of electoral fraud in the country
during the infamous decade of the 1930s led to considerable disillusion with that country's
democratic political institutions.
In 1943, the military took the reins of power.
Juan Perón was part of the military junta.
And by 1946, he had taken complete control of the country.
He implemented an enormous expansion of the state that, in fairness, was partly designed
to improve the lot of workers.
But it also massively expanded the Argentine state's control over its economy.
Juan cemented high tariff rates and other forms of protection, which reduced foreign
direct investment, which had been the lifeblood of the Argentine economy in the pre-World
War I era, and encouraged the rise of uncompetitive industries.
The legacy of these years led to decades of coups, fragile democratic governments, occasional
banking and currency crises, hyperinflation, and other kinds of socioeconomic ills.
So this leads to an obvious question.
Is Argentina a harbinger of other declines from prosperity?
Now here, fortunately, there are reasons to be skeptical.
Simply put, no other country has matched Argentina's fall from prosperity from a rich country to
a less developed country in modern history.
Now it's true that some developing countries have had a few years of rapid growth and then
seen that rapid growth cut short.
But these countries were only developing countries to begin with.
They were in no way thought of as developed.
We also talked about North Korea's decline, beginning in the 1970s.
But even in the 1970s, North Korea was still just a developing economy.
In other words, the exceptions I just talked about are really exceptions.
No other developed economy in the last 150 years has followed Argentina's trajectory.
Another thing to consider, and I talked about this before, is that Argentina had a long
history of bad governments and bad political institutions.
Even during the boom times of the Belepoque era, that's the era prior to World War I,
electoral fraud was a real problem in Argentina.
For example, secret ballots were only introduced in Argentina in 1912.
Each Argentine government, furthermore, since the 1930s, found a way to put their own political
cronies on the court.
So in fact, whenever there would be a change in power, inevitably the new party would find
ways to impeach Supreme Court justices and then install loyal political cronies in their
stead.
By the first decade of the 21st century, corruption was simply an accepted fact of life in the
Argentine government.
According to one local NGO, a corruption case in Argentina took seven years to prosecute,
and only 15 of 750 anti-corruption cases prior to 2004 resulted in convictions.
Now as I noted in a previous lecture, almost all developed economies have firmly entrenched
democracies.
Now these regimes might be imperfect, they might be vulnerable to interest group pressure,
but they are highly unlikely to fall to a military dictatorship.
In contrast, by the way, dictatorships are often quite vulnerable to downward economic
shocks.
During the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, for example, the Suharto regime fell
in Indonesia.
In contrast, in democratic governments like South Korea, the crisis simply caused the
incumbents to lose in the next election.
The regime of democracy itself actually tended to be strengthened by the economic crisis.
Now that said, the countries that would appear to be most a threat for an Argentina-like
fall are those that meet the following criteria.
First, presumably these are countries that only recently joined the ranks of the developed
world.
These would be countries that do not have a strong institutional history of broad-based
liberal democracy.
And finally, these countries would presumably be dependent on the global economy for their
prosperity, which means a cutoff from the global economy would be pretty devastating.
Now this actually does describe somewhat the eastern and southern European economies pretty
well.
But even there, there's yet another backstop.
These countries can rely on the European Union to prevent the worst kind of policy
outcomes like, let's say, anti-democratic coups or blanket trade protectionism from
taking place.
So on the whole, while Argentina is a cautionary tale, it is highly unlikely that other advanced
industrialized democracies will follow its path.
Let's focus on the second way of losing prosperity now, which is natural disasters.
The case of Argentina that I just talked about is the case of a political regime committing
policy suicide.
There are other examples of countries that lose significant amounts of prosperity due
to a different kind of calamity altogether.
The damage from natural disasters does not get accurately measured in GDP, because as
I said before, gross domestic product measures the value of all new goods and services created.
It doesn't factor in the destruction of existing wealth.
The fact is there have been plenty of natural disasters that have caused widespread damage
to national economies.
Let's think about hurricanes.
Hurricanes can sweep the regions and countries devastating electrical infrastructure, housing,
and roads, not to mention the loss of life.
In 1780, three powerful hurricanes hit the Atlantic Seaboard.
One of them devastated most of the Caribbean islands and the inhabitants living on those
islands.
6,000 people died on the island of Barbados alone in that year from the hurricanes.
Approximately $80 million in current dollars of economic damage occurred as well.
In other words, most of Barbados' economy was destroyed from those hurricanes.
But that damage was paltry compared to that estimated from more recent hurricanes, frankly
because modern development creates more assets that can be destroyed in a hurricane.
In 2005, Hurricane Katrina tore through New Orleans causing massive flooding, killing
more than 1,800 people, and causing an estimated $81 billion in property damage.
Now hurricanes are not the only kind of natural disaster.
Earthquakes can also cause serious damage.
The 1972 earthquake in Minagua, Nicaragua killed 5,000 people and in some ways utterly
changed that country's trajectory.
The earthquake displaced two-thirds of Minagua's population because of destroyed buildings
and infrastructure.
The center of the capital was destroyed and to this day, the downtown has not really
been rebuilt.
The government's feeble response to the quake sparked outrage and led to a revival of armed
insurrection, eventually leading to the 1979 Sandinista Revolution.
The 1995 earthquake in Kobe, Japan caused more than $100 billion in damage and killed
6,500 people.
The 2008 earthquake in the Sichuan province of China caused less property damage than
the one in Kobe, only $29 billion.
However, more than 70,000 people died from that earthquake.
Another kind of natural disaster is tsunamis.
Tsunamis are caused by earthquakes that happen in the oceans.
The effect is to create tidal waves that can devastate coastal areas.
The December 2004 tsunami that swept across the Indian Ocean caused $14 billion in property
damage and killed approximately a quarter of a million people.
The 2011 tsunami that hit Japan was without question the most expensive natural disaster
in history to that date.
The tidal wave washed across northern Japan, destroying entire coastal areas.
But more significantly, the earthquake and the tsunami caused a power outage at the Fukushima
nuclear power plant that made it impossible for the nuclear reactor to be properly shut
down.
The result was that three nuclear cores suffered meltdowns, leading to massive releases of
radiation into the atmosphere.
The event was rated a 7 on the international nuclear and radiological events scale, the
highest possible rating a disaster could earn.
The Japanese tsunami and the nuclear disaster is now clearly the most expensive in history.
The World Bank estimates the damage at approximately $235 billion.
The Japanese government itself estimates the damage at more than $300 billion.
In truth, the aggregate effect will be even greater because the disaster led the Japanese
government to mothball all of its existing nuclear reactors, raising the price of energy
consumption in that country.
Another kind of disaster are epidemics.
Sometimes natural disasters can trigger infectious diseases such as cholera to spread.
In other cases, slow motion epidemics can have devastating effects on national societies.
The AIDS epidemic is a powerful example of this.
Because it is transmitted primarily by sexual contact, it's an unusual disease in its demographic
effects.
You see most infectious diseases hit the very young and the very old the hardest.
AIDS, however, affects the most able-bodied of a population, which therefore results in
even more severe socioeconomic effects.
Because of AIDS, African countries like Zambia, South Africa, and Zimbabwe actually move backwards
on the United Nations International Human Development Indicators between 1985 and 2000.
That's the first time that ever happened since the HDI was created.
So clearly, natural disasters can have devastating effects on national economies, but what can
be done about them?
I mean, after all, natural disasters are often referred to as acts of God, implying that
neither societies nor governments can be held responsible for the damage done by them.
Now this is true to some extent.
Seismologists cannot predict the epicenter of an earthquake in advance.
Meteorologists can't tell you when or where a hurricane will emerge.
Still, attributing the cost of natural disasters entirely to random chance would be an equally
disingenuous move.
For example, while scientists and experts cannot predict exactly where and when natural
disasters can take place, they can estimate likelihoods and probabilities.
Earthquakes are far more likely, for example, to occur at the joints of tectonic plates,
like the San Andreas Fault in California.
Hurricanes are far more likely to hit near Florida, let's say, than Maine.
Scenarios will hit the Midwestern Plain states far more frequently than the Northeast or
the Rocky Mountains states.
And the early detection of epidemics should be pretty possible.
Governments should therefore have an incentive to guard against the worst case scenarios
that come from natural disasters.
What can governments do?
Well, there can be things like the provision of emergency services and release supplies
as a way of reducing the damage after an initial disaster.
Governments can also impose building codes so that structures can survive earthquakes
or, let's say, high winds.
Governments can also provide early warnings of imminent storms or epidemics, as well
as information about what to do if a crisis should break out.
So which governments have an incentive to make these kinds of public goods investments?
There are two basic factors that appear to play a role here.
The first is the relative prosperity of the country.
All else equal, the richer a country is as measured by per capita income, the more resources
that that government can devote to public and private goods necessary to prevent the
worst case outcomes from a natural disaster.
The second factor, however, that determines how well a government can respond to a natural
disaster is its regime type.
Even when one controls for income, democratic governments are far more likely to have invested
in the emergency services and health infrastructures that can mitigate against the worst natural
disasters.
For example, in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control plays that role in identifying,
arresting, and hopefully containing the spread of epidemics.
To see the importance of these factors, consider the effects of two earthquakes that occurred
less than two months apart in the year 2010.
In January of that year, an earthquake hit Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
In February of that year, a quake hit central Chile.
Now, the Chilean earthquake was 500 times as powerful as the quake that hit Port-au-Prince,
Haiti.
But the effects of each disaster were dramatically different.
In Haiti, approximately 316,000 people died and another million people were made homeless.
Eight months after the quake, very few of those displaced persons had managed to rebuild
their homes.
One year after the quake, less than 5% of the rubble had been cleared and less than 15%
of the housing stock had been replaced.
Now in contrast to Haiti, consider the Chilean response to the earthquake.
In the case of the earthquake that struck central Chile, only 525 people were killed
and less than 10% of the population in the affected areas lost their homes.
Most of Chile's infrastructure that had been damaged from the quake was repaired within
less than a year.
So why was there such a big difference?
One reason was that the Chilean earthquake was deeper underground and had an offshore
epicenter.
Still, remember that earthquake was 500 times as powerful, so the location of the quake
is not the only explanation for this.
Another reason was that Chile was an established wealthier democracy and that gave it three
distinct advantages over Haiti.
First, Chile had building codes that required an ability to withstand earthquakes.
Haiti on the other hand had no building codes.
Therefore, the initial damage from the quake in Chile was minimized, whereas it wasn't
in Haiti.
Second, Chile's public services were better, which made it easier for that country to respond
and redress the damage caused by the quake.
History rights in Chile were also well established, meaning it was easier for insurance to pay
out those affected by the quake.
In Haiti, by contrast, a lot of the land where home stood stand on uncertain legal status,
making it difficult for those who were displaced to get compensation.
So as it turns out, the weak theory of history does contain more truth than we would expect.
Yes, based on the past, it seems possible for significant gains in prosperity to be
reversed.
But for that to happen, the government in charge has to incur a lot of bad luck and
make a lot of bad policy decisions.
However, if we look into the future, there are a number of new and challenging roadblocks
to prosperity at the national and the global levels.
That's what we're going to turn our attention to in our next lecture.
