Let's say there was an invention that could boost the national prosperity in the United
States by a trillion dollars annually.
That's a pretty significant bump in gross domestic product, more than five percent.
The thing is, the way this invention works, everyone in the United States would benefit
by about exactly one dollar.
Except the inventor, she would receive the remainder of the trillion dollar surplus.
So here's my question, does this invention make the United States better off?
Economists have a quick, easy, and unequivocal answer to this question.
The answer is yes.
When economists think about maximizing everyone's welfare, they operate on the principle called
Pareto maximization.
This is named after the Italian economist, Vilfredo Pareto.
The principle is simple.
If there is an economic transaction that can make someone better off without making anyone
else worse off, then it is a prosperity enhancing move.
This is certainly the case with the invention I just described, which is why economists
would approve it.
More surplus and wealth is created, a trillion dollars worth.
Some economists might then go on to argue that taxes or transfers can be put in place
to make sure that the benefits can be distributed more evenly.
But to be honest, most economists don't care about distribution all that much.
Neither should be pointed out to most Americans.
Poll after poll of Americans show two things.
First, almost all citizens of the United States think of themselves as middle class.
Second, Americans are actually pretty leery about using income redistribution as a policy
tool.
Instead, Americans believe that prosperity is available to them so long as they earn
it.
Indeed, one of the most common tropes in American literature is the notion of the American
dream.
It's the belief that no matter what a person's origins, if they work hard and they apply
oneself, prosperity is guaranteed.
The heyday of this literary theme was the early part of the 20th century.
Today, however, that theme appears to be rarer and rarer in novels.
Just as economic inequality in the United States has exploded to levels unseen in 90
years.
Similarly, at the global level, inequality has also skyrocketed.
The best evidence for this is the existence of Davos Man.
The political scientist Samuel Huntington coined this term to describe attendees at the World
Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, an annual get-together of the great and good.
These represent the global, political, economic, financial, and cultural elites.
The gap between the way they live, chartered jets, first-class hotels, spas, personal handlers,
and so forth, is far different from the way the poor in the poorest countries live or
even the middle class in most developed societies live.
And this lifestyle gap is wider than it's ever been in history, a fact chronicled by
the journalist Christia Freeland in her new book, Plutocrats.
While the existence of such inequality might offend the sensibilities of some of you, it
should be stressed that the role of inequality in affecting national prosperity remains a
hotly contested issue.
Even strong egalitarians like John Rawls believe that some degree of inequality is inevitable
in society.
We'll talk about that in a later lecture.
And as we shall see, there are valid arguments that some degree of inequality can actually
contribute to prosperity, but there are powerful arguments that suggest too much inequality
can actually hamper long-term prosperity.
We will consider all of these arguments in turn.
Now first, let's define our terms.
As we learned in an earlier lecture on its sources, poverty refers to whether an individual
standard of living is below some absolute level.
Inequality, on the other hand, refers to relative disparities in the standard of living
or income between different individuals or groups.
One popular measure of inequality is the Gini coefficient.
This is named after the sociologist Corrado Gini.
This measure divides the income of wealth of a population into fifths or quintiles,
from the richest quintile to the poorest, and then compares the share of national income
that they earn.
Now by definition, the richest quintile is going to out-earn the poorest quintile.
What the Gini coefficient does is measure the precise gap in income of the poorest quintile
compared to the population of the richest quintile.
In an absolutely egalitarian society, the income of everyone will be equal.
No one will be richer, no one will be poorer.
In that kind of society, the Gini coefficient will be zero.
In a radically unequal society, however, the richest quintile will earn all of the income
and possess all of the wealth.
The Gini coefficient in that society will equal one.
Intuitively, one would expect poverty and inequality to follow each other.
But history suggests that in fact the opposite has often been true.
Under the following facts, over the past 200 years, there is no denying that global inequality
has steadily risen.
Since 1820, economists believe that the world's Gini coefficient has increased by more than
30 percent.
During the same period, however, poverty fell drastically.
In a one estimate, only 5 percent of the world's population lived on more than the equivalent
of $2 a day in 1804, which means that 95 percent of the world's population was living in poverty.
By 2011, at least 60 percent of the world's population lived on more than $2 a day, despite
the fact that the global population increased eight times over the past two centuries.
For another confounding example, consider that there have been loud and recent complaints
about rising inequality in the United States.
Groups like Occupy Wall Street have loudly complained about rising inequality and the
benefits going to the one percent.
However, the 2008 financial crisis led to a drastic, though temporary, reduction in inequality.
The reason is simple.
Those who were hardest hit from the 2008 recession, at least in terms of financial impact, were
in fact those very one percent.
The top one percent share of national income in the United States fell from 23.5 percent
to 18.1 percent in the first two years of the crisis.
Of course, at the same time that inequality was falling, poverty was rising as unemployment
expanded and more people on the lower end of the income ladder felt the effects of the
crisis to the point where the poverty rate in the United States peaked above 15 percent
in 2010.
In this way, the Great Recession followed the same pattern of the Great Depression.
You had falling levels of inequality and rising levels of poverty.
It's worth noting, however, that this compression of inequality after 2008 was very quickly reversed.
According to income data from the economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Sayes, the top
one percent reaped 93 percent of all the income gains in the year 2010, and their share of
national income recovered to about 19.8 percent.
So what does the current data say on inequality?
Despite brief countertrends like the Great Recession, the data here is pretty incontrovertible.
Economic inequality is on the rise in a lot of countries.
In 1980 and 2005, the Gini coefficient increased in 80 percent of the advanced industrial states
that are members of the OECD, the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development.
In the United States, the Gini coefficient has gone from .3 to .42 in the past 30 years.
Remember that the closer the number gets to one, the greater the inequality.
So clearly the U.S. has become a more unequal society in recent years.
To put this in more concrete terms, the top one percent of the U.S. population captured
52 percent of the gains in national income between 1993 and 2008.
Income inequality also increased in the United Kingdom, Italy, and New Zealand.
Even in Sweden, which is one of the most egalitarian societies in the world, inequality rose.
Inequality also rose in the advanced developing countries.
Inequality has risen for China and Russia, in fact far more quickly than in the United
States.
Both countries are actually now more unequal societies than the U.S.
Now as for the matter of global inequality at the individual level, here the evidence
is a bit more muddled.
If you forget countries for a second, if you simply look at the world as an assemblage
of individuals, what is happening with inequality?
It's a mixed bag.
Over the past 20 years, the dramatic growth of the advanced developing economies like
China and India has likely reduced inequality.
But at the same time, the global elite, the Davos culture, has done fabulously well.
In other words, the rich continue to get richer.
Now this leads to the next obvious question.
Why is inequality on the rise?
In essence, many of the trends we've already talked about at the national level are responsible
for the increase in economic inequality.
So one issue is simply that more countries are becoming prosperous.
In an impoverished society, equality is easy to achieve because almost everyone is poor.
Most developing countries, like China and Brazil, are now experiencing rising levels
of inequality because more wealth is being created.
So it's not that the rich are stealing from the poor in order to become rich.
Rather in these developing countries, the individuals who have the skills and education
necessary to participate in, and therefore to benefit from, wealth creation are relatively
few, at least initially.
We'll return to this in a few moments.
Next on the list is education.
Yes, without question, it is a key to national and individual prosperity.
But education can also contribute to economic inequality.
Human capital is of increasing importance to determining income.
The gap of wages between educated and uneducated has been rising for decades.
We've talked about this before.
So even though getting an education at the individual level is an unalloyed good, it
does contribute to inequality.
As in previous societies, since no one had an education, there was no way to gain an
increase in income.
The moment you create a strata of society that's educated, then suddenly inequality
is going to increase.
Another reason for the widening of inequality, which we've talked about before, has to do
with globalization and the superstar phenomenon.
In a global marketplace, the best of the best can earn a much greater income than even
the very good in that profession.
In basketball, for example, LeBron James earns a lot more money than, let's say, the hundredth
best basketball player in the world.
Globalization is also weak in the power of labor unions in the developed world, reducing
the ability of workers to bargain for higher wages.
Organization and automation have altered the composition of developed economies away from
union jobs.
In the 1950s, for example, over 40% of America's private sector workforce was unionized.
That figure fell to less than 7% at the end of the year 2010.
Finally, global and national public policies also play a role in widening the gap between
the haves and the have-nots.
In general, at the global level, the rules of the economic game are written by the great
powers, which tend to be pretty rich and powerful.
Even if many of these rules promote global economic openness, at least some of these
rules stack the deck even more in favor of the rich and powerful.
Let me give you two examples of this at the global level.
Innovation would be intellectual property rights.
Intellectual property rights at the global level have become very strict.
That is designed to reward innovators.
And as we've noted before, innovation drives economic growth.
So in theory, that's a good thing.
After an idea is innovated, however, the key to prosperity is the diffusion of that idea
to the rest of the world.
If intellectual property rights are too stringent, then the innovator gains at the expense
of those who would spread new ideas in a low-cost manner to consumers.
Another example of the policy that would benefit the global rich is agricultural subsidies.
Even though, let's say, West African cotton producers and Latin American sugar producers
are globally competitive, trade barriers still exist that block or reduce exports of those
goods to the advanced industrialized democracies.
Now this also applies at the national level.
Let's consider three significant changes to the U.S. tax code between 1980 and 2010.
In 1980, the top marginal tax rate was 70 percent.
By 2010, it had been lowered to 35 percent.
The maximum tax rate on long-term capital gains fell in those 30 years from 28 percent
to 15 percent.
And the estate tax went from 55 percent on any inheritance, over $650,000, to zero.
Now in fairness, the estate tax then started to go up in 2011.
Now an economic rationale can be made that each of these changes in the tax code are
designed to spur economic growth.
But combined, however, the wealthy garner a disproportionate benefit from each of these
changes to the tax code.
So we know that inequality is on the rise in the world, and we have a pretty good set
of explanations for why it's been rising.
So now let's get to our chief question.
Is rising inequality a problem for economic prosperity?
The economist Bronko Milanovic has studied this issue from quite some time, and he's
actually suggested a pretty useful analogy to describe the relationship between inequality
and prosperity.
He argues that we should think of inequality as being the economic equivalent of cholesterol.
Now there are actually good kinds and bad kinds of cholesterol.
The good kind is pretty nice.
The bad kind can lead to various forms of heart disease.
Just as there are good and bad kinds of cholesterol, there are good and bad kinds of economic
inequality.
Now how can inequality possibly be a good thing?
Let's look at two examples.
First, there's a phenomenon of rapid economic growth.
As we see globally, and as many countries in the developed world are now demonstrating,
rapid economic growth often comes with rising inequality.
This is particularly true when married to globalization, as those individuals with relatively
scarce skills in the developing world possessing things like education or entrepreneurial skills
get rewarded handsomely in the global marketplace.
Now this doesn't mean that the rest of the people in these societies get left behind.
They presumably benefit too.
But the distribution of benefits, particularly during the initial stages of rapid growth,
can be radically unequal.
This pattern has been observed so frequently in the past that it can be represented graphically
in a figure known as the Cousinets Curve, which is named for the economist Simon Cousins.
In a very poor society, there is equality.
In a rapidly growing society, inequality explodes.
But in a mature, prospering society, inequality should start to abate.
Besides being an indicator of rapid economic growth, inequality can also provide a useful
signal of economic incentives.
See presumably income is a good signal of what services are strongly demanded by society
and what services shouldn't necessarily be demanded so much.
So not shockingly for example, doctors tend to make more money than toll booth collectors.
One of the potential problems with a truly egalitarian society is that the price signal
for which activities are important is blunted.
So talented people might not go into the professions where they and the rest of society would benefit
the most.
A society with moderate amounts of inequality can signal which activities or careers are
worth pursuing better than more equal societies.
Now the key to this argument is the notion of equality of opportunity.
If two people respond to the same signals and are equally worthy, then both should succeed
regardless of their origins or their family connections.
Alright, now let's get to the potential troubles in terms of economic inequality that will potentially
put a damper on economic prosperity.
Some of, first of all, some of these positive arguments that I just talked about have been
a little bit exaggerated by their proponents.
For example, the Cousinets Curve argument has actually not held up terrifically well
over time.
More sophisticated studies of this data have demonstrated that the Cousinets Curve does
not necessarily bend back.
In other words, radically unequal societies do tend to stay pretty unequal.
For example, Brazil has been a radically unequal society for decades, but in 2002 President
Lula in Nácio de Silva made it his top priority to reduce poverty and inequality in that country.
For his efforts, after 10 years, he did lower Brazil's genie coefficient, but he only lowered
it from 0.58 to 0.54.
Brazil is still one of the world's most unequal societies.
The argument about inequality signaling useful choices, well that certainly makes sense when
you're comparing doctors to toll booth collectors.
But what if you're comparing, let's say, hedge fund managers to physics teachers?
Then the comparison doesn't seem to work.
Indeed, during the 21st century, a large fraction of the PhDs in physics and mathematics seem
to be going into finance rather than into their chosen profession.
In retrospect, this might not have been the best allocation of human capital.
Moreover, we can identify several negative economic effects that come from economic inequality.
In the first place, inequality can stunt long-term economic growth.
The reason is that in an unequal society, the wealthiest control access to important
economic institutions, particularly, and as we've talked about before, access to capital.
If inequality is particularly concentrated, then the less well-off will find greater barriers
to credit, making it difficult to accumulate the necessary human capital or physical capital
to prosper.
In a truly unequal society, growth in personal consumption will also be constrained, and
that limits the opportunities for profitable investment.
This retards growth, which in turn keeps consumption low for a longer period of time.
Globalization exacerbates this problem for developing nations, because the rich in those
countries, rather than reinvesting their wealth in their own national economy, can take their
savings and move it to safer havens in the developed world.
It should also be pointed out that there is a strong evidence of path dependence in economic
inequality.
As I've said before, path dependence means that what happens in the past has a profound
effect on the current situation.
Multiple economic studies show that inequality in land ownership is responsible for continued
economic inequality in Latin America, for example.
Now, disturbingly, path dependence is also evident in income mobility.
The research consensus, and this is contrary to American myth, is that the United States
now has one of the lowest levels of income mobility in the developed world.
According to the Economic Mobility Project and the Brookings Institution, intergenerational
mobility in the United States is among the lowest in the OECD economies.
Now, intergenerational mobility is a fancy term that refers to how much children's income
can diverge from their parents.
In the United States, close to 50 percent of a child's earnings can be explained by
what their parents earned.
In contrast, in places like Canada, Finland, Norway, and Denmark, less than 20 percent of
a child's earnings can be explained by what their parents earned.
So if Americans are born poor, they are more likely to stay poor throughout their life.
Despite the perception that Americans have greater opportunities for prosperity than
Europeans, the reverse actually appears to be true.
But even beyond stunting long-term growth, economic inequality can have adverse political
consequences as well.
Now, in theory, a society can be economically unequal, but politically equal.
A free market democracy might lead to individuals earning radically different amounts of money,
but still having equal voice in government, because they each have one vote when they
go into the voting booth.
In this situation, governments should still provide the necessary public goods to promote
equality of opportunity.
In practice, however, things look slightly different.
In unequal authoritarian societies, governments will only care about the selectorate and only
provide them with goods and services.
This further exacerbates economic inequality.
In unequal democratic societies, the rich can use their money to lobby and buy political
influence through things like campaign contributions, bribes, or other forms of political corruption.
In these situations, the rich have an incentive to use their political influence to bend the
rules of the game to keep themselves rich and prevent competition to their sources
of income.
They will, in other words, engage in unproductive rather than productive entrepreneurship.
The result is a society with lower levels of economic growth, fewer people becoming
prosperous, and political corruption making change next to impossible.
In the worst case scenario, rising inequality contributes to both political instability
and political revolutions.
Finally, inequality also decreases the non-economic components of prosperity.
Now remember, in our second lecture, we talked about how material wealth is strongly correlated
with the sense of well-being.
One exception to that rule was if the distribution of income widened within a society, happiness
went down for most people.
The reason is that people are less happy when they can visibly observe the gap between
the lifestyle they can afford and the lifestyle enjoyed by the best off.
All else equal, greater national and global inequality can therefore make people feel
less prosperous.
So clearly, there are multiple and complex ways in which inequality can affect national
prosperity.
What is really important to recognize, however, is that there are two mediating factors that
help to determine the precise relationship.
The first are political policies, and the second is the sense of national identity.
So let's turn first to political institutions and policies.
Governments can do three things to try to ensure that income inequality does not hamper
the growth of economic prosperity for all.
The first is to invest in public goods that clearly promote growth.
Inequality stings far less if the public perception is that there remains both the
quality of opportunity and expectations that growth still benefits everyone.
Investing in public goods that promote economic growth and by avoiding public bads that reward
the rich at the expense of the poor can ameliorate the problems of inequality.
The second policy that governments can do is use transfer and redistribution policies.
Even if the distribution of income is unequal, social welfare and transfer programs that
provide minimum income and health benefits can ensure that the distribution of consumption
is more even.
Redistributionist policies that go too far will blunt the incentives of those at the
higher end of the income spectrum.
But inadequate transfers blunt the ability of those at the lower end of the income spectrum
to improve their standing.
Another issue that governments can do is public accountability and legitimacy.
If those on the lower end of the income spectrum believe that their voice is heard in government,
then they will be less likely to reject the economic system that leaves them as the have-nots.
Governments have to demonstrate concern for the less well-off for this legitimacy to be
sustained.
And the second factor that can curb the negative impact of inequality is national identity
and culture.
Unequal societies retard prosperity if the haves do not identify themselves as having
any relationship whatsoever with the have-nots.
If national identity is strong, however, then the haves will tend to prefer providing the
necessary resources and policies to assist the have-nots to allow for greater income
mobility and greater economic prosperity.
Even though the United States is a relatively unequal society, Americans are by far more
optimistic than any other developed economy about their chances for individual success.
According to the Brookings Institution, more Americans believe that people get rewarded
for their skill, intelligence, and effort than in any other nationality in the developed
world.
Countries with weaker levels of national cohesion, due to let's say ethnic, religious, or regional
heterogeneity, are far less likely to support generous welfare policies.
And this has been one positive reason why the United States has less generous welfare
provisions than let's say Western European nation states.
Now this leads to a central irony.
Countries with higher levels of national cohesion can actually tolerate higher levels of inequality.
But in all likelihood, they won't.
They'll enact policies that help keep inequality restrained.
The United States, which has a very strong sense of national identity, but also has a
relatively heterogeneous population, is the big exception here.
The strong sense of national identity does help to compensate for rising levels of inequality
in the United States.
So today we've learned that inequality is a global and a national phenomenon.
There are a lot of reasons for this, including the increasing importance of education and
globalization.
Not all of this inequality is bad.
Like cholesterol, there are good and bad kinds.
That said, there is a tipping point after which inequality can truly hamper economic growth
and harm mass prosperity.
But developing an expert consensus about where that precise tipping point is will unfortunately
be very difficult to reach.
