In October of 2001, Apple introduced the iPod as a new product into the marketplace.
Over the next decade, its invention triggered a wave of new gadgets from both Apple and
its competitors, things like smartphones, tablet computers, cloud computing, software
apps, and so forth.
This leads to a pretty interesting question.
Since Apple is an American company, do the iPod, and more significantly the iPhone, represent
an American success story?
The gadget enthusiasts listening to me are no doubt aware that the answer is more complex
than that.
See, even if the iPod or the iPhone was invented in America, it's actually manufactured in
China.
And according to economists Yu Qingxing and Neil Duterte, the iPhone contributed $1.9
billion to the U.S. trade deficit with China in 2009.
So maybe the iPhone is a Chinese success story.
But the answer is even more complicated than that.
Maybe if you look at who produces the component parts of the iPhone, you discover that China
actually plays a very minor role.
Components for the iPhone 3G, like its flash drive, came from a Japanese firm, Toshiba.
The South Korean firm, Samsung, provided the application processor.
The German company, Infineon, provided the camera module, and it was an American corporation
that provided the Bluetooth application.
All of these component parts were actually assembled by a Taiwanese firm called Foxconn
that's based in Shenzhen, China.
So the truth is that the iPhone is not really a Chinese success story either, exactly.
China is responsible for less than 4% of the total manufacturing cost of the iPhone.
Instead, the iPhone is a success story about globalization and the global supply chain.
Thinking about value added in zero-sum language like China wins or America wins doesn't actually
make a whole lot of sense.
A lot, though not all, of global production is a positive sum game.
So far in these lectures, we have talked primarily about individual and national pathways
to prosperity.
We live in a global economy, however, and what happens at the international level is
increasingly important to individual and national welfare.
Both the boom of the early 2000s and the bust of the 2008 financial crisis demonstrated
the interconnectedness of the global economy.
This should not be surprising.
Regardless of the model one prefers for promoting national prosperity, embracing globalization
is usually one of the key policy planks that is advocated.
Ironically, however, at the same time that policymakers repeatedly praise globalization,
the phenomenon has been politically controversial.
In the 70s, 80s, and 90s, many in the developing world argued that globalization was a tool
designed and used by rich countries to exploit the underdeveloped parts of the world.
This triggered massive protest movements that culminated in the 1999 battle in Seattle,
large-scale demonstrations and violence that took place at the World Trade Organization
meetings that were held in that city.
These demonstrations became a regular part of high-level summits of the International
Monetary Fund, World Bank, World Trade Organization, and G8 summits and meetings.
As we've moved into the 21st century, however, there has been a fundamental transformation
in attitudes towards globalization.
Public opinion surveys show a persistent increase in positive attitudes towards globalization
by people who live in both the advanced developing countries and the least developed countries.
According to the Pew Global Attitude Survey Project, more than 80 percent of respondents
in the BRIC economies, and by BRIC I mean Brazil, Russia, India, and China, had a favorable
view of globalization in the year 2011.
In smaller developing countries, the enthusiasm was even greater.
More than 91 percent of Kenyans and 97 percent of Lebanese respondents had a favorable view
on expanding trade.
In the developed world, however, there is increasing suspicion about the phenomenon
that places like China and India are unfairly somehow appropriating all of the jobs and
welfare gains from globalization.
So what are we to make of this?
Well, the answer we're going to do the following in this lecture.
First, we're going to define what we mean by globalization, because the term itself
is kind of shrouded in a lot of conceptual fuzziness.
Then we're going to explain why globalization should lead to greater prosperity.
Then we're going to detail and discuss some of the myths about the globalization phenomenon.
And we're going to look very closely to see whether these myths are grounded in any kind
of accuracy.
And then finally, we're going to discuss globalization's proper role in promoting prosperity across
the globe.
All right, let's start by talking about a definition of globalization.
Most people define globalization the same way former Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart
wants to find pornography.
I know it when I see it.
So some people say, hey, Twitter, that's an example of globalization.
Or other people point to financial crisis and say, see, that's globalization.
Other people talk about the spread of corporate logos, things like McDonald's or Apple, and
say that's what's got to be globalization.
The result of these kinds of conversations is that globalization produces an awful lot
of nonsense writing, people claiming things like the world is flat or that we live in
some kind of hybrid reality.
So let's try to be a little more precise in the definition we use.
Here's the definition I generally tend to use.
Globalization is the cluster of technological, economic, and political innovations that have
drastically reduced the barriers to exchange of goods, services, and ideas across borders.
And let me explain why I use this definition.
First of all, it's primarily economic.
The key to globalization is the increased opportunities for cross-border economic exchange.
It does also incorporate things like changes in technology.
Systems as prosaic as containerization and as nifty as smartphones have made it easier
to trade across borders regardless of what governments want to do in terms of restricting
or easing trade.
Indeed, containerization, by the way, was the method by which shipping companies figured
out how to standardize the size of cargo containers, allowing them to be shipped without being opened.
Smartphones, on the other hand, gave individuals in the developing world the ability to contact
buyers and sellers beyond their village, greatly expanding trading opportunities.
And there's also a policy dimension to globalization.
Countries have, by and large, been lowering their barriers to trade and exchange for about
a half century.
The other thing I like about this definition is that it distinguishes causes from effects.
So when we talk about globalization, we're talking about the reduction of barriers to
exchange.
The effects of globalization are what happens from that lowering of barriers.
So does this mean that the current era of globalization is historically unique?
Actually, no.
In many ways, the era of globalization started in the 1850s and ended with the First World
War was actually more intense.
Now, you might sound, thinks that's crazy.
I mean, what about the Internet?
Things like that.
Well, in terms of information, the 1866 transatlantic cable reduced the transmission of information
between New York and London from 10 days to one day.
The Internet only speeds up communication by a little bit compared to prior innovations
like the facts of the telephone.
In terms of people, migration flows were actually much greater a century ago.
For example, Ireland's per capita income growth was twice as large as its actual growth
in GDP from 1840 to 1900.
How is that possible?
It was mass emigration.
So many Irish left the country after the Great Potato Famine that even though the economy
didn't seem to grow by all that much, on a per capita basis, it actually did quite well.
And also in terms of cross-border capital flows, the 19th century era of globalization
was pretty powerful.
By a lot of financial measures, the late 19th century was actually more globalized than
the current era.
For example, in today's modern financially interconnected economy, the United States,
the most powerful economy in the world, invests about 5% of its total savings abroad.
Now that's a lot of money, but in 1901, 53% of British savings was invested overseas.
So economic globalization has waxed and waned since the 19th century, which coincidentally
is around the time that mass prosperity started taking off.
Are these two phenomena linked?
Well now let's talk a little bit about why globalization should in theory at least boost
economic prosperity for all.
Now economists can offer a very simple story for why the reduction of barriers to exchange
can boost prosperity.
Let's imagine if each state in the United States decided to impose tariffs and other
barriers to exchange with each other.
So let's imagine New Jersey erected tariffs against New York, or Arkansas against Missouri.
That would obviously make it more expensive to ship goods or provide services within the
country, and that would clearly reduce overall economic output.
Globalization essentially reduces similar kinds of barriers across countries.
Now in doing so, globalization provides four different mechanisms to reduce poverty.
The first mechanism should come from static increases in wealth.
From David Ricardo onwards, economists have argued that lowering trade barriers allows
national economies to focus on sectors in which they retain a comparative advantage.
So for example, if Columbia and the United States sign a free trade agreement, which
by the way they have, Columbia can focus on things like making coffee and growing flowers,
their comparative advantage.
The United States on the other hand can focus more on high tech goods.
This increases productivity for both countries and should also increase prosperity.
Another driver for prosperity from globalization is that the bigger that the market is created
from trade liberalization, the greater the benefits from specialization due to areas
of comparative advantage, and the greater variety of goods that are available to all
consumers.
Not surprisingly, the tradeable sectors in most economies, by that I mean the sectors
where in fact goods can be traded across borders, are far more productive than non-tradeable
sectors.
The Peterson Institute for International Economics estimates that the liberalization
of trade since 1945 has provided an additional $1 to $1.5 trillion in added output annually
in the United States alone.
The global benefits are massively greater.
From our previous lectures, we know that developing countries usually suffer from a lack of capital.
Financial globalization in theory should allow capital to reach the places where it will
earn the highest rate of return.
That should mean developing countries.
And as it turned out, in 2011, four of the five largest recipients of foreign direct
investment were the BRIC economies, Brazil, Russia, India, and China.
Another reason that globalization should boost prosperity is greater economic dynamism.
Globalization expands the size of the market.
This provides firms and entrepreneurs with a greater incentive and the economies of scale
to take the necessary risks and make the vital investments in new inventions and innovations
like the iPod and iPhone.
This matters because as we know from previous lectures, greater innovation is the number
one driver for boosting global prosperity, particularly in the developed world.
The last reason that theoretically globalization should promote prosperity is that globalization
also promotes economic interdependence.
And as we will discuss in a future lecture, one of the effects of economic interdependence
is to reduce conflict between countries.
The less likely that war will take place between countries, the less money that has to be spent
on unproductive, indeed even destructive investments like defense.
The most tangible benefits of economic interdependence can be observed in Europe.
Despite centuries of war, the strengthening and expansion of the European Union has provided
a significant security blankly against the likelihood of conventional war breaking out.
Defense expenditures as a percent of GDP in Europe averaged above 3% in the 1980s because
it was the Cold War.
By 2011, the average is lower than 2%.
Furthermore, when there is less conflict between countries, private entrepreneurs will be more
willing to make global investments that are riskier, but should yield greater rewards,
and the data is pretty clear on this point.
There is in fact decent statistical evidence that higher levels of trade and more trade
agreements reduce violent conflict between countries.
For example, the regions of the world that have embraced globalization the most, North
America, Europe, and East Asia, contain politically stable regimes, few international or civil
wars, and very few incubators of terrorism.
The regions of the world with the most tenuous connection to global markets, let's say Africa
and the Middle East, contain more unstable regimes, the greatest amount of political
violence, and unfortunately many hotbeds of terrorist activity.
So this is a pretty straightforward story.
Globalization does tend to boost overall prosperity, at least in theory.
There are myths, however, that are constantly evoked.
Some of these myths do have a shred of truth to them, so now let's take a look at them
and see what's what.
Let's start with our first myth about globalization, the notion that globalization is a golden
straight jacket that leads to a race to the bottom in terms of things like regulatory
standards or taxation.
In his book, The Lexis and the Olive Tree, Thomas Friedman famously argued that globalization
was a golden straight jacket that forced countries to choose between, and I quote,
free market vanilla and North Korea.
What Friedman meant was that he believed global capital markets would punish any country that
deviated from market friendly policies.
Now even if that sounds like an overstatement, it is often argued that under globalization,
capital has become increasingly footloose and powerful because it has become more mobile.
Capital will seek the highest rate of return after all, and government intervention, even
well intentioned regulation, lowers the rate of return.
Stringent regulation will raise the cost of business activity, high tax rates lower corporate
profits, and big government deters economic growth and reduces profit opportunities for
business.
So the argument here is that capital therefore engages in regulatory arbitrage.
It will move to low cost, low regulation environments such as China or Vietnam.
The United States and other developed countries fearing a loss of their tax base will race
to the bottom, eliminating regulatory standards and slashing the provision of public goods.
The final result is some kind of Darwinian struggle for capital, where other values are
sacrificed to the altar of commerce.
This extends even to things like cultural homogenization.
There are concerns that globalization causes everyone to eat at the same restaurants, watch
the same big Hollywood films.
Indeed, this argument has a long intellectual lineage, stretching back to Adam Smith in
The Wealth of Nations.
In that book he wrote, the proprietor of stock is a citizen of the world and is not necessarily
attached to any particular country.
He would be apt to abandon the country in which he was, assess to a burdensome tax, and would
remove his stock to some other country where he could either carry on his business or enjoy
his fortune more at his ease.
By removing his stock he would put an end to all the industry which it had maintained
in the country with which he left.
Now what Smith meant with this statement was that capitalists aren't patriotic and
they're perfectly mobile, so countries need to please them.
Carl Polanyi painted an even bleaker picture in his book The Great Transformation when
he wrote, to allow the market mechanism to be the sole director of the fate of human
beings would result in the demolition of society.
Nature would be reduced to its elements, neighborhoods and landscapes defiled, rivers polluted, military
safety jeopardized, the power to produce food and raw materials destroyed.
This is a pretty vivid picture that Polanyi and Smith have painted.
What's the evidence for it?
Well, it's actually not all that strong.
In fact, it's surprisingly weak.
If the race to the bottom logic was correct, then foreign direct investment should be racing
to the cheapest and most weekly regulated jurisdictions in the world.
Instead, in 2007, roughly two-thirds of all foreign direct investment actually went to
the developed world, the countries with the largest governments, highest tax rates and
most stringent regulations.
Now to be fair, developing countries are absorbing an increasing share of FDI, but most of that
has gone to large market jurisdictions like China, where the goal is very often to produce
for domestic consumption as well as for export.
China furthermore suffers from corruption and a very intrusive state at times.
But as for firms with more than a billion potential consumers, they're going to want to invest
there anyway.
The OECD, IMF and World Bank have all concluded that globalization-friendly measures like
trade openness are positively correlated, in fact, with the enforcement of things like
core labor standards.
And in fact, in Latin America, countries that impose greater barriers to trade and capital
actually had higher levels of environmental pollution.
Now as for cultural homogenization, if anything, the reverse has been true from globalization.
As Chris Anderson has argued in his book, The Long Tail, the great thing about the Internet
in a global age is that it allows for sellers to find markets with niche products.
For example, research shows that more than 35% of Amazon's book sales in 2008 came from
niche books, those that would never have been carried in traditional brick-and-mortar stores.
This represents a significant increase in the purchase of non-mainstream books since
2000, and globalization is responsible for that.
Furthermore, the notion that other countries should maintain their cultural purity is frankly
both paternalistic and backwards-looking.
Cultures always adapt to new technologies and opportunities all of the time.
So my assessment of this, markets do care about some aspects of, let's say, macroeconomic
policy, things like a government's inflation rate, its budget deficits, and to some extent
its corporate tax rates.
And these concerns do impose some modest constraint on small governments.
But globalization is not even close to the policy-straight jacket that critics claim.
All right, let's go on to our second myth, which is that globalization reduces the prosperity
of the developed world compared to the developing world.
The argument here is that globalization rewards the factors of production that are locally
abundant and punishes those factors of production that are locally scarce.
In the developed world, this means that labor is hurt while capital benefits.
The most obvious evidence for this is the wage stagnation that we're currently experiencing
in the developed world.
We've talked about this a bit in previous lectures.
For example, we can also see evidence of this effect from the offshore outsourcing phenomenon.
Multiple consulting firms have projected that millions of developed country jobs will relocate
to the developing world.
Nandan Nilakane, the CEO of Infosys, declared once, everything you can send down a wire
is up for grabs.
His point was that any job or service that could be done over the phone or over the Internet
could be done from anywhere in the world.
Princeton economist Alan Blinder once speculated that up to one-third of all of American jobs
will eventually be outsourced offshore.
So what's the evidence for this?
As we discussed previously, it is undeniably true that wages have stagnated in the developed
world, and globalization is probably one of the factors that accounts for that.
Globalization is also likely responsible for the spike in income at the top of this spectrum.
As the possessors of capital, the wealthy are certainly benefiting from globalization.
However, wage stagnation is only one part of the story, and masks two facts that contradict
this argument.
First, economists are in a rough consensus that skill-based technical change is also
responsible for a lot of the gap in wages.
In other words, there are multiple factors affecting wages in the developed world, and
globalization is only one cause among many.
The wage flattening does not mean that workers in developed countries are less competitive
than before.
In fact, productivity statistics show that American workers are still the most productive
workers on Earth.
But it is true that their wages have not matched the increase in their productivity.
This is happening for several reasons, such as weaker labor unions.
But another reason is that wages are not the only reward workers receive for their jobs.
In the United States, for example, a McKinsey Global Institute study showed that between
1996 and 2005, total benefits for workers rose for every group of wage earners in the
United States.
Among the lower-tier earners, however, the category where wage stagnation is at its strongest,
a much greater share of total benefits come in the form of health care benefits.
As for offshore outsourcing, this fear has been somewhat overstated.
Projections from the last decade, when offshore outsourcing was really thought to be a tsunami,
were wildly exaggerated.
Project job losses from offshore outsourcing were only a fraction of earlier estimates.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated job losses from offshore outsourcing in 2005,
and they found that the kind of service sector jobs allegedly under threat from offshoring
experienced far fewer mass layoffs than other sectors.
A more recent investigation by the Peterson Institute for International Economics concluded
that economists like Blinder had vastly overestimated the percentage of American jobs at risk for
offshore outsourcing, and it underestimated the number of high-skill service sector jobs
that globalization creates in the developed world.
Furthermore, the offshoring trend is actually tapered off dramatically.
Frames did not always realize the benefits that they tried to gain from offshore outsourcing.
Rising wages and skill shortages in places like China and India have greatly reduced the
margins from outsourcing.
In fact, the recent trend is actually something called insourcing, in which firms still subcontract
to smaller firms, but they do so within the same country in the United States.
As wages in places like China have risen, firms across all sectors have started relocating
both manufacturing and service sector jobs back in the United States.
If offshore outsourcing was really an issue, then developed countries should be importing
more in these sectors than they're exporting, because developing economies should be developing
a comparative advantage in these service sectors.
According to recent data, however, mature economies are actually running $113 billion
surplus in business services, allegedly the harbinger for offshore outsourcing.
This finding is consistent with estimates from the McKinsey Global Institute, which suggests
that for every dollar offshored, it generates $1.12 in return to the overall economy.
To my assessment of this myth, globalization does play some role in the flattening of wages
in the developed world, but its role has been greatly exaggerated, and the data do not support
most of the extreme claims about the negative wage impacts of workers in the developed world.
All right, let's talk about the third myth.
The globalization benefits the global rich at the expense of the global poor.
Over the past two decades, as we've talked about in the previous lecture, there's been
an explosion of the global rich, even though billions live on less than a dollar a day.
The rise of the Davos culture demonstrates the massive concentration of wealth at the
top of the income and wealth spectrum.
Globalization, according to this argument, offers meager benefits at best for the poor
and massive benefits for the rich.
Furthermore, critics argue that capital flows do not match the expectations of the theory
that globalization projects.
Over the past decade, capital has actually been rushing primarily from emerging markets
to mature markets.
The globalization hypothesis would predict the reverse.
Capital should go into capital poor areas.
Another argument is that globalization also increases economic volatility.
Think about crises in the past couple of decades, the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the 2008
global financial crisis.
Stocks like these hurt the poor far more than the rich.
What's the evidence for this?
On the one hand, as I said before, there is no denying that the rise of the super rich
is in part a function of globalization, the superstar phenomenon that we've talked about
before in previous lectures.
With a global market, global fortunes can be made, especially by those who already possess
the necessary capital to invest.
It's also true that financial globalization in particular has led to more frequent and
more severe financial shocks during the post-Cold War era.
In fact, the only period that matches the post-1990 era of volatility was the era between
the two world wars, and that's never a good comparison to make.
This volatility is one reason for capital flows moving the way they have, by the way.
During times of heightened uncertainty, capital will rush to safe havens.
In the modern global economy, the safe havens are those places with deep and liquid capital
markets and strong property rights, in other words, the developed economies.
On the other hand, most of the data flatly contradicts the poor are getting poor hypothesis.
In fact, in the 30 years since globalization has really taken off, the percentage of the
world's population living on $1 a day has declined from roughly 40% to roughly 20%.
And furthermore, the most globalized economies also generate the highest rates of economic
growth.
The World Bank estimates conclude that globalization led growth benefits the poor proportionately
a fair amount.
Despite financial shocks, the global economy has actually benefited the poor more than
before.
Indeed, the World Bank looked at poverty data for the first two years after the 2008 financial
crisis and concluded that extreme poverty continued to decline across all major regions
of the globe.
Despite the crisis, the developing world achieved its first millennium development goal of having
the 1990 levels of extreme poverty already far ahead of schedule.
So my assessment, as we've talked about in the previous lecture, there is a difference
between increased inequality and increased poverty.
The effect of globalization makes this clear.
There is no doubt that globalization benefits the rich, but it has also been one of the
biggest engines eliminating poverty from the world over the past three decades.
The benefits to the poor far exceeded the costs.
So even though inequality has increased, poverty has undoubtedly fallen.
So let's wrap up.
Many of the beliefs about globalization are either gross exaggerations or simply wrong.
All else equal, globalization is a help and not a hindrance to achieving global prosperity.
That said, there are two caveats that should be acknowledged right now.
The first is that globalization has contributed to a rise in inequality and an explosion of
winner-take-all markets.
And second, the positive role for globalization has likely been exaggerated as well.
In truth, most of what determines national levels of prosperity are domestic policies,
not foreign economic policies.
So globalization is not really pernicious, but neither is it a panacea.
