We've already talked about the prerequisites for individuals and national governments to
achieving prosperity, but those are not enough when talking about the global level.
For many individuals, the ability to cross borders has been a key prerequisite for achieving
prosperity.
The Magribi and Venetian traders in the medieval era made their money by being able to cross
the Mediterranean Sea.
Immigrants to the Western Hemisphere during the Age of Discovery came to the United States
to make their fortune.
Indian software entrepreneurs in the United States arrived here because of H-1B visas,
and therefore were able to make their own fortune.
And we've talked before about the role that remittances play for families and individuals
in the developing world.
For most developing countries, the pathway to prosperity is required access to global
capital and global markets.
British foreign direct investment was crucial to the development in the Americas in the
19th century.
And as we noted in a previous lecture, the newly industrialized countries' access to
the American market permitted the export promotion path for economic development.
This suggests that for many countries and individuals, the path to prosperity will
be blocked unless an international organization or powerful country chooses to provide a sufficient
amount of global public goods.
Now in this lecture, we'll address four important topics that relate to global prosperity.
First we'll explain what global public goods actually are and why they aren't necessarily
always provided.
Second, we'll see why many experts believe that there needs to be a hegemon or superpower
if you prefer that term, for global public goods to be provided.
Then, we're going to look at the logical and historical evidence and counter evidence
to this belief.
And finally, we'll see and take a look at what the future holds for American hegemony
in the global economy.
So let's start with our first topic, what are we talking about when we talk about public
goods?
Now to review, a public good is distinct from a private good because of two qualities.
The first is non-rivalry.
The consumption of the good by one individual does not prevent the consumption of the good
by the another individual.
Now there are examples of public goods at the international level.
Let's say for example, clean air.
My enjoyment of clean air does not prevent my neighbor or for that matter someone living
in either New Zealand or Madagascar from also enjoying the same clean air.
Another example of a global public good is knowledge.
If one farmer learns about a new method for cultivating agriculture, it doesn't limit
the ability of other farmers in other countries to learn the same technique.
So non-rivalry is one essential quality that distinguishes a public good from a private
good.
The second essential quality is non-excludability.
Non-excludability means that it's either technologically or politically impossible to exclude the benefits
of the good to a particular group of individuals even if they don't contribute to paying for
the good.
Now there are certainly examples of this at the international level.
One would be let's say security against invasion.
For example, during the Cold War, Ireland was not a member of the NATO alliance.
But the fact that they weren't a member was irrelevant.
They were going to be protected against any Soviet invasion regardless because of where
they were geographically located.
Another example of a non-excludable good, immunization against disease.
Even if I do not get immunized against a disease, I am far less likely to contract it if everyone
else receives such immunizations because their immunizations reduce the chances of me catching
it, particularly when I'm traveling.
Most public goods that are vital to prosperity are provided at the local or national level.
For example, public safety and emergency services are generally taken care of at the local level.
Regulations to control, let's say smog, are usually articulated and implemented at the
regional and national level.
But there are some public goods that primarily exist at the global level and that are designed
to foster sustained economic growth.
How?
Well presumably these public goods will promote greater levels of trade and investment, thereby
ensuring that the prosperity benefits of globalization that we talked about in the last lecture will
continue.
And by having those benefits of globalization, that should lead to robust levels of economic
growth as well at the global level.
Furthermore, these global public goods should help to prevent, contain and repair the adverse
economic shocks that come at the global level.
So what exactly, what kind of public goods will do these things?
Well the most important set of global public goods was articulated by the economic historian
Charles Kindleberger in his masterwork, the world in depression.
Kindleberger identified two key global public goods.
The first was ensuring global liquidity.
Now in economics the liquidity of an asset is how quickly and widely it can be traded.
Cash is the most liquid asset.
Gold might sound liquid, but it's actually very heavy and not terribly portable.
Houses are probably the most illiquid asset.
Individuals need to have liquid assets including cash, bonds and securities in order to be able
to exchange goods and services.
Think of liquidity to the global economy the same way you would think about motor oil in
terms of lubricating a car engine.
As the global economy grows global liquidity needs to grow along with it, otherwise deflation
kicks in and that acts as a constraint on further economic growth.
A financial or economic crisis often leads to the drying up of credit, provide private
financial actors, get exceedingly risk averse about loaning money out during the middle
of crises.
Private capital markets are naturally pro-cyclical, they're happy to lend during boom times,
but reluctant to do so during bad times.
We'll talk a little more about this in our lecture on financial crises.
To prevent a total credit crunch, public good providers need to do the following.
First, they need to provide counter-cyclical long-term lending by acting as a lender of
last resort.
Now this lender of last resort could be a national government or an international institution.
These providers also need to lower interest rates so that it is easier for private financial
institutions and businesses more generally to secure access to credit.
For example, during the Asian financial crisis that lasted between 1997 and 1999, the IMF
offered up a variety of loans to countries in the Pacific Rim that faced their own credit
crunch.
At the same time, the United States Federal Reserve cut interest rates three successive
times to inject more dollars into the global financial system.
Now I should stress at this point that this kind of public good is not a costless policy.
Providing counter-cyclical lending has risks.
There's no guarantee, for example, that the loans that are offered will be paid back.
Furthermore, this kind of provision of liquidity leaves a domestic economy vulnerable to inflation
and asset bubbles.
If authorities discount too much, then there could be a problem.
There's also the dangers of moral hazard, a belief that there will always be someone
to bail out those in financial distress.
That encourages some firms, states, and individuals to behave more recklessly.
In fact, after the Asian financial crisis, financial traders used to refer to this as
the green span put, meaning then Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
What they meant was that they knew Greenspan would act as if a crisis occurred in financial
markets.
This made them more comfortable with accruing greater risk in their portfolios, therefore
making it more likely that Greenspan would have to bail them out.
So that's a quick look at global liquidity.
The second global public good that Kindleberger identified was providing a large market for
distressed goods.
During global economic downturns, producers face slacking demand.
If those goods don't find a market, then firms will reduce their output, which in turn means
that they will shed workers, which will lower demand even further.
There needs to be at least one large market that can sustain economic growth and continue
to purchase imports.
Now again, this is not a costless policy.
Keeping a market open for a surge of imports can hurt domestic producers during an anticipated
downturn, even if consumers benefit.
Producers and politicians most certainly will not.
In addition to the two global public goods identified by Kindleberger, economists and
political scientists have added others, so let's take a look at four more examples of
global public goods.
The first is protecting of shipping on the high seas.
This is a pretty important global public good.
According to the International Maritime Organization, 90% of global trade is carried out by sea.
Developing economies in particular are particularly reliant on sea-based trade.
Piracy raises the cost of shipping goods and services across the globe.
There's direct costs, things like the seizure of cargo and the demanding of ransom.
But there are also indirect costs.
Piracy can raise insurance premiums and redirect ships to longer and more expensive trade routes.
Now navies can help to deter and reduce piracy, as a multilateral anti-piracy task force began
doing off the coast of Somalia in 2009.
Another global public good is the prevention of both major and minor wars.
Wars, particularly those between great powers, have many deleterious economic effects.
Among other things, wars dramatically reduce global economic growth, trade and exchange.
Wars can raise the cost of shipping, raise the cost of energy.
Now, that said, trying to prevent wars is certainly not a costless goal.
Only the way to prevent war is to be able to deter its outbreak.
And the only way you're going to be able to deter its outbreak is that you have to have
sufficiently large amounts of armed forces to convince other countries not to even bother
with a military challenge.
You kind of have to act like the world's policeman.
Yet another global public good is the maintenance of exchange rate stability.
Exchange volatility makes it more expensive and riskier to exchange goods and services
and capital across borders.
You see, individual traders and investors always need to hedge against currency risk.
But that hedges costlier as exchange rates become more volatile.
If governments decide to promote fixed exchange rates, in other words pledges to intervene
in foreign currency markets to prevent excessive volatility, then cross-border trade and exchange
can thrive.
Now this is not a costless policy.
A commitment to a fixed exchange rate generally means a sacrifice of an independent monetary
policy.
So in other words, the central bank, rather than using monetary policy to try to expand
or contract the economy during booms and busts, instead winds up focusing on keeping the exchange
rate relatively stable.
So as a result, this eliminates a particularly powerful policy tool for national governments.
And it removes the option also of devaluing one's currency as a way of improving one's
balance of trade.
Now there's one final global public good that I'd like to mention.
And that's the definition and enforcement of economic rules and regulations.
Increasingly, a lot of cross-border exchange is about complying with those rules and regulations.
And the clearer and more well articulated those rules are, the easier it is for producers
to comply.
Now some of these rules will seem kind of intrinsically important, like let's say health
and safety standards and treating perishable foods in terms of trade.
Some of these rules are going to seem pretty mundane.
Believe it or not, there are rules that standardize the width of credit cards so scanners can read
them across the globe.
Now even though that might sound mundane, to understand what happens without serious
kinds of coordination, consider what happens when you travel overseas and need to figure
out whether your plug will work in a foreign country's electrical socket.
Because electrical systems were put in place well before this kind of global policy coordination
was truly ever conceived, it's simply too impractical for countries to harmonize these
standards today.
And it would basically require some countries to completely replace all of their electrical
sockets and that would be terrifically expensive.
As a result, international travelers have to carry an assortment of odd looking plugs
to make sure their electric gizmos can function in foreign countries.
Now that said, articulating global rules and regulations and coordinating them at the global
level is certainly not a costless policy.
To achieve consensus on global rules requires a lot of compromise, a lot of diplomacy, and
worse, an awful lot of committee meetings.
Ensuring adherence to these rules requires investments in monitoring and enforcement.
And furthermore, there are some instances where there simply should be no agreement at the
global level.
Let's talk about internet content regulation as an example.
Lots of different states have different mores and morals about what should be regulated
and what shouldn't be regulated on the internet.
So as a result, for example, in Europe, there's a lot of regulation against let's say Nazi
propaganda, which in the United States would be considered problematic because of First
Amendment rules.
On the other hand, content regulation on the internet in the United States cracks down
much harder on child pornography than it does in Europe.
In the developing world, there's lots of internet content that states consider pretty
offensive that are thought of as perfectly acceptable in the developed world.
So these are a few of the global public goods that need to be provided if we wish to foster
worldwide prosperity.
But who will provide them?
Who has an incentive to provide them?
This problem is generic to all public goods, local, national, and global.
It's costly to provide such goods, and it's cheaper to free ride off of others that are
providing those goods.
Now at the local or domestic level, the notion is that collective leadership or government
can act to provide public goods at the global level.
At the global level, there is no central government.
There is, however, the theory of hegemonic stability.
Now the theory of hegemonic stability has a pretty simple logic.
A hegemon is defined as a great power whose economy is appreciably larger than any other
country's economy.
In the mid-19th century, that would have been the United Kingdom.
In the mid-20th century, it would be the United States.
A rising hegemon has the incentive, according to this theory, to prefer an open global economy.
As the most productive economy, the hegemon can appreciate the benefit of lowering barriers
to exchange elsewhere, which boosts their exports.
Furthermore, the theory of hegemonic stability posits that only a rising hegemon has the
necessary incentives to invest in the kind of global public goods that I've talked about
before.
They're large enough so that they'll recoup the benefits, and a rising hegemon has the
longest shadow of the future, meaning they value the future as just as much as they value
the present.
So the hegemonic state anticipates recouping those benefits for a while, while still outgrowing
everyone else, so the costs don't really impose a serious drag on their own economy.
Because of its power, the hegemon can provide these global public goods in such a way to
ensure a more favorable distribution of benefits to them.
So, for example, during the 19th century, the gold standard was a global public good
because it ensured pretty stable exchange rates.
According to some estimates, the gold standard helped to boost global trade by as much as
a third.
Now, by actively maintaining the gold standard and managing it, Great Britain ensured that
London was the epicenter of global finance, not an insignificant benefit to them.
For a second example, some intellectual property protections are useful for spurring further
technological innovations.
In pushing for more stringent intellectual property rights, the United States was bestowing
benefits on key domestic industries, sectors like pharmaceuticals, software, and the entertainment
industry.
Now, there's a downside to the theory of hegemonic stability.
Eventually, the cost of providing these public goods saps the growth of the hegemon.
Other states free ride off of these global public goods, provided by the hegemon, and
by not contributing to them, can actually grow faster.
As a result, the superpower's relative power starts to fade.
It becomes too costly for it to continue to provide global public goods, at which point
the international system falls into crisis, and stays there until a new hegemon can emerge.
So, for the global economy to provide greater prosperity, there needs to be a hegemon that
wants to provide stability.
Otherwise, according to this theory, you'll be operating in a low growth environment.
So, does this theory hold up?
Well, there are a few theoretical holes.
First of all, it's not entirely obvious why a hegemonic power would choose prosperity
for all, rather than for prosperity for itself.
Imperial powers like Spain tended to divert resources from colonies to their own metropole,
rather than thinking about providing global public goods.
Similarly, the Soviet Union transferred wealth from the Eastern Bloc to itself, in some cases
physically by moving factories from Eastern Germany to Soviet soil.
This also acknowledged the existence of something called optimal tariff theory.
Now, I don't want to get into too much detail about that, but this theory basically suggests
that a large enough market would actually make itself better off by raising its trade
barriers, because it possesses some monopoly power and pricing.
The United States in 1945 probably would have been large enough to use optimal tariff theory.
It's also not entirely clear why the hegemon can't compel contributions by other countries
into providing public goods.
Furthermore, the political scientists Robert Cohen and John Eikenberry argue that the creation
of international institutions can compensate for hegemonic decline.
So even if there's a fading hegemon, the provision of global public goods could still exist.
International institutions lock in the rules and make it easier to reassure all countries
that the system will continue.
For example, the IMF was actually strengthened in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis,
despite the perceived relative decline of the United States.
Political scientists Duncan Snydel and others go so far as to argue that a hegemon is not
actually all that necessary.
A concert of great powers can provide the same kinds of global public goods necessary
to promote economic growth.
At the regional level, for example, there's no single hegemonic power in Europe, yet the
European Union has actually provided significant amounts of goods.
Even at the global level, the G20 did act as a useful forum for coordinating fiscal
stimulus during the 2008 financial crisis.
So the theory of hegemonic stability is not perfect, but as a rough and ready guide for
20th century economic history, it's actually pretty compelling and a pretty accurate description
of what happened.
To understand, let's do a very quick review.
During the pre-World War I era, as I said before, Great Britain managed the gold standard
and pushed for greater trade liberalization.
Among other things, they repealed their own court laws, and in 1860 signed the First Trade
Treaty with France, the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty.
Indeed, at the peak of British power in 1880, average tariff levels in continental Europe
were pretty low, between 9 and 12 percent.
And as I said before, economists estimated that the gold standard increased trade flows
by at least a third.
After 1890, Britain's relative power waned compared to rising states like Germany, Russia,
and the United States.
At the same time, average European tariff rates started to rise.
They went up to between 12 to 18 percent, higher but still lower compared to the earlier
half of the 19th century.
Wheat tariffs skyrocketed to 40 percent, and cooperation on the gold standard started
to break down by 1911.
Now let's think about the interwar period.
Great Britain was still the largest trading state, but the United States was far and away
the largest economy.
Great Britain struggled to resuscitate the open global economy, but it fell apart after
the 1929 stock market crash in New York.
Now, the United States was singularly unhelpful during this entire period.
After the end of the First World War, the United States refused to join the League of
Nations.
Indeed, even afterwards, the United States refused to send U.S. officials to international
economic conferences.
Instead, it was actually private U.S. bankers that represented U.S. interests at these conferences.
The United States also insisted on the repayment of World War I debts, while simultaneously
passing the highest tariffs in American history.
The U.S. policies helped to convert the stock market crash into the Great Depression, and
by these policies I'm talking primarily about the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, which in 1930 raised
American import barriers to their highest levels in history, and this sparked a trade
war in which most countries dramatically increased their own tariffs.
In 1931, when the Austrian Bank credit onstalt was going under, which then triggered a wave
of global banking runs, the United States again refused to assist.
And then in 1933 at the London Conference, a newly elected president, FDR, announced
unilaterally the United States would be going off the gold standard.
The end result was the worst global economic downturn in the last two centuries.
Between 1929 and 1933, the U.S. economy shrunk by 30 percent.
Canada, Germany, and the Latin American economy shrunk by between 25 percent and 30 percent.
And countries across Europe fell between 15 and 25 percent.
Unemployment rose to 34 percent in Germany in 1931 and 25 percent in the United States
in 1933.
Charles Kindleberger's assessment of this period was the inspiration for his theory
of hegemonic stability.
He said, the world economic system was unstable unless some countries stabilize it, as Britain
had done in the 19th century and up to 1913.
In 1929, the British couldn't, and the United States wouldn't.
When every country turned to protect its national private interest, the world public interest
fell down the drain.
And with it, the private interest evolved.
So without a hegemon, Kindleberger concluded that the global public goods would not be
provided.
Now after the Second World War, the Bretton Woods era began, which was a sharp contrast
to the interwar period.
The United States seemed to learn its lesson from the Great Depression and supplied a
significant amount of global public goods.
The United States played a pivotal role in creating the United Nations, the general agreements
on tariffs and trade, GATT, which is the predecessor to the WTO.
It also played a role in creating the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, sometimes referred
to as the Bretton Woods Institutions.
And the United States also used the Marshall Plan to revive the Western European economies.
And the Marshall Plan was not a small contribution.
The amount of the Marshall Plan equaled 5% of US GDP, the equivalent of more than $600
billion today.
What was the result of this US leadership?
By the 1960s, average tariffs on non-agricultural goods had fallen to 9%, akin to the heyday
of the 19th century.
Between 1948 and 1973, the economic output of the OECD economies tripled.
Now in the post-Bretton Woods era, after 1973, America's relative power seemed to be
fading.
The US had lost the Vietnam War, was dealing with both an oil crisis and pretty high levels
of inflation, and seemed to be losing its overall competitiveness.
Now by and large, the post-World War II foundations held, but there was undeniably some backsliding.
It was the end of the fixed exchange rate regime.
You started seeing a growth of trade protectionism and a surge in commodity prices.
The results of this?
On trade, there was positive growth during this period, but it was at half the level
of what it was during the Bretton Woods era.
So as a result, a fading United States also seemed to be correlated with the fading benefits
from global public goods.
Now we get to the post-Cold War era.
US hegemony seemed to experience a resurgence at the end of the Cold War.
The US in particular benefited from a peace dividend, cutting defense expenditures after
the Soviet Union collapsed.
There was also a productivity boom in the United States, as the US economy exploited
new information and communication technologies.
Possible challengers like Japan and Germany encountered their own domestic difficulties
in the 90s.
Not surprisingly, the United States actually ratcheted up the provision of global public
goods.
It pursued a strong dollar policy, allowing other countries to keep their currencies more
undervalued, boosting their exports.
Furthermore, the Cold War institutions that were set up went global, things like the WTO
and the IMF.
The United States also acted as a crisis manager during the Asian financial crisis.
In the results of all this, by 2005, global economic growth was at an all-time high.
So to conclude, looking back over the 19th and 20th centuries, we do see a pattern.
When there was an obvious superpower in the world, there was also a fairly healthy provision
of global public goods.
When that hegemon was thought to be fading, the provision of these goods also waned,
though they didn't disappear.
And when there was no uncontested economic superpower, global prosperity nosedived.
So what can we conclude from this?
Well, it might not be necessary for there to be a liberal hegemon to promote global
prosperity, but it does seem like it makes things a lot easier.
What about the future?
It's easy to predict that U.S. relative power is declining, compared to the rapid growth
of China and the other brick economies.
But to paraphrase Mark Twain, predictions of the passing of American hegemony have often
been greatly exaggerated.
As much as people like to think that China will eventually supplant the United States
in terms of power, this is not the first time predictions of this kind have been made.
In 1957, when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, there was a lot of fretting that the Soviet
Union had surpassed the United States.
In 1971, when Bretton Woods collapsed and the European Union seemed to be rising, a
lot of pundits argued that was going to be Europe's moment.
When the Cold War ended, one of the jokes was that the Cold War ended, the Soviet Union
and the United States both lost in Japan won.
There was a belief that Japan was going to become the world's superpower.
Each time it was the challengers to the United States that faded from view.
In previous crises, American power sustained itself for a number of reasons.
First, the U.S. has tended to adjust and adapt more quickly to crises than other countries.
And in fact, other countries have often had to adjust even more than the United States.
For example, after the collapse of the Bretton Woods regime in 1971, the U.S. dollar depreciated
against the Deutsche Mark and the Yen, making American exports relatively more competitive.
After the 2008 crisis, the dollar was still thought to be the safe haven.
So U.S. official borrowing rates actually stayed very low compared to other highly indebted
rich countries.
Furthermore, certain dimensions of U.S. power have been far more enduring.
The fact is the United States does not have a rival in the Western Hemisphere, so as a
result, its borders are relatively secure.
The strong sense of an immigrant culture in the United States, its higher education institutions,
also endowed the United States with significant advantages.
As for the notion that China will challenge the United States, we're going to talk about
this a little bit in a few more lectures, but let's just say for now that China has its
own issues.
It's potentially going to suffer from a financial bubble of its own.
As its country hits middle income status, its growth rates will inevitably slow, and
its growth rates will also slow as it has to deal with technological leadership as opposed
to technological catch-up.
China also has to deal with things like environmental catastrophes and greater geopolitical pressures.
Indeed, there are signs that U.S. hegemony will be pretty resilient in the future.
The U.S., for example, has gone the furthest in deleveraging debt from the 2008 financial
crisis.
There's no doubt that U.S. government debt has increased, but both personal and corporate
debt loads have fallen.
The U.S. also displays greater manufacturing strength, the return of insourcing that I've
talked about before.
The Boston Consulting Group estimates that manufacturing will boost GDP by $100 billion,
creating between two to three million jobs.
There's also the benefits from a new energy boom.
The growth of unconventional energy sources in the United States suggests that the U.S.
will actually become an exporter of natural gas and oil by the year 2030.
Furthermore, the reduction of costly military commitments, like Iraq and Afghanistan, can
also help improve the U.S. fiscal picture.
So to sum up, for prosperity to continue to thrive at the global level, there needs to
be global public goods.
Unlike at the national or local level, however, there is no world government.
This makes the provision of these goods a bit more uncertain unless there is an economic
hegemony.
The risk is that no one will have both the capability and the incentive to do it.
The United States has been the global economic superpower since 1945, and now there are fears
of its relative decline and China's relative rise.
The future of global public goods depends on no small part of the performance of these
two very different economies and how their recipes for prosperity pan out in the future.
That's the question to which we'll address in the next lecture.
