For most of this course, we have discussed the prerequisites to achieving prosperity
at the individual, national and global levels.
From a historical perspective, it would seem that the chances for creating prosperity have
never been better.
Well the next several lectures, we're going to stress test that concept.
As we now know, for prosperity to be sustainable, a whole lot of necessary conditions need
to be met.
And over the next few sessions, we'll look at the political, economic, environmental,
ideological and ethical challenges to prosperity in the years to come.
We'll start with the political.
Really put, will the necessary political foundations for global prosperity continue
to exist?
Now in essence, there are two political shifts that could truly threaten global prosperity.
The first would be a failure of global governance, a failure to provide the global public goods
that we talked about before.
The second would be a resurgence in war.
Let me talk about global governance first.
Now global governance is just a refresher in memory, refers to the ability of powerful
actors, large countries, multinational corporations, non-governmental organizations and international
institutions to agree on the key rules governing the global economy.
You've probably heard about some of these global governance structures before.
The World Trade Organization establishes and enforces the rules for global trade.
The International Monetary Fund and World Bank monitor and assist countries that face
acute financial crises.
The International Atomic Energy Agency monitors, regulates and provides technical assistance
for both nuclear materials and trade for civilian nuclear purposes.
But you've probably not heard of some of these structures.
For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
That committee creates codes of conduct for national banking regulators.
The International Association of Insurance Supervisors does the same thing for insurance
regulators.
And the International Organization of Securities Commissions does the same thing for securities
markets.
Furthermore, the Financial Stability Board, which used to be called the Financial Stability
Forum, acts as an overseer for the institutions I just mentioned, plus a few others.
To a large extent, we've dealt with the question of global governance in some of our previous
lectures.
In essence, the theory of hegemonic stability tells us that if there is a single economic
superpower, then the chances of these structures working reasonably well is enhanced.
Now, I was also pretty confident, if you recall in that previous lecture, about the future
of American hegemony.
But what if I'm wrong?
What if U.S. hegemony really does fade?
My own research in a book called All Politics Is Global suggests that global economic governance
can still function well if the large economies can form what we would call a great power
concert.
So, if the major economies of the globe, let's say the United States, China, and the European
Union, can agree on the basic rules of the economic game, then global economic governance
should continue to function reasonably well.
Well, do they agree?
I've talked about the different varieties of capitalism and different economic models
in previous lectures, so you might think the answer is no.
However, all of these models do share a few important traits in common.
The first is a genuine embrace of the open global economy.
The second is some regulation of the financial sector.
And the third is expansionary monetary and fiscal policies during a global economic crisis.
It shouldn't be surprising, then, that even during the 2008 financial crisis, the trading
system stayed relatively open.
Great power governments cut interest rates and boosted spending.
And new banking rules, namely the Basel III banking standards, were actually negotiated
pretty quickly.
A crisis in global governance is certainly something a contingency we need to worry about
in the future.
But it does seem that in contrast, the mammoth clash of economic ideologies in the 20th century
when capitalism, communism, and fascism, all were trying to triumph from the globe,
there's actually now still a rough consensus on the basics of global public policy in the
21st century.
So a breakdown of global governance is certainly a possibility, but it's a relatively remote
one.
Now this leads us to the far more serious and far more severe possibility.
Will war make a comeback?
Now I cannot stress this enough.
Wars, simply put, are really, really bad for prosperity.
Now Americans don't necessarily appreciate this fact for a few reasons.
First, historically, World War II played a huge part in lifting the U.S. economy out
of the Depression.
As a result of that data point, a lot of Americans think war stimulates the economy at times.
Furthermore, despite the trillion dollar cost of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the domestic
economy seemed quite capable of maintaining high growth for years during the peaks of
those two conflicts.
This might make many Americans complacent when it comes to the negative potential impacts
of war.
And finally, with the exceptions of Pearl Harbor and the September 11th attacks, violent conflict
has not really touched the shores of the United States for more than 150 years.
As a result, Americans, unlike, say, Europeans, Asians and Africans, have not really had an
opportunity to witness firsthand the ravages of war on their domestic economy.
Nevertheless, the data on this is pretty clear.
Even beyond the loss of life, war and violent conflict are not good for either national
or global prosperity.
Let's consider World War I as an example.
Between unrestricted submarine warfare by the Germans and the continental blockade that
was imposed by Great Britain during the Great War, transport cost more than doubled between
1914 and 1918.
The global trade-to-output ratio fell from 23 percent to 13 percent as a result of that
war.
Furthermore, the Eastern European economies were absolutely devastated by the conflict.
By 1920, Russia had lost seven-eighths of its pre-war production capacity.
Post-war economic traumas were also significant.
There was massive hyperinflation in Austria, Poland, Hungary, Russia and Germany.
And by hyperinflation, I mean an inflation rate of one trillion percent.
World War I is just one example, but it's not a terribly unusual one.
Statistical analyses by political scientists show that over the past century, war has had
a profoundly negative impact on most economic measures of prosperity.
Interstate war, particularly wars involving great powers, depressed the level of international
trade.
And also, these effects are long-lasting.
It takes a long time for trade between former military enemies to recover to their pre-war
levels.
Indeed, even though the Cold War has ended 20 years ago, more than 20 years ago, trade
levels between the United States and Russia are still pretty absurdly low.
Civil wars also reduce trade with the affected country by as much as 33 percent.
And even wars that don't spread beyond a particular region and don't drag great powers
in for too long, like let's say the Balkan conflicts that erupted during the mid-1990s,
can still cause stock markets, like the Dow Jones or Financial Times indices, to decline
in total value.
On smaller issues, war continues to have a negative effect.
One study, for example, revealed that fishing output declined by close to 20 percent in
countries experiencing conflict.
So wars clearly threaten global prosperity.
What is this cause for pessimism about the future of prosperity?
After all, the United States has fought numerous conflicts since the end of the Cold War.
Somalia, Bosnia, Kosovo, two Gulf wars, Afghanistan and Libya.
So it would be pretty easy to assume that war is a constant in world politics, and consequently
an ongoing threat to global prosperity.
Now, actually this leads us to a really surprising finding, which is that war, as we generally
understand it, has actually been on the wane.
No matter how you slice the data, the world has become noticeably more peaceful since
1945.
Now, let me go through exactly the statistics to convince you of this.
The first and most important data point are great powered wars.
Now, these tend to be the most devastating in terms of loss of life and economic devastation.
For example, World War II left 65 million people dead, created 21 million refugees and
displaced persons.
The costs of the war were in the trillions of dollars, back when a trillion dollars
meant something.
Crucially, however, there has not been a full-blown war between two great powers since 1945.
Now, this is the longest duration of great power peace since the modern state system
began in 1648 with the peace of Westphalia.
The historian John Lewis Gattis labels this period the long peace.
Now, this is also part of a longer term secular trend that scholars like Stephen Pinker and
Joshua Goldstein have researched.
A centuries-long decline in the frequency and duration of great power wars.
For example, there has been a general decline in all interstate wars.
Let's take Europe, for example, which has the longest history of nation states as we
currently understand the term.
The data shows a long and persistent decline in wars between European states between the
years 1500 and 2000.
And globally, there has been a steady decline in the average number of international conflicts
occurring each year, or starting each year, from 1950 onwards.
In other words, each decade has experienced fewer interstate and anti-colonial conflicts
than the previous decade.
Indeed, during the years 2000 to 2010, there was only one sixth the level of conflict that
existed in the 1950s.
And the total number of interstate wars is now at one-fifth the level of the mid-1980s.
Even when interstate wars are taking place, their intensity has also died down considerably.
The wars themselves are shorter.
And the casualties from war have also fallen to new lows, mostly because war fighting now
involves less infantry and because battlefield medicine techniques have improved dramatically.
For example, the United States has been involved in two decade-long wars in its history, Vietnam
and Afghanistan.
In Vietnam, the U.S. suffered more than 58,000 dead and more than 150,000 soldiers wounded.
In Afghanistan, the U.S. has suffered less than 3,000 dead and less than 15,000 wounded.
That's still an appalling loss of life, but it's much lower than took place during the
Vietnam War.
So we've seen that both great power conflicts and interstate conflicts in general have declined.
What about civil wars?
And indeed, for a brief period after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the number of civil wars
actually spiked.
Since 1994, however, there has been a significant decline in the number of civil conflicts.
According to the Human Security Project, the number of civil wars fell from about 50 per
year in 1993 to only 30 per year in 2006.
And between 1991 and 2008, the number of high-intensity civil conflicts fell by more than 80 percent.
And the deaths caused by civil war has also been on the way.
Now all of these trends are particularly remarkable because there are actually more states in the
world now.
As to 180, ergo, one would expect a greater likelihood of either interstate or civil conflict
over time just because there are more states out there where this possibility could happen.
Now will this trend continue?
In part, this depends on why one thinks the trend started in the first place.
Now among international relations scholars, there are three major approaches to international
relations.
There's the realist approach, the liberal approach, and the constructivist approach.
Each of these approaches offers a valid explanation for the rise in the long piece.
Let's start with the realist.
Realists offer a three-step explanation to explain why the world has become more peaceful
since the end of the Second World War.
Now the primary reason they would argue the world is more peaceful is the absence of great
power conflict.
Great power wars are the ones that cause the greatest death, destruction, and disruption.
Now realists go on to argue that because there's been a greater concentration of power among
a few states, war has been less frequent.
You see, after 1945 the world was bipolar, meaning that there were two superpowers during
the Cold War obviously, the United States and the Soviet Union.
After that, there was essentially a unipolar era.
The United States was the only superpower.
Now in general, realists believe that the fewer the number of great powers in the world
there are, the less the likelihood of violent conflict.
This is in some ways the security version of the theory of hegemonic stability that
I talked about in a previous lecture.
According to realists, only when the distribution of power becomes more multipolar, like let's
say the 1910s or the 1930s, will violent conflict return.
Realists also point to the invention of nuclear weapons as another reason for the relative
peacefulness of the post-World War II era.
One could argue that the United States and the Soviet Union came very, very close to
a full out war, particularly during let's say the Cuban Missile Crisis.
But the possibility of a nuclear exchange forced them back from the brink.
The moment a country possesses a second strike capability, the ability to respond to nuclear
weapons with nuclear weapons of their own, the prospect of mutually assured destruction
acts as a powerful deterrent against the escalation of conflicts.
Now liberals offer different causal explanations for the decline of violent conflict.
One of their explanations is the spread of democracy.
One of the more powerful empirical findings in international relations is that mature
democracies do not fight each other.
A century ago, that wasn't considered that important since there were only a handful
of democracies on the planet.
For the past 40 years, however, waves of democratization in Southern Europe, Latin America, the Pacific
Rim, Eastern Europe, and most recently the Middle East have transformed this landscape.
In 1946, about 30% of the world's governments were democratic.
By 2006, that figure had doubled to approximately 60%.
Now according to liberals, these democracies create zones of peace where war is simply
no longer thought of to be a policy option.
Now a second factor liberal analysts point to is the growth of economic interdependence.
Globalization directly affects prosperity by increasing productivity, but there's an
indirect effect as well, which we've talked about before.
The greater the levels of economic interdependence, the more reluctant states are to initiate
conflict that would disrupt that trade.
Some argue that the trading relationship has prevented both Beijing and Washington from
acting too belligerently towards the other.
Finally, the liberal approach highlights the pacifying effects of international institutions.
International organizations can help to mediate and reduce tensions between countries that
would otherwise have triggered a war.
Since the end of the Cold War, for example, United Nations peacekeeping missions have
tripled in number, as have other peacekeepers outside the UN auspices, like let's say the
use of NATO and European Union forces in the Balkans.
UN sanctions to contain the ability of rogue states to make trouble have also increased.
There are also now United Nations sanctions on more than 25 jurisdictions.
Even if they don't work at regime change, they do constrain the ability of these governments
from trying to cause trouble or make mischief outside their borders.
Other international treaties and institutions exist to help with monitoring, enforcement
and the amelioration of possible conflicts.
So, for example, the International Atomic Energy Agency has made life pretty difficult
for Iran by reporting very diligently on that country's questionable nuclear program.
International criminal courts' indictment of Slobodan Milosevic during the Kosovo War
in the late 1990s made it impossible for him to leave that country without fear of being
extradited to the International Criminal Court.
Some have argued that being trapped in Serbia caused him to acquiesce to NATO when he otherwise
would not have done so.
And there are other international organizations, like the UN High Commissioner for Refugees,
that help to ameliorate these kinds of conflicts.
Combined, these three liberal factors make up Immanuel Kant's guide for perpetual peace.
When Kant wrote in the late 18th century, he argued that it was possible to envision
a world without war.
Three of his key mechanisms for accomplishing this were the spread of Republican governments,
trade between countries and international organizations.
Okay, we reviewed the realist and the liberal explanations for the decline in global conflict.
Finally, constructivists argue that the growing power of international norms has made the world
a more pacific place.
Increasingly, norms have emerged to regulate and constrain the use of violent conflict
in world politics.
For example, even though nuclear weapons have existed since 1945, they haven't been
used since 1945.
There appears to be a strong taboo against the use of weapons of mass destruction, not
just nuclear weapons, but also biological and chemical weapons more generally.
There's also a rise for a taboo against honor killings, cross borders.
And there's an increasingly strong norm against targeting civilians in wartime.
War crimes have also drastically reduced the material incentives to use force in the first
place.
For example, territorial changes as a result of interstate war have plummeted to an all-time
low.
So, even if a state were to win in combat, it's not going to be able to annex much territory
as a result.
Combined, these shifts in how man views war might make Norman Angel write a century after
his time.
In the Great Illusion, he argued that because war was far more expensive than trade, the
use of force was about to become obsolete.
He wrote, the truth is that the military method, as a solution of the problem for the struggle
for bread, would only be effective if we were prepared to slit the throats of a whole population
– 100 million folk, women and children included.
And that method has practical and aesthetic disadvantages into which we need not enter.
Now, Angel wrote that in 1911, and World War I broke out soon afterwards.
But it's possible that a century later, Angel might actually be right.
Note that all of these arguments, the realist, the liberal and the constructivist approaches,
have acknowledged the same trends over the past two decades – a trend towards fewer
and less violent wars.
So what do these arguments have to say about the future?
Well, of these theories, realism is probably the most pessimistic about whether the future
will be peaceful.
As we've discussed before, the distribution of power looks to become less concentrated
and more multipolar, which does increase the likelihood of great power war.
Now, although more and more states seem to be trying to develop nuclear weapons, almost
none of these states can afford the second strike capabilities necessary for mutually
assured destruction to work.
Furthermore, the evidence that nuclear weapons constrain conflict without such second strike
capabilities is actually pretty weak.
In fact, if anything, it's possibly the opposite.
For example, both India and Pakistan announced to the world and tested nuclear weapons in
1998.
They then fought a full-blown war in 1999 – the Kargil War – after both countries
became nuclear capable.
The data suggests that the likelihood of conflict increases, actually, when countries attempt
to acquire nuclear weapons.
So even if the possession of these weapons promotes stability in the long term, as more
states try to acquire them, there is far and away more short-term instability.
Liberals are a bit more optimistic about the future.
And the reason is that the trends they focus on seem to be moving in a direction they like.
The trend of globalization, for example, does not seem to be reversing.
On the other hand, if the fallout from the 2008 financial crisis means a decade of slow
growth, the temptation for a reversing course will be powerful among populists and nationalists.
Leaders like Russia's Vladimir Putin and Venezuela's Hugo Chavez have dealt with
economic reversals at home by trying to scapegoat foreigners, for example.
If the two leaders do that to each other, it would be a problem.
There are also more and stronger international institutions there have been in previous eras
as well, which liberals should be enthusiastic about.
Although there are concerns that United Nations peacekeeping has hit its limit and greater
discord in the UN Security Council will reduce its ability to tamp down conflict elsewhere.
The effect of democratization is even trickier to predict for a few reasons.
First of all, the rise of China has made authoritarianism a more appealing form of governance for
some developing countries, as we talked about last time with the Beijing Consensus.
Furthermore, each wave of democratization comes with a counter wave of authoritarian
reversion.
For example, when the Soviet Union collapsed, all of the 15 newly independent countries
held elections and proclaimed themselves to be democracies.
In a lot of these countries, however, whomever was elected started taking undemocratic steps
to stay in power.
So now in countries like Belarus or Azerbaijan or even Russia, institutions like Freedom
House no longer categorize them as democracies.
And while Tunisia, Egypt and Libya have all held elections and seem to be making a transition
to more representative rule following the Arab Spring in 2011, in all likelihood, the
next few years will see slowing or reversal of the democratization trend in the Middle
East.
At a minimum, governments in the Persian Gulf, like Saudi Arabia or Bahrain, have moved in
the opposite direction, cementing their authoritarian rule.
Furthermore, while mature democracies are far less likely to go to war with each other,
there are two other instances to consider where in fact war might become more likely.
The first is that democracies are more likely to go to war with non-democracies, sometimes
in an effort to advance the very cause of democracy and human rights.
This explains the 2003 invasion by the United States of Iraq and the 2011 intervention in
Libya, for example.
This type of ideological conflict could be on the upswing.
Another problem is democratizing states.
In other words, those countries that are no longer authoritarian, but we wouldn't think
of necessarily as mature democracies either.
For these countries in transition, they tend to actually be far more war-like than either
established democracies or established autocracies.
It is in democratizing states that populism and nationalism sometimes lead to more belligerent
policies.
And unfortunately, there are a lot of democratizing states, so in the near term, the likelihood
of war might go up.
Constructivists are probably the most optimistic about the future, for a variety of reasons.
First of all, they argue that the norms against violent conflict aren't merely interstate.
Nearly all kinds of violence have fallen dramatically over the past few centuries.
So slavery, which used to be a fact of life, is now banned pretty much everywhere.
Acts like political assassination have become extremely rare.
Things like infanticide or racial pogroms still happen, but they happen far fewer and
far less frequently.
Crimes against women and even things like animal cruelty.
All of these things still happen, but again, the trend line is that they're all happening
far less frequently.
Once a global norm takes hold, it is very, very difficult for it to change.
So as more and more civilizing norms take effect, it will be more difficult for states
to stop complying with them, or they will face more penalties if they decide to break
those norms.
Now that said, there are some caveats here.
The decade since the September 11th attacks have eroded the adherence of some powerful
norms or powerful nations to certain norms, such as, let's say, those prohibiting torture.
And there are new arenas of conflict, like in cyberspace, where norms simply have yet
to emerge and the principles of deterrence don't apply.
While norms do an effective job of constraining the behavior of states, non-state actors,
like terrorist groups, are a different story.
As Al Qaeda's actions demonstrated, they will not feel constrained or bound by interstate
norms.
These extremist groups can, at a minimum, foment larger conflicts through their actions.
But while groups like Al Qaeda can cause trouble, they also demonstrate the power of these global
norms.
As the hegemon, the United States has no shortage of enemies in the world.
And when George W. Bush was president, he pursued anti-terrorism policies that were
not popular with much of the rest of the world.
Still, there is no evidence of any country providing significant aid and comfort to Al
Qaeda after the 2001 terrorist attacks.
The reason constructivists would argue is that when all states have in common is a rejection
of armed violent actors that want to subvert them.
As Al Qaeda and its affiliates launched attacks in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, India,
and East Asia, it lost all sympathy.
By 2011, with the death of Osama bin Laden, the group was far weaker than it used to be.
Stepping back, are there any macro trends?
There appear to be a few.
First of all, the long-term trends do seem relatively promising, particularly if the
liberal or constructivist arguments hold.
Greater globalization, the spread of mature democracies, and the power of humanitarian
norms all look to be a firm anchor, securing an ever-widening zone of peace.
For the next decade or so, however, there will be a significant and crucial period of uncertainty.
The shift to multipolarity potentially and the authoritarian backlash could lead to an
increase in the likelihood of violent armed conflict.
If this period of uncertainty passes, then the political challenges to global prosperity
will be greatly reduced.
So in conclusion, there are political challenges to prosperity.
It is possible there could be a future breakdown in global governance.
There will likely be wars and genocides in the future.
The data and trends the past several decades and centuries suggest, however, that there
probably won't be nearly as many as in the past.
Depending upon which theory of international relations you subscribe to, it's possible
that the next decade or so will produce greater levels of uncertainty.
However, these longer-term trends seem pretty powerful.
The world looks to stay pretty peaceful, which will be a boon to global prosperity.
So in our next lecture, we'll shift away from political and security challenges to prosperity
and start looking at the economic challenges.
