The tulip is a truly lovely flower. Do you think, however, that a single tulip bulb should
be worth 45 times a person's average annual income? That's what actually happened in February
of 1637 in the city of Amsterdam in the Netherlands. In that month, a single tulip bulb was priced
at the same value as a house on Amsterdam's finest street, including a horse coach. Indeed,
in that month of February, the price of a tulip bulb was 20 times greater than it was
six months earlier. Now, six months later, in November of 1637, the price of that tulip
bulb had fallen by a factor of 20 as well. The world was then introduced to a concept that
would become depressingly more familiar with time, a financial bubble. In our last lecture,
we focused on the political challenges to global prosperity. Now, in this lecture and the next
one, we'll look more closely at the economic challenges to global prosperity. Among those
challenges are financial bubbles, which have the dangerous ability to derail prosperity,
and that's what we're going to focus on today. A financial bubble is defined as occurring when
the price of an asset increases dramatically in a short period of time, and then, like a real bubble,
pops and implodes. Note that bubbles can occur in almost any asset class, so they can occur in
stocks, bonds, commodities, and so forth. And even tulip mania was not really just about the
tulip bulbs. What was actually being bidded on was an option contract to purchase bulbs in the
future. Now, anyone who's paid any attention to the economy over the last two decades is painfully
aware that financial bubbles are disturbingly common. There was the dot-com bubble of the late
90s and then 2000, and there was the subprime mortgage housing bubble that contributed to the
2008 financial crisis. Even though the past few centuries have seen what seems like seamless
increases in economic growth, bigger and smaller bubbles have been a regular appearance. In their
book, This Time is Different, economists Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart scoured more than 800
years of financial history to examine the pattern of more than 300 financial crises, including
numerous asset bubbles. They concluded that the after effects of a financial crisis are pretty
severe. So pretty much after every financial crisis, on average, GDP falls by roughly 9
percentage points. Housing prices fall by 35% on average over six years. Stock market indices fall
by an average of more than 50% over the next three years. Public debt, the amount the government has
to borrow, grows by about 86% on average. And unemployment increases by an average of 7 percentage
points for more than four years after the end of a financial crisis. Indeed, current estimates
suggest that it will take until the 2020s before the U.S. job market fully recovers from the 2008
financial crisis. Bubbles can have long term impacts if they are severe enough and if they're not
remedied. Consider the Great Depression. Now the Great Depression started with an attempt in August
1929 by the Federal Reserve to pop actually the U.S. stock market bubble. Overnight, the Fed raised
interest rates from 5% to 6%, a pretty dramatic increase back in those days. And for a few weeks,
the stock market actually wasn't all that affected. Indeed, the Dow Jones industrial average hit its
all time high of 381 on September 3rd, 1929, about a month after the Fed had raised its interest
rates. A few weeks later, however, a British financier named Clarence Hatrie admitted to having
engaged in massive fraud. It turned out that he had forged over a million dollars worth of municipal
bonds to attempt one of his leveraged buyouts. After he turned himself in, his investors were left
with 70 million dollars in losses. This caused the market to truly panic in October of 1929.
By November 13, 1929, the Dow Jones was down to less than 199 points, 48% off its high from two
months earlier. The Dow Jones would not reach that September 1929 high again until November 23,
1954. The stock market crash initially did not seem to affect the financial sector as a whole,
but what it did trigger was a cascade of catastrophic policy decisions that turned the
financial bubble into the Great Depression. So first, there was the 1930s smooth holly tariff,
which set off multiple trade wars and basically reversed the trend towards globalization that
had been building for the previous century. The Federal Reserve's decision to keep interest
rates relatively high led to a contractionary monetary policy, which in the United States
shrunk GDP even further. The Hoover administration's decision to balance the budget amounted to a
contractionary fiscal policy, which shrunk the economy even further. In 1931, the Austrian bank
Credit Anstalt faced its own crisis. It was a run on its bank and a threat to go under.
No other central bank agreed to come to the aid of Austria, which then triggered a global wave
of banking runs. And finally, there was Franklin Delano Roosevelt's unilateral decision to go off
the gold standard, while the 1933 London Economic Conference was taking place. Now this might
have actually been the right policy call. The countries that went off the gold standard the
earliest were also the countries that recovered the quickest from the Great Depression. The problem
was FDR made that decision unilaterally, eroding any hope for international economic cooperation
and further inhibiting cross-border exchange for the rest of the 1930s.
And then there was the premature decision in 1937 to pursue a contractionary fiscal policy again in
the United States. That prolonged the downturn in America, and the end result was that the bursting
of the bubble became a decade-long depression that shrank the U.S. economy by 30%, promoted global
economic closure, and essentially laid the groundwork for the start of the Second World War.
So unless bubbles are headed off in advance, or at least repaired quickly after they pop,
they can truly wreak long-term damage. So bubbles are clearly an inherent part of the capitalist
system. But what causes them? Why do they persist? Are they a sign of man's inherent irrationality?
Well, to answer these questions, we're going to break down a typical financial bubble into its
various stages. And to make the connection to global prosperity as clear as possible,
we're going to pay particular attention to the bubble that's freshest in our minds,
the housing bubble that triggered the 2008 financial crisis. Now as a general rule,
asset bubbles have a similar life cycle and a similar dynamic to them. And somewhat surprisingly,
there can be very rational reasons for their creation. Alright, so let's start with the first
stage, which we'll call the takeoff. Now there usually needs to be a valid reason why investors
get enthusiastic about an asset in the first place. The most likely causes are either a change in the
rules or an innovation that makes the asset suddenly that much more valuable. In the case
of Dutch tulips, for example, it was a change in the contract that was being bid on that started
the bubble in the first place. Prior to 1637, the futures markets for tulips were pretty simple.
Buyers agreed to pay a fixed price for a tulip bulb at a specified date in the future.
In late 1636, however, the market for tulips was depressed, which meant that all the Dutch
holders of tulip bulbs were paying too much for them in the end. As a group, they lobbied for a
change in the contract. So instead of a future guarantee of purchase, the market switched
to an option to buy at a specified price at a specified date. Now because that option could
be declined if the future market price was lower than the option price, the revised contract
was more valuable because it hedged against the risk of declining tulip values. So naturally,
the price of the contract went up considerably, which then set off the tulip bubble.
Similarly, for the .com bubble, it was plain to everyone that the internet was going to transform
how firms would do business in the marketplace. The growth of the web led to real productivity
increases in places like retail businesses in the developed world. There was every reason to
believe that e-businesses had a potential edge in profitability. And as for the housing bubble,
there were multiple causes, but the biggest one was the securitization of subprime mortgages.
Subprime is exactly what it sounds like. Mortgages made to less than credit-worthy buyers,
and as a result, they're charged, generally speaking, a higher interest rate. Now the default
rate on these mortgages was obviously higher, but financial innovators came up with the idea of
pooling together individual mortgages and turning them into securities. These were called collateralized
debt obligations, or CDOs. The idea behind a CDO was diversification. If a bank held an individual
mortgage, it always suffered the risk of default or early payments. By combining mortgages and
turning them into bonds, an investor could feel more confident about a reasonably stable rate of
return. And indeed, the first subprime mortgages securities earned a pretty decent rate of return.
Now in all of these cases, change in innovation led to an increase in the value of the particular
asset. But more than this, in all of these cases, it's the smart, well-informed investors who get
in first because they immediately recognize the market opportunity. In other words, they are acting
rationally at this first stage in the bubble's life cycle. However, their actions attract a second
wave of investors who are generally going to be less well-informed, or more likely simply to play
follow the leader. And this leads us to the next stage. Stage two is the credit boom. As a particular
asset rises in value, several things begin to vastly expand the amount of credit in the market.
This helps to fuel demand for that asset even further, which in turn inflates the bubble even
more. So how does credit expand? If an asset class rises in one country, cross-border investment is
likely to rush in to invest as well. So this increases the supply of capital, and thereby
inflates the price of the asset. In the case of the subprime mortgage bubble, for example,
massive amounts of overseas capital created what Federal Reserve Chairman Benjamin Bernanke
called a global savings glut. Foreign capital bought up U.S. assets of all kinds, treasury notes,
stocks, mortgage bonds, because dollar-denominated securities were seen as safe and liquid.
The increased demand inflated the prices of U.S. assets across the board. Mortgage bonds,
those CDOs I talked about a few minutes ago, seem particularly attractive because they earned a higher
rate of return than T-bills, but through institutions like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac seem to have a
quasi-guarantee from the U.S. government. So next, the original holders of that asset can use the
capital gains accrued as collateral to borrow for further investments or consumption.
See, there are basically two ways to earn money from an investment, the interest or rate of return
that's accrued from it, or through capital gains and appreciation of the market value of the asset
itself. Bubbles really take off when the capital gains seem to skyrocket. In the case of the dot-com
boom, investors were able to use their stock portfolios to borrow even more money to buy more
stock, until of course these stocks started to collapse in price. Now in the case of the housing
bubble, the appreciating value of real estate allowed a large number of households to boost
their consumption by taking out home equity loans. In the case of subprime mortgages in particular,
the rising value of those houses allowed the people originally taking out the mortgages
to flip their house for an even more expensive one.
New entrants to the market will seek to borrow money to get in on an asset that seems to be
going nowhere but up. And this was possible at the beginning of the housing boom because the U.S.
Federal Reserve kept interest rates very low for a very long time in response to the downturn
created by the dot-com crash and the September 11 terrorist attacks. Now the sense even among
market skeptics becomes that you're losing money by not investing in the asset class.
In the 1920s and 1990s, not owning stock seemed like losing money, the opportunity cost of not
investing in those assets was pretty large. Similarly, in the 2000s, not owning a house
seemed like a waste. It seemed like you were actually losing money because the asset was
rising so high in price. And not surprisingly as a result, during the 2000s, home ownership
rose to its highest level in American history. Now banks contributed to this issue by not engaging
in due diligence when offering mortgages. Banks didn't necessarily look at things like credit
scores and encouraged both borrowers and ratings agencies to bend the rules so that loans and
securities could be issued with a AAA rating. See, the borrowers thought that if the banks believed
that they could pay, then they could pay. Think about if you're taking out your own mortgage,
if the bank says everything checks out then you're going to presume the bank knows what it's talking
about. And furthermore, for many mortgages, this was actually true in the short run, particularly
if the mortgage was, let's say, an adjustable rate interest payment only mortgage where the
rate doesn't go up for a few years. Now the end result of all this is that the financial sector
tends to be prosyclical. As an asset class takes off in value, the economy as a whole grows from
the windfall. Robust economic growth causes banks and other financial institutions to overestimate
the health of everyone's balance sheet so they loan out even more money, which then fuels the boom
even more. Banks and financial institutions also overestimate their own financial health,
particularly if the inflated asset is on their own balance sheets, or if the inflated asset
is off balance sheet, which allows them to engage in various forms of speculation.
As a result, they increase their risk by loaning more money, or by engaging in greater financial
risk with the loans that they actually carry out. In the case of the subprime bubble, household
debt to GDP in the United States increased from 80% of gross domestic product in 1993
to 130% by 2006. And that brings us to stage three where the mania really begins.
The Dutch tulip bubble didn't really take off until new traders entered what had been previously
a relatively small and elite market. And this set the pattern for all future bubbles.
As the asset price continues to rise, smart investors might begin to recognize that a bubble
is forming. And yet, nevertheless, those smart investors will still often stay in for quite a
while. Now, why might that be the case? The economist John Maynard Keynes once described
picking winners in financial markets as akin to picking the winner of a beauty contest.
To predict correctly, your goal is not to figure out who is the most beautiful contestant.
Your goal is to pick who you think the other judges think the most beautiful contestant is.
In other words, it is rational in the short term to invest in assets experiencing a bubble
so long as you are convinced that everyone else is staying in as well.
Call this rational irrationality.
Even those who predict the bubble don't necessarily make any waves until it actually happens.
In fact, predicting it too early can be hazardous to your reputation.
In 1929, the economist and statistician Roger Babson predicted a stock market crash.
Well, that was great, except he had been predicting it for two years without it happening before.
And as a result, after a while, he became thought as the boy who cried wolf.
Robert Schiller did the same thing with the housing bubble. That economist pointed out that
the rent-to-home price ratios were way out of kilter with historical norms. When housing prices
continue to go up for a few years after his warnings, however, he was dismissed as a Cassandra.
And similarly, the economist Noriel Rubini predicted that there would be a global financial
crisis. The problem is he predicted it from about 2004 on. And after a few years of it not
happening, his warnings weren't heated. As the bubble expands, other psychological and political
effects kick in to prevent policy corrections. The boom in asset prices begins to alter society at
large. Consider, for example, these trends from the years of the expanding housing bubble.
Now, one trend was a diversion of human capital and profits to the financial sector.
By the year 2007, 50% of all Harvard Business School graduates went into finance,
as well as a lot of PhDs in mathematics and physics. People like Bono and Madeleine Albright
started setting up hedge funds, because that's what everyone else was doing.
As a result, it suggested that setting up a hedge fund was trendy, rather than actually based on
valid economic reasons. Lowered down in the income class, other people became professional
house flippers, buying one home, rehabbing it, selling it, and then moving on.
Moody's and other bond rating agencies had no model of what would happen to mortgage
back securities if housing prices actually fell. Now, that sounds vaguely absurd. Surely,
they should have prepared for this contingency, except you have to realize it had been more
than a generation since housing prices actually had fallen. There was almost no institutional
memory of something like that happening. Furthermore, powerful political interests
acted to prevent any kind of policy correction. Now, the Federal Reserve could have popped the
bubble at any point by raising interest rates, or the Federal Government could have raised taxes
and cut government spending as a way of cooling off the economy. Financial regulators could have
monitored and enforced the existing rules somewhat better. But for all of these cases,
there were powerful interest groups with a vested interest in stopping the policy.
For example, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the financial sector more generally
were politically powerful and connected to both major parties, and were able to block
any pressure, any government effort, to prick that bubble.
And there's another problem, which is psychological. It's next to impossible before the bubble
actually pops to make the political argument that there is a bubble, and therefore it's time to
pop it. Very often, what you're experiencing during the moment simply looks like the new normal,
and that leads us to the fourth stage of a crisis. The fourth stage of a financial bubble
is the notion that this time is different. With each year that a bubble continues,
an ideological apparatus gets created to strengthen,
support, and justify the sustainability of the bubble to perpetuate the belief that
this time is different. As the economists Carmen Reinhardt and Kenneth Rogoff put it,
it is the firmly held belief that financial crises are things that happen to other people,
in other countries, at other times. Crises do not happen to us here and now. We are doing things
better. We are smarter. We have learned from past mistakes, and the old rules of valuation
no longer apply. In the 1920s, faith in the functioning of the stock market
was at an all-time high. By September 1929, the economist Irving Fischer declared,
stock prices are not too high, and Wall Street will not experience anything in the nature of a crash.
In October, Fischer, at that point one of the most respected economists in the world,
asserted that stocks have reached what looks like a permanently high plateau.
And during the housing bubble, similar kinds of faith were placed in a number of certitudes.
One was in the Great Moderation, and the Great Moderation was a reduction
of business cycle fluctuations that had taken place over the previous generation.
This was generally credited to the Federal Reserve's ability to use monetary policy pretty
adroitly to arrest downward swings in the business cycle and prevent inflation from occurring.
Another article of faith was the belief that private orders and self-regulation
would prevent any serious financial market correction.
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan believed that counter-party surveillance
gave all financial actors an incentive to guard against irrational exuberance.
There was also great faith in portfolio diversification,
and other forms of financial innovation as a way for financial institutions to hedge against risk.
Each individual financial actor thought they were hedged and diversified against risk,
and as a result overlooked the overall build-up in systemic risk.
For example, one of the tools that a lot of these financial institutions used to hedge against
risk was to buy something called credit default swaps, basically an insurance contract against
the collateralized debt obligations falling in value. What they didn't anticipate was that
almost all of these financial institutions bought those credit default swaps from a single institution,
AIG, which meant that if in fact they all had to be cashed in, AIG was going to be on the hook
and was never going to be able to afford to pay out all of those contracts.
So we've passed through the first few stages of a financial bubble.
Now let's look at the last stage, the bubble bursts. At some point the bubble can no longer
continue to expand, reality kicks in, and everything falls apart very, very quickly.
In the case of the housing bubble, two things caused the bubble to pop.
First, a lot of mortgage payers suddenly saw their payments go up dramatically
as interest rates started going up and balloon payments came due.
Second, once housing prices started leveling off, not even falling, just leveling off,
it was impossible for homeowners to sell their properties to avoid foreclosure.
As waves of mortgage defaults began, the market for subprime mortgage securities evaporated.
Which then meant there was no way to price will became known as toxic assets.
Between September 2007 and September 2008, the balance sheet of financial institutions began
to look extremely precarious. Those financial institutions became extremely leery of lending
to each other. LIBOR, the London Interbank Offer Rate, the rate banks used to loan money to each
other rose to all-time highs. Banks didn't trust each other. First, Bear Stearns,
then Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and then finally Lehman Brothers went under.
After Lehman, the ripple effects buckled the entire global financial system.
The immediate effects were pretty devastating.
Global trade and output levels declined more sharply than during the first few months of
the Great Depression. The IMF estimates that $4 trillion were lost by the global financial
sector from the crash. The McKinsey Global Institute places the entire global decline
in asset values at $27 trillion in 2008 alone, the equivalent of 50% of annual global economic
output annually. The U.S. economy contracted by more than 8% in the fourth quarter of 2008.
The ideology supporting the bubble also collapsed. In 2008, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan
admitted the following in congressional testimony. Those of us who have looked to the self-interest
of lending institutions to protect shareholders' equity, myself included, are in a state of
shock disbelief. Yes, I've found a flaw. I don't know how significant or permanent it is,
but I've been very distressed by that fact. This modern risk management paradigm held sway for
decades. The whole intellectual edifice, however, collapsed in the summer of 2008.
And now this brings us to the last stage, the cleanup from the bubble.
From Reinhart and Rogoff, we know that a lot of financial panics follow a certain pattern.
The private sector suffers massive losses, which threatens to take down the entire financial system.
The public sector steps in to prevent total catastrophe. As a result, public debt to GDP
ratios really explode. In theory, over time as economic growth returns, countries grow their
way out of the debt bomb. In practice, there are very often government debt defaults as well,
or at least an upsurge in inflation if the government simply prints money to pay for the debt.
See Greece or Iceland or Dubai, for examples of these kinds of debt defaults or near-debt defaults,
and see the Latin American economies of Brazil and Bolivia during the debt crisis of the 1980s,
for examples of inflation. What about after the 2008 crisis? There's been a definite
explosion of government debt, and some ratings agencies worried about this explosion of debt
have downgraded U.S. government debt in particular. So, stepping back, what have we learned?
There are a few takeaways. The first is to understand that bubbles are endemic to the system,
pretending otherwise is just foolhardy. More economic research needs to be devoted
to studying bubbles, manias, and crashes. Ideally, intervening prior to the manic phase
would be good, but as we've seen, there are excellent political and psychological reasons
why this doesn't happen. Hopefully, the magnitude of the Great Recession was so large that it will
forestall another bubble for quite some time. There are generational effects from crises,
as large as the one in 2008. People who grow up during these periods, for example,
tend to save more and act in a more risk-averse fashion.
Indeed, after the Great Depression and World War II, there was a 30-year period of stability.
So, hopefully, it will be quite some time before we need to re-examine the Great Depression and
Great Recession for lessons learned. Bubbles tend to produce both absurd levels of optimism at
their peak and absurd levels of pessimism that the world is ending when they pop. It's often right
after a financial bubble pops that some economists start speculating that the engine of prosperity
has really burned out once and for all. This leads us to worries about a coming Great Stagnation,
which will be the topic of our next lecture.
