In October 2008, during the depths of the financial crisis, a Gallup poll showed that
only 7% of Americans thought the country was headed in the right direction.
Clearly, the financial crisis was to blame for that kind of pessimism, but actually that
figure massed something deeper.
Since the start of the 21st century, poll after poll has shown that Americans believe
that their country is headed in the wrong direction.
Indeed, from January 2004 to September 2012, Gallup has failed to get a majority of Americans
to agree that the country is on the right track.
This pessimism in the polls is emblematic of a larger theme.
It's tough to deny that the developed world has had a rough few years.
The European Union has been suffering a growth slowdown for some time before the 2008 crisis.
That crisis, however, exacerbated the sovereign debt problems for the southern European economies.
Population has been in an economic malaise since its real estate bubble popped in the
early 90s.
The Fukushima nuclear disaster was a more recent body blow to the economy.
Its debt to GDP ratio is more than 200% higher than any European country.
Its population is also aging rapidly.
According to some estimates, it will shrink by half by the end of this century.
And as for the United States, for the past 20 years its growth rate has outperformed
both Europe and Japan.
Still, the polls have shown unremitting pessimism for close to a decade.
Why?
In part, as noted in the past lecture, this is the after effect of an asset bubble bursting.
The public mood inevitably shifts from extreme optimism to extreme pessimism.
There is a deeper explanation, however.
If one compares the U.S. economy since 1971 to the Bretton Woods economy, there is no
denying that, with one brief exception, there has been a slowdown in per capita income growth.
According to Northwestern University economist Robert Gordon, at the peak of the 20th century
U.S. boom, real GDP per capita increased by about 2.5% a year.
In the 21st century, that figure has been less than 1.4%.
Gordon speculates that by the year 2100, growth in GDP per capita could fall to pre-1800 levels.
And this slowdown is not only true of the United States.
It potentially applies to both Japan and Europe as well.
So the question for this lecture is, is this slowdown a permanent shift?
Have the days of rapid economic growth in the developed world come to an end?
And this matters for a variety of reasons, but the simplest is that even a modest permanent
reduction in per capita income growth means a dramatic decrease in prosperity over time.
The difference between 2.5% growth in per capita income and 1.5% growth doesn't sound
like much, but it really is.
To use a simple example, let's consider two economies.
We'll call one economy high growth, and we'll call the other economy okay growth.
Each economy starts with a GDP of, let's say, $10 billion, with 1 million people for
a per capita income of $10,000 per person.
Okay growth manages 2% growth in per capita GDP over the next decade.
High growth manages 3% growth in per capita GDP over the same time period.
Now, let's also assume magically that populations have remained unchanged.
After 20 years, okay growth has increased its GDP by approximately 48% to have a per
capita GDP of $14,800 per person.
That sounds great, except during the same time, high growth has increased its GDP by
approximately 80%, lifting its income per capita income to $18,000 per person.
So the fact is that over time, even small differences in growth rates will matter for
prosperity.
Prosperity has been rising at such a steady state for so long that we tend to take its
persistence for granted.
What if global economic growth returns to the levels of the pre-1800 era in which increases
in per capita income were practically non-existent?
Now remember our hockey stick graph.
If stagnation truly returns, this means people will be living on the flat part of the graph
again as opposed to the rapidly rising part.
So first things first, what are the explanations proffered for why growth in the developed
world will not be as robust in the future as it used to be?
Now I'm going to focus on the United States for the rest of this lecture, but bear in
mind that a lot of this analysis applies to most of the rest of the developed world.
The primary narrative that is offered is that the developed world has basically picked
all of the low-hanging fruit that boosts economic prosperity.
And therefore from here on in, growth is simply tougher because the opportunities to boost
growth are that much harder.
Now recall from our previous lectures what factors can lead to boosts in economic growth.
The first is personal security and property rights.
It's difficult for any individual or business to think about productive investment unless
their personal safety and their property rights are recognized and protected by a robust legal
system.
Another factor is investments in human and physical capital.
Things like greater capital accumulation help to push out the production possibilities
frontier.
So do investments in education, which is one of the most important kinds of capital accumulation,
namely human capital.
Expanding the number of educated workers in a sophisticated market yields significant
gains, both for the individuals who get the education and for the society at large.
The elimination of discrimination.
Racial or gender discrimination is really a disguised form of rent seeking, or as we
phrased it in an earlier lecture, unproductive activity.
It's a way of preventing the most ideal person for a job from getting that job.
Ensuring that the best people enter the workforce, regardless of race, gender, religion and so
forth, is an easy way to improve prosperity by putting more productive workers in the
jobs that they should earn.
Investment in public goods is also a way to boost prosperity.
Beyond security there are other public goods investments that spur and encourage private
sector activity.
The internet, for example, was largely a creation of the US government and government
funded research.
Without its existence, firms like Google or Facebook would not necessarily exist, much
less be able to introduce new innovations.
Another factor that boosts prosperity is globalization.
The liberalization of international trade allows for increases in economic growth.
It gives firms a further incentive to innovate, with the prospect of new and growing markets
outside the home country.
And finally the most important one, technological innovation.
We know that this is the single most important engine of prosperity for the developed world.
Without new innovations, national and global economic growth would slow down dramatically.
Now the developed world has been leaning on most of these drivers for quite some time.
But for many developed nations, the law of diminishing marginal returns has really begun
to kick in.
In other words, some of the factors that I just talked about, you can't necessarily
ring that many more improvements in prosperity from.
Let's take security.
Individuals and businesses in the developed world no longer have to worry so much about
having their personal safety and property rights protected by the rule of law.
Now this is a good thing.
But on the other hand, levels of security are so high that very little else can be done
in this area that will serve as a significant spur to economic growth.
In other words, few additional prosperity gains will come in the developed world from
increases in personal security and property rights.
In fact, if anything, the pendulum has swum too far in the other direction, particularly
in the area of intellectual property rights.
Now intellectual property rights or IPR are important for fostering innovation.
But the rights have become so robust as to potentially inhibit the diffusion of new ideas.
For example, in 2012, a U.S. court ordered the Korean firm Samsung to pay Apple $1 billion
in damages for patent infringement, arguing that Samsung's phones were too much like
the iPhone.
The specific patents that were alleged to be broken, however, were frankly pretty picky
even, such as the ability to double tap on a phone's surface to zoom into an image.
If patent enforcement is this strict, then fear of legal battles can actually deter innovation.
Let's talk about another potential roadblock to prosperity, education.
In 1900, less than 7% of age-appropriate Americans had graduated from high school.
In 2000, that figure was approximately 75%.
And that was actually a small dip from the 80% peak that occurred in the late 1960s.
In 1900, only one-quarter of 1% of Americans went to college.
In 2009, the figure was 40%.
In educating a wider spectrum of Americans, a lot of human capital has been created.
And the people who could exploit education to the fullest were getting it.
The problem is that the United States has clearly hit diminishing marginal returns on education.
In today's world, people who want to go to school usually can go to school.
The 25% who don't graduate from high school would undoubtedly benefit from getting more
of an education.
But they are also likely the group of individuals that would require the most intensive and
expensive effort to get them educated in the first place.
We're already seeing this in college dropout rates.
Now these are often the people for whom the high cost of education can be financially
crippling.
People who go to college for a year or two and then drop out can be saddled with high
amounts of debt and, lacking a degree, be unable to get the job that pays down that
debt.
In the 21st century, one-third of all current college students will drop out, a much higher
percentage than in, let's say, the 1960s.
Now part of that increase is likely due to financial aid difficulties.
But not all of it.
The United States will benefit from greater investments in education, but the magnitude
of that benefit will probably be lower than in the 20th century.
Now as we talked about before, another thing that can boost prosperity is the elimination
of discrimination.
Now, it would be foolhardy to claim that there is no discrimination in the workplace now.
But it would be equally foolish to claim that discrimination has not been substantially
reduced in the past century.
So-called white ethnics, Italian Americans, Irish Americans, Ukrainian Americans, Jewish
Americans, and so forth, face really no more barriers to work.
Asian Americans have survived and thrived in the American workplace.
African Americans face no formal barriers in the education and labor marketplace, and affirmative
action programs are designed to address the residue of racism in the American workplace.
And as for gender, beginning in the 1960s, women entered the workforce en masse and have
stayed there ever since.
As the journalist Hannah Rosen has observed in The End of Men, women now dominate a lot
of the service sectors with the most job creation.
The glass ceiling for women has been cracking in the past few decades and looks set to shatter
in this century.
And in terms of earning human capital, the majority of students earning a bachelor's
degree are women.
The majority of students earning master's degrees are women.
And the majority of professional degrees and PhDs are again women.
In the 20th century, each of these steps that I've talked about, personal security, education,
eliminating discrimination, led to a burst in productivity.
As better qualified and capable individuals entered the workforce.
And as with education, there can and will be greater gains in overall prosperity if
discrimination continues to wane.
But those gains will be less in the future than the past.
The most significant steps of progress have already been taken.
All right, what about public goods?
Well, one of the issues here is that measuring the productivity and efficiency in public
goods is fantastically difficult.
When measuring GDP, economists tend to figure out the value added of outputs by using their
market price.
You can't do that with government services, however.
What's the value added of, let's say, improved national defense, for example?
Instead, economists have to measure government inputs, like budgets, because measuring outputs
is so difficult.
Still, for some important sectors in which the government plays an important role, let's
say education and healthcare.
The data suggests that the United States is not trending in a positive direction.
We've already talked about high school and college education.
When it comes to primary education, the United States already spends more per pupil than
any other country in the world.
Despite that level of expenditure, U.S. test scores have been consistently mediocre for
decades.
According to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, in 2009, 15-year-olds in
the United States ranked only 14th out of 34 OECD economies in reading.
They ranked 17th in science and 25th in mathematics.
The same story can be told for healthcare.
U.S. expenditures on healthcare as a percentage of GDP are higher than any other country.
Yet if one compares the state of American health by measures of life expectancy or infant
mortality, the U.S. is again at the middle of the pack.
Unless greater efficiencies can be rung out of current public goods investments, future
investments won't appear to yield much in the way of productivity gains.
Which means that these sectors will act as a drag on the U.S. economy.
What about globalization?
Compared to where it was at the time of the Great Depression, the United States is a
far more globalized economy, as are most of the developed countries in the world.
And while there are sectors of the U.S. economy that remain somewhat sheltered, by and large
the barriers to entry into the U.S. market are actually pretty low.
Moreover, the spread of information and communication technologies has expanded the goods and services
that can be easily traded internationally.
The problem is that most of the major steps towards global trade liberalization have already
been taken.
Sure, other economies could liberalize further.
But according to the Peterson Institute for International Economics, even the complete
removal of all barriers to global trade would not create as much of a boost in economic
growth as the gains that have already been captured from the past five decades of trade
liberalization.
So, like the other areas, the developed world faces diminishing returns with respect to
the future economic benefits of trade liberalization.
Now let's talk about technological innovation.
As we know from our previous lectures, this is the really important dimension.
Even if other engines of economic growth are slowing down, an increasing pace of innovation
can still lead to an inexorable increase in prosperity.
And looking around, it would seem that technology is changing as rapidly as ever.
Appearances can be deceiving, however.
Consider the general purpose technologies of modern society, things like the automobile,
the airplane, the computer, the telephone and the refrigerator.
These have all improved over the past 30 years, but we still rely on all of these inventions.
Nothing new has replaced them.
And even the existing improvements on these inventions are not necessarily better.
For example, the average speed on a passenger aircraft has actually fallen since the introduction
to the Boeing 707 in 1958 because of the need to conserve fuel on flights.
Now, in point of fact, there do seem to be signs suggesting that the pace of technological
innovation peaked in the late 19th century and has been slowing down ever since.
This is likely because it was easier in the past for a single inventor, like a Leonardo
Da Vinci or a Thomas Edison, to make a significant innovation.
At present, the fields that seem so promising for innovation, nanotechnology or green energy,
require massive laboratories and fixed investments.
Only large-scale institutions like universities, multinational corporations of the government
can play in that kind of innovative field.
Now, as we've talked about before, in his 1942 book, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy,
Joseph Schumpeter warned that once large organizations become the primary epicenter for innovation,
the pace of change would slow down.
If those large organizations are inherently conservative, they will be less likely to
imagine truly radical innovations.
Now, the obvious objection to this argument would be, let's say, the development of laptops
or smartphones or tablet computers or other gadgets that truly exploit the Internet to
its fullest.
And this is the one remaining sector where innovations are attached to, let's say, individual
names.
Steve Jobs was responsible for the development of tablets, Mark Zuckerberg for Facebook,
and so on.
Now, this is undeniably true.
The problem is, is that a lot of the gains and utility from these innovations have not
strictly speaking been economic.
See, most of the important innovations that we think about with respect to the Internet,
social networking sites, Twitter, Wikipedia, YouTube, and so on, are basically free technologies.
As Tyler Cowan has argued in his book, The Great Stagnation, the big technological gains
are coming in revenue-deficient sectors.
They generate a lot of genuine enjoyment, but they lead to few new businesses or sectors.
And indeed, it should be noted that the largest and most dynamic information technology firms,
like, let's say, Google, Facebook, or Apple, hire only a fraction of the people who worked
for General Motors in its heyday.
Indeed, it is frequently argued that Internet-based content has eroded the financial health of
other sectors, such as entertainment and journalism.
So it seems like a prosperity slowdown is inevitable.
Is this actually true?
Have all the low-hanging fruit really been eaten already?
Now, I don't think so, but before I tell you why, I want you to bear in mind the following
warning.
I'm making predictions from here on in in terms of the rest of this lecture about the
future of innovation and economic growth.
If I really knew these answers cold and was absolutely sure about them, I wouldn't be
talking to you right now.
I'd be on my yacht somewhere, with a large staff catering to my every whim, because I
would be filthy, stinking rich.
So I don't know for sure.
No one does about the future.
That said, there are five excellent reasons to believe that the engine of economic growth
will continue to run as it has in the past.
The first is that there are still actually plenty of opportunities to boost human capital.
Although mass education exists in the developed world, neither college nor postgraduate education
is as common.
There are still improvements in productivity that can come from a more well-trained workforce
in the developed world.
In fact, the OECD estimates that if the United States could significantly improve its students'
test scores on math and science for the current generation, the benefits for the overall U.S.
economy would be massive.
Indeed, if the U.S. were able to get its test scores up to the best performer, which is
Finland by the way, the OECD estimates that the gains would exceed $100 trillion over
the lifespan of that generation.
That's a significant amount of change.
It's also worth noting that India and China are just beginning to generate large supplies
of highly educated workers.
With migration, more of these individuals can earn higher degrees, increasing the likelihood
of producing more innovators like Bill Gates and Steve Jobs.
There are also lots of opportunities to improve productivity in sectors like healthcare and
education, where the government plays an outsized role.
It's true that education and health have lagged behind in productivity, but that doesn't
mean that productivity improvements cannot occur in those areas.
Just because educational scores haven't improved as of late doesn't mean that it's impossible.
It means that this is in fact a target of opportunity for further innovation.
Until the 1990s, there was general skepticism that it was impossible to improve the productivity
of the service sector more generally, but then various retail and professional services
learned how to exploit information technologies.
And productivity in those sectors really took off.
The growth of online education and the computerization of health records do hold some promise as a
way to boost productivity in both of those sectors.
So according to a RAND Corporation study conducted in 2005, the United States could
save $81 billion annually while improving healthcare outcomes if all healthcare records
were, let's say, computerized.
Those are pretty serious gains.
And if online education could raise test scores by just a fraction, the benefits would be
even greater, as the OECD figures suggest.
Furthermore, the revolution in computing is just starting.
Moore's Law, named after Intel co-founder Gordon Moore, is an empirical observation
that computer processing power can be doubled every 18 months.
Now there's no guarantee that this will continue in the future, but the rule has held since
1965.
To appreciate the exponential power, growth, and computer power this would unleash, consider
that in the past five years alone, computer technology has improved to the point where
computers can drive cars, navigate stairs, win chess and jeopardy tournaments, task that
computer scientists themselves did not think were possible just a short time ago.
The growth of computer power, combined with the explosion of data that is now available
via the Internet, suggests a number of possible ways that will lead to new profit-making innovations.
Indeed, even though economist Tyler Cowan is the proponent of the great stagnation,
the very way he marketed that idea was innovative.
He did it through a very low-cost e-book that could be downloaded very quickly onto a Kindle.
This would have been inconceivable before the development of the tablet computer.
The low-cost diffusion of ideas increases the likelihood that some innovator exposed
to the right set of ideas comes up with a truly radical innovation.
The development of 3D printers could also transform how we think of manufacturing.
These printers combine computer design with the printing of products using a combination
of high-tech manufacturing devices, things like lasers or electron beams, as well as
powdered raw materials.
Fourth thing to consider, there's often a generational delay in how new technologies
can lead to increases in productivity.
In 1987, Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert Solow famously wrote, you can see the computer
age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.
His point was that even though computers had penetrated the workplace, labor productivity
growth was slowing.
By the late 1990s, however, about a generation after the growth of personal computing, the
effects of labor productivity really began to be felt.
Non-farm business productivity rose even faster during that decade.
One reason for the generational delay is that it takes this long often for businesses to
be reorganized to optimize such new technologies.
Well, it's been almost 20 years since the spread of the Internet and the World Wide
Web.
This suggests that we might be on the cusp of yet another boom in productivity and prosperity.
Furthermore, any belief in the true end of radical innovations sounds incredibly premature.
In 1899, Charles Duel, the commissioner of the U.S. Patent Office, allegedly declared
that everything that can be invented has been invented.
As it turns out, this appears to be an urban legend.
He actually said was closer to the truth.
In my opinion, all previous advances in various lines of invention will appear totally insignificant
when compared with those which the previous present century will witness.
I almost wish that I might live my life over again to see the wonders which are at the
threshold.
The long cycle theory of history argues that much of the past five centuries consist of
two alternating phases of development.
The first phase, in which a cluster of path-breaking innovations are created, and in the country
of origin amasses considerable power as a result.
The second stage is one of diffusion in which the rest of the world catches up by adopting
these technologies and figuring out the best way to manufacture and exploit them.
Now, if this theory is correct, then we're currently experiencing the diffusion stage
in which societies try to figure out the best way to exploit information and communication
technologies.
This does not mean the end of radical innovations.
Indeed, even as diffusion is taking place, there are important new and radical innovations.
Consider the onset of hydraulic fracturing or hydrofracking.
It's a new means to extract oil and natural gas that became commercially viable in the
last decade.
The effect of this innovation on the future of energy reserves has been dramatic.
Instead of worrying about things like peak oil or rising level of imports, energy analysts
now predict that North America will be a net energy exporter within the next 20 years.
One way to prime the pump for radical innovations is through demand.
The reason that fracking was developed was due to the increases in energy prices over
the past decade.
As climate change continues to kick in, for example, there will be an even greater demand
for more environmentally friendly technologies, like alternative fuels or low-carbon emission
vehicles.
So to sum up, there are a lot of fears about a growth slowdown in the developed world,
particularly in the United States.
Pessimists are concerned that a lot of the one-off achievements in static growth have
already been accomplished, and that technological innovation will no longer be able to maintain
the same pace as existed a century or two ago.
They might be right, but there are reasons to believe that their fears have been overstated.
In our next lecture, we'll tackle another fear that exists about the future of prosperity,
environmental catastrophe.
