In our last few lectures, we've talked about the political, economic, and technological
challenges to the future of prosperity.
Some of these challenges are more serious than others, but in theory, all of these challenges
can be surmounted.
That said, there was an implicit assumption that I was making during these lectures, that
everyone in the world wants to be more prosperous.
Well, isn't that right?
Doesn't greater economic prosperity lead to a greater sense of well-being?
That was the general conclusion I drew in our second lecture, but it certainly doesn't
apply to all individuals at all times.
Indeed, there have been pockets of individuals out there who genuinely fear greater prosperity.
In 1995, a mysterious individual that was referred to only as the unabomber sent letterbombs
to various university researchers and other airlines, killing three people and wounding
others.
He promised to stop so long as he could publish his manifesto in the New York Times and the
Washington Post.
Those papers complied, and the resulting manifesto turned out to be a screed against prosperity
as we currently understand the term.
In other things, it's said that the Industrial Revolution and its consequences have been
a disaster for the human race.
Similarly, Osama bin Laden released numerous manifestos blasting the system of global capitalism.
In one 2007 tape, he urged Americans to liberate themselves from, I quote, the deception, shackles
and attrition of the capitalist system.
These are just the people who captured public attention through violent action.
Ever since prosperity became a mass phenomenon starting in the 19th century, there have been
significant theories and ideologies that have opposed or resisted the very idea of global
capitalism for either economic or non-economic reasons.
We need to discuss these ideas a little bit in order to better understand them.
Now there are other ideas, or to be honest, fears that are far friendlier to the notion
of a free market, but also threaten the prosperity engine of capitalism.
We'll talk about those at the very end of this lecture.
But to understand the origins of ideological opposition, let's think about how a perfectly
functioning capitalist society would work.
You'd likely see the following.
First, people would by and large be pursuing their self-interest.
As we've discussed in previous lectures, it was Adam Smith who first made this observation
in his Wealth of Nations.
He noted that every individual, by pursuing their own self-interest, helped to benefit
all of society by maximizing their own productivity and profit from that productivity, leading
to industries that produce their greatest value.
Another effect of a well-functioning capitalist machine is increased specialization in division
of labor.
The greater that one can specialize, the more productive the labor, and the more globalized
the division of labor.
The greater the degree of specialization in interdependence.
After all, specialization means an increased reliance on others to do the things that
you stop doing in order to specialize.
For example, I am the worst handyman in the world.
If something goes wrong in my house, I can't fix it.
The reason is in part because I learned at a very young age that if I tried to do that
because I wasn't specialized in it, inevitably I would have to bring in someone professional
and spend a lot more money for them to fix the screw-ups that I've made.
So therefore, I'm interdependent on the rest of the economy for my house not to fall apart.
Constant and fast-paced innovation.
From previous lectures, we know that innovation is the most important engine of economic growth,
particularly in the developed world.
This means a lot of creative destruction.
We also want to see a discrimination-free workplace, so women and minorities should
be able to participate in the workforce at the exact same rate as non-minority men.
And we'd expect to see investment in public goods.
We know that private markets function better when certain public goods like public safety,
disease prevention, and global peace are provided.
Now, most of this probably sounds pretty good if you're listening to me right now.
There are elements of the capitalist society that I've just described, however, that would
raise the hackles of particular subgroups, and those subgroups might agitate rather strenuously
to prevent prosperity from happening as a result.
So who are these subgroups?
We'll call them the four Rs, the romantics, the reactionaries, and the revolutionaries.
And then finally, we'll talk about the radicals at the end.
And we'll consider each of these groups in turn.
Let's start with the romantics.
Just as Europe was beginning to experience its economic miracle, a group of writers began
to suggest that the increase in mass prosperity came at a high price.
These writers argued that the growing sophistication and specialization of capitalist societies
was not all good.
They opposed the wig theory of history, the argument that the world is in every way getting
better and better.
The philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau argued that men were much happier when they were
noble savages and therefore not part of society.
In contrast to Thomas Hobbes, who in his book Leviathan argued that a state of nature was
really a war of all against all, Rousseau argued that man in nature was temperate and
caring.
It was enjoining a society that eventually led to man's problems.
You see, according to Rousseau, being part of a society means being dependent on others,
thereby weakening man's autonomy, or even for that matter, his survival instincts.
Men in society inevitably experience inequality according to Rousseau, whereas in nature they
simply wouldn't encounter enough other people to feel that sense of inequality.
This inevitably breeds envy in individuals, which in turn gives the powerful and the wealthy
an incentive to exploit these grievances to engage in politics.
In essence, those who are better off in Rousseau's society try to exploit the rage and jealousy
produced from inequality to institute a political order that suits their own narrow ends.
As he wrote, the rich man, thus urged by necessity, conceived at length the profoundest
plan that ever entered into the mind of man.
This was to employ in his favor the forces of those who attacked him to make allies
of his adversaries, to inspire them with different maxims, and to give them other institutions
as favorable to himself as the law of nature was unfavorable.
Rousseau was the first romantic, but he spawned many others who opposed the spread of industrial
capitalism on similar grounds.
In the United States, for example, Thomas Jefferson bitterly opposed the spread of industry.
He believed strongly that America should remain an agrarian society, populated by small landowners.
In fact, he stated in the notes on Virginia that those who labor in the earth are the
chosen people of God.
Now, he didn't go so far as Rousseau is to believe that civilization itself was worthless.
But he did go so far as to suggest that the United States should simply import all of
its manufactured goods from Europe.
For Jefferson, manufacturing meant cities.
And when Jefferson was an ambassador in London, he saw the squalor and poverty of London and
blamed it on the burgeoning industrial revolution.
Ironically, it should be noted that his president, Jefferson's policies, particularly the Louisiana
purchase, wound up guaranteeing that his vision would never come to fruition.
Another example of an American romantic was Henry David Thoreau.
He was the exemplar of the American School of Transcendentalists, a group of writers
and thinkers who praised the virtues of self-sufficiency.
Thoreau's most famous work was Walden, in which he wrote approvingly of his time spent
in relative self-seclusion, ostensibly away from civilized society.
In Europe, romanticism was as much an aesthetic movement as a philosophical and political
one.
So poets like Keats or Shelley were prominent romantics, and it did play something of a role
in the revolutions of 1848 and the nationalist movements that followed.
Thomas Carlisle probably represented the most overtly political expression of romanticism.
Carlisle bitterly opposed the industrial revolution and in fact was the person who dubbed the study
of economics to be the dismal science.
He also should be pointed out rejected democracy in favor of the heroic leader who would somehow
emerge from the aristocratic class.
Despite his opposition in those of other romantics, however, they had little to no effect on the
spread of industrial capitalism, beyond a powerful and persistent appeal to nostalgia.
In some ways, the Unabomber's manifesto perversely updated this romantic objection to capitalism
to the modern era.
Now let's talk about the reactionaries.
Now to understand this group, one again has to appreciate the revolutionary features of
capitalism.
Innovation leads to new ideas and exciting frontiers, but innovation inevitably transforms
society.
The best example of this has been the rise of digital entertainment and social media.
The ability to use digital cameras to download music or films or television shows, or even
this lecture, has made entertainment much more accessible.
The ability to use email, social media, and other web 2.0 technologies to stay in touch
with one's network seems to be pretty great.
However, the development of digital entertainment has also led to some destruction.
As we've talked about before, upstate New York was deeply affected by the shrinking of
Kodak.
As demand for print photography has declined, people who worked for those firms were laid
off.
So in the 1980s, for example, Kodak employed 62,000 people in the city of Rochester.
By 2012, it employed fewer than 7,000 workers.
Now Rochester as a whole has done actually pretty well, but nevertheless, innovation
leads to creative destruction, which leads to a lot of churn.
Furthermore, the development of the internet has caused entire retail chains to go out
of existence.
In the 1990s, tower records and blockbuster video were thriving chains.
By the 2000s, however, both went bankrupt because their business model was essentially
outdated by newer firms like Netflix.
As we've discussed before, this kind of innovation isn't just about new products.
It's about the best way for society to take advantage of such innovations.
This means a lot of societal churn, the making and unmaking of traditions.
A century before Schumpeter talked about creative destruction, some other economists
also appreciated the revolutionary effects of the capitalist engine.
They appreciated more than any thinker before, and perhaps more than any thinker since, the
ways in which the capitalist system completely transformed society on a regular basis.
They wrote that capitalism cannot exist without constantly revolutionizing the instruments
of production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them, the whole relations
of society.
The effect of this constant pace of innovation and transformation on the rest of human society
was incredibly powerful.
They concluded that all fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and
venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away.
All new form ones become antiquated before they can ossify.
All that is solid melts into air, and all that is holy is profaned.
Who were these thinkers?
Who said this?
It was Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in the Communist Manifesto.
Now we'll get to Marx and Engels' objection to capitalism in a minute or two, but they
were absolutely right to observe that capitalism is anathema to cultural conservatives.
Rapid and rising levels of prosperity inevitably rearrange social relationships far more quickly
than conservatives tend to be comfortable with.
Indeed, by definition, conservatives want to conserve existing societal traditions.
Those that feel particularly fervently about this are often referred to as reactionaries.
Now it should be noted that when it comes to capitalism, reactionaries exist across
the political spectrum.
On the right, thinkers stretching back to Edmund Burke have been resistant to the kinds
of change that capitalism generates.
Because conservatives are wary about rapid societal change, they are naturally concerned
that capitalism threatens to upend, revamp, or simply destroy long-standing traditions.
So in this sense, conservatives actually believe that prosperity in and of itself is sometimes
a bad thing.
On the left, sociologists like Karl Polanyi have deplored the effects of capitalism on
other aspects of society.
In his classic work, The Great Transformation, Polanyi issued a dire warning of the effects
of a society dominated by the market mechanism.
He wrote, to allow the market mechanism to be the sole director of the fate of human
beings would result in the demolition of society.
Polanyi, like Marx, believed that the market mechanism was so powerful that it would subordinate
the rest of society's institutions if it was allowed to proceed in an unregulated
manner.
Nor are reactionaries limited to Western civilization.
Indeed, in many ways, they are more plentiful outside of the West.
Take for example Mohandas K. Gandhi, the father of Indian independence and the non-violence
movement that brought it about.
Gandhi staunchly opposed modern capitalism.
For example, he wrote in his book Hind Swaraj that Western civilization is, and I quote,
irreligion, and it has taken such a hold of the people in Europe that those who are in
it appear to be half mad.
They lack real physical strength or courage.
They keep up their energy by intoxication.
They can hardly be happy in solitude.
Gandhi believed that the long-lasting endurance of Indian civilization was proof of its superiority.
And in some ways, in stating this, he was echoing the arguments that Burke made centuries
earlier about English civilization.
So in essence, reactionaries do not like the way in which capitalism, to function properly,
changes societies, particularly the mores and traditions that have endured for centuries.
They want to preserve political and social traditions because they presume that any traditions
that have managed to endure must have some redeeming value.
As William F. Buckley put it once, a conservative is someone who stands a thwart history, yelling
stop at a time when no one is inclined to do so.
Although modern American conservatives are far friendlier to capitalism, so-called paleoconservatives
are more suspicious, as are traditional European conservatives.
These are the groups that embody the reactionary tradition.
Alright, let's move on to the revolutionaries.
Now even if capitalism leads to ever-increasing levels of prosperity, there are those who
argue that the distribution of that affluence is badly skewed.
Now as we've talked about in previous lectures, there is no denying that the increase in mass
prosperity has also come with increased levels of inequality.
And this brings us back to Karl Marx.
Marx's critique of capitalism wasn't that it was unproductive.
On the contrary, as he and Frederick Engels acknowledged in the Communist Manifesto, they
said capitalism, during its rule of scarce 100 years, has created more massive and more
colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together.
Now Marx actually recognized at the time the boom in mass prosperity that was starting.
Instead, Marx's argument was that capitalism accomplished this through the brutal exploitation
of the working class.
He argued that the only possible way that capitalists could earn a profit was by squeezing
out as much surplus value from the workers as possible.
Marx believed that the forces of capitalism would lead to more and more individuals being
forced out of the bourgeoisie and into the class of exploited workers, which they called
the proletariat.
Eventually, the distribution of wealth would become so uneven that workers would rise up
and seize control over the means of production.
And then, as Marx and Engels put it, there would be a society in which the operating
foundational principle would be, from each according to their ability to each according
to their needs.
Marx thought that the end of capitalism was inexorable, simply the natural outcome of
history.
By the time it ended, Marx believed that capitalism would become so productive and so automated
that scarcity itself would not be a significant problem.
In other words, Marx believed that in a socialist utopia, the organization of production wouldn't
matter because the factories would be so productive that some dulled incentives wouldn't be all
that significant.
Obviously, things have not worked out that way so far.
So, we have the romantics, the reactionaries, and the revolutionaries.
Just how serious should we take these different strands of objections to the capitalist engine?
On the one hand, all of these movements that I just described were much more powerful in
either the 19th or 20th century than they are now.
Indeed, there's not a lot of evidence that any of the ideological objections to capitalism
that I've described have really attracted a lot of current followers.
So, for example, the romantic appeals to the past certainly have some nostalgic appeal
from limited moments of time.
That said, as we've talked about before, survey after survey shows that mass publics
across the globe are fundamentally content with both capitalism as an economic system
and globalization as a natural extension of capitalism.
Furthermore, in the case of romantics, at least individual romantics actually have an
exit option.
They can choose to live such a life without necessarily disadvantaging anyone else.
So, as a result, it's unlikely they will pursue strategies to thwart prosperity for anyone
else.
In other words, the unabomber is an exception.
The reactionary appeal can be more powerful, particularly during times of turmoil.
That said, the creative destruction of innovation by and large benefits far more people than
it hurts.
It is very difficult for reactionary appeals to resonate beyond a narrow minority.
And as for revolutionaries, certainly the Occupy Wall Street movement that sprang up
in the fall of 2011 suggests that there is at least some residual resentment against
how capitalism currently functions.
But that said, the collapse of the Soviet Union was truly the death knell for Marxism
as a mass political movement.
The only places Marxists currently stay in power is through brutal coercive force.
Furthermore, it should be pointed out that critiques and discontentment with capitalism
are not the same thing as wanting to change it the way revolutionaries like Marx or Engels
intended.
It's perfectly fine to criticize the capitalist system.
But the problem is that unless these critics have a genuine viable alternative, they're
not going to attract a lot of followers.
It should also be noted that these groups do not agree much with each other all at all.
Revolutionaries, for example, by definition, want to change the system pretty radically.
Reactionaries, on the other hand, want to preserve traditions.
They would likely resist the social change advocated by revolutionaries.
Similarly, romantics don't believe in interdependence, community or, for that matter, discipline
all that much.
These are the hallmarks of both the revolutionary and the reactionary movements.
This leaves little incentive for these groups to cooperate with each other in order to form
a larger movement.
Now on the other hand, the world has changed.
Even if the groups politically opposed to capitalism are small, they are pretty devoted.
And unfortunately, the barriers to destruction are lower than they used to be.
Indeed, both the Unabomber and the September 11 terrorist attacks have demonstrated that
small groups can wreak large changes on the world.
Indeed, one could argue that 9-11 represented the most successful anti-capitalist action
ever conducted against the United States.
Why do I say that?
Well, think about it.
Cross-border trade was shut down completely for 10 days following the September 11 attacks.
In response to the attacks, the United States enacted a series of airport and border control
measures that dramatically raised the cost of transportation inside the United States
and the cost of migrating to the United States.
So these ideological challenges matter less because of their innate popular appeal and
more because of the potential that these groups have for pursuing radical action.
That's important.
But without mass numbers of followers, these ideological challenges to capitalism probably
don't represent a serious impediment to expanding global prosperity.
So does that mean there are no powerful ideological challenges to global prosperity?
Well, actually, there is one final group to consider.
And this is a sort of perverse argument.
It's that the staunchest defenders of capitalism might also wind up being its greatest ideological
threat.
Here I'm talking about the radical capitalists.
Now recall from previous lectures that for prosperity to be attained, some public goods
provision was necessary.
This means there is some role for governments to play in national economies.
Now, of course, government is not perfect.
As we've talked about before, there are public bads as well as public goods.
Think of it, if you will, like the story of Goldilocks.
You want a government that does the things that only government can properly do in an
economy, but not much more than that.
Too little government and there's a problem.
Too much government and there's also a big problem.
The problem is, is that there are genuine disagreements on the exact proper role and
size of the state.
If the state directs too large a share of economic activities or controls them through
regulation, entrepreneurship can be redirected from productive activities to unproductive
or rent seeking activities.
And that is a genuine concern, as we've talked about a lot in these lectures.
The most radical defenders of laissez-faire capitalism fear that any encroachment by
the state on the market is the beginning of the end.
The most sophisticated and well articulated version of this argument was Friedrich von
Hayek's The Road to Serfdom.
Now in that book, Hayek argued that an attraction to central planning by the government in one
sector or one sphere would inevitably lead to the encroachment by the state into other
spheres of life.
Simply put, because an economy is so complex because it requires so much local knowledge,
it is extremely difficult for the government to limit its interventions without causing
unforeseen complications.
And it's in fact dealing with those unforeseen complications that wind up requiring more
state interventions.
Eventually, the slippery slope, and the radicals that I'm talking about like to use the phrase
slippery slope a lot, of state interference and over-regulation leads to an overpowering
oppressive state that stifles prosperity.
So for Hayek, the social democratic parties in Western Europe were little removed from
the economic philosophy of either the fascists or the communists.
Now Hayek at least allowed that the state did have some minimal role to play in society.
The writer Ein Rand was even more militant in her belief that capitalism would rot from
within if the state played any appreciable role.
In her novel Atlas Shrugged, Rand warned that those who lost out from innovations would
inevitably band together with the state or use the state to stop the spread of progress.
To Rand, anyone who voiced a favorable word for government regulation or government interference
was a looter or a moocher off of the true heroes of capitalism, the entrepreneurs.
The novel paints a harrowing picture of a society that becomes more and more addicted to the
state, and the entrepreneurs simply decide to go on strike, thereby bringing the economy
to its knees.
Now adherents of both Hayek and Rand have become more influential and more powerful
in the decades since their writing.
For example, the tarp bailout of big banks in the fall of 2008 looked very eerily familiar
to readers of Atlas Shrugged.
It looked like the government bailing out those cronies that were close to the government,
the financiers.
Furthermore, several high-ranking Republicans, like Paul Ryan, the 2012 GOP vice presidential
nominee, have talked at length about Rand's influence on their own political thought.
Hayek and Rand's concerns about the growing state and the way in which it encourages unproductive
entrepreneurship are well founded.
Indeed, it is probably impossible for corruption not to exist on some level when there is a
government program.
That said, radical anti-government zeal can be bad for prosperity for two reasons.
First, markets can function more smoothly with the effective provision of public goods.
Opposition to all government functions could therefore make it harder for societies to
prosper.
Capitalism is a great engine for prosperity, but it's also very volatile, and this leads
to the second problem with radical capitalists.
Because capitalism is prone to crisis, as we know from our discussion of financial bubbles,
it's endemic to the system.
These crises were also far worse in the 19th and 20th centuries, when governments were
much smaller.
It's when economic crisis takes hold that truly radical ideas, like fascism or communism,
can take root in societies.
Now an approach that successfully argues that any state role is inherently evil will likely
trigger more and bigger economic crises, and thereby empower even more radical ideas to
challenge capitalism.
So although the radicals might think they are the best friends for prosperity, their
logic, taken to extremes, could pave the way for capitalism's undoing.
In declaring that the perfect is to be the enemy of the good, radical defenders of capitalism
threaten the very system they claim to embrace with such fervor.
So in conclusion, even when prosperity is rising for all, there will be those with ideological
or aesthetic objections.
By and large, those radically opposed to capitalism are less dangerous to prosperity
than those who are so fervent in their support of the free market that they threaten to subvert
the very system that they claim to love.
