We are coming to the end of our journey together, discussing the foundations of economic prosperity.
Along the way, we have explored topics as diverse as 16th century innovations in China,
17th century beauty standards, 18th century environmental changes on Easter Island,
19th century political institutions in Great Britain, the 20th century economic history of Botswana,
and construction in the 21st century of the iPhone.
Three large questions in particular have structured this course.
First, how do individuals achieve economic prosperity?
Second, how do nations achieve economic prosperity?
And third, how can the entire globe achieve economic prosperity?
So let's take a quick look at some of the key conclusions we've reached as we've tried to answer these questions.
First, how do individuals achieve prosperity?
The answer depends on where you live.
In the developed world right now, it's pretty simple.
There are three answers to this, education, education, and education.
Globalization and technological innovation have dramatically increased the returns to human capital formation,
a fancy phrase for education.
Now entrepreneurship is another pathway.
It is riskier, but can yield greater rewards, like the hare racing the tortoise.
Education is the tortoise here, slower, but steadier, and with much less downside risk.
In the developing world, it's a bit more complicated.
Weak institutions and public goods provision lead to some alternative strategies beyond education,
including migrating to the developed world.
Second, how do nations earn prosperity?
The answer here again is fairly straightforward,
even if the political incentives to implement the correct policies are often lacking.
First, you want to see reasonably strong protection of property rights.
You want to see policies that promote and reward productive innovative activities,
rather than things like rent seeking, corruption, or outright destruction.
You want to see policies that provide opportunities and support for education.
You want to see strong political institutions that provide incentives for political leaders
to continue to provide capable public goods.
And finally, how can global prosperity be achieved?
Again, the big takeaways are relatively clear.
You want to see a promotion and a fostering of economic interdependence
through greater levels of globalization.
The logic here being there are gains for all,
as well as fewer wars translating into greater prosperity.
You also want to see the provision of more global public goods,
the ability to intervene during a crisis,
and provide for relatively open access to markets.
Indeed, the opportunity to access the global marketplace
is one of the key attributes that you want to see global public goods in terms of provision.
Now, what I just said are general policy principles,
and they're incomplete ones of that.
I didn't say how education should be funded, for example.
As I stressed at the beginning of these lectures,
we do not have all the answers about how to promote prosperity.
Our tour of development economics should have convinced you of that fact.
Still, for those of us concerned about the present and future,
the guidelines I just elaborated are pretty sound.
We've also addressed some of the current challenges to economic prosperity,
and as you'll recall, there are quite a few of them.
There are environmental challenges, things like climate change,
and other environmental effects that have the potential to destroy the affluence
of large swaths of the globe.
There's economic stagnation.
Financial crises and technological stagnation
can cause the engine of prosperity to simply stall out.
There's war, violent conflict between great powers
emissarates and impoverishes countries,
not just those participating in war, but innocent bystanders as well.
Things like political malfeasance.
National governments, whether weakened by corruption or blinded by ideology,
can sabotage their own economies.
And crucially, mismatched incentives.
If national or global institutions are misaligned,
then individuals might take actions that enrich themselves,
but impoverish others.
There are obvious challenges to the current levels of economic prosperity.
So we've also addressed whether prosperity is sustainable over time.
We know for a fact that it's not guaranteed.
Look up Argentina, or North Korea, or even Easter Island.
It is possible, however, to sustain prosperity.
Most of the challenges to prosperity that we've talked about in this course
can be addressed with reasonably competent behavior and policymaking.
And so there's a decent chance that the onward march of prosperity will continue.
Still, even if prosperity continues to expand,
we also know two big things.
The first is, is that a lot of the drivers for global prosperity right now,
such as economic globalization and rewarding technological innovation,
are also responsible for increases in income inequality.
The second thing that we know is prosperity is still a partial phenomenon.
There remain large segments of the global population
that live in truly backbreaking poverty.
According to the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization,
more than 925 million people in the world went to bed hungry in the year 2010.
A far greater number live in conditions that cannot be described in any way
whatsoever as prosperous.
Ironically, thanks to technological innovations that have increased prosperity
for a lot of people, we can now see the appalling nature of this poverty
on our television sets and on the Internet
in ways that were simply impossible a century ago.
These images of poverty, starvation, and immiseration are so heartbreaking
that they almost compel us into action.
It is impossible not to wonder what can be done.
This question brings us to the heart of this last lecture.
The persistence of poverty raises some vexing ethical and moral questions.
What, if anything, do the globally prosperous owe the global poor?
Does enjoying prosperity come with a moral obligation
to do what we can to lift others out of poverty?
These are the main issues we're going to think about to close off our discussion
of the foundations of economic prosperity.
Now this is a difficult question, one that as you will see will resist easy
answers, but one that any person living in
affluent should wrestle with at some point in their life.
To tackle these issues, we need to go beyond the principles of political
economy that we've talked about for most of these lectures.
We're now entering the world of ethics and political philosophy.
To help you out, I'm going to provide you with three very different ethical
worldviews on this issue. Libertarian, contractarian,
and cosmopolitan approaches. Now this is not an exhaustive list
of ethical points of view, but I've picked these three because they offer very
contrasting answers to our questions.
Let's start with libertarianism. Now libertarians share a few
axiomatic principles, things they take as given.
First, they assume that the aim of any individual
is to maximize his or her own happiness and not the happiness of others.
According to libertarians, it is simply impossible to discern the preferences
of others. I can't know for sure what you want, for example.
On the other hand, it's rather easy to discern one's own individual preferences.
Most of the time, I'm quite sure what I want.
Therefore, each individual should concentrate on what he or she knows
best, their own individual wants and desires. Now according to libertarians,
to ensure that individuals can achieve their greatest level of happiness and
prosperity, their right to property must be strongly
enforced. There are both moral and utilitarian
arguments for this position. The moral argument is that it is an
immoral act to confiscate property not owned by you,
to give to someone else. What gives anyone the right to take what you have
owned, what you have built without your consent.
So the utilitarian dimension to this argument is also clear.
See, any effort to tax for redistributive purposes
creates an incentive for further lobbying to take from the prosperous.
If you know that the state can provide you with benefits that you haven't paid
for, your natural instinct is to ask the government
for even more benefits. Why would you stop with aid for food
or health care needs? Why wouldn't you ask for subsidies for purchasing a
smartphone or a plasma television or a car?
If allowed to go unchecked, eventually the redistribution would be so great
that the incentive for the prosperous to work at all becomes blunted.
For example, why should I work hard to prepare great lectures?
If I know that more than half of anything that I earn from that effort
will be taken away from me.
Now this is at the heart of Ayn Rand's argument in Atlas Shrugged,
in which she depicted the long-term debilitating effects of the state
trying to redistribute wealth within a society.
Rand believed that her logic applied with equal force
to the global distribution of prosperity.
Libertarians therefore believe that any economic redistribution
must be voluntary without violating anyone's property rights.
So for example, I might want to give my money to charity
because it makes me feel better because I like to help others.
But according to libertarians, I have no obligation
to do so.
Now some thinkers like Ayn Rand go further and argue actually that altruism
itself is actually immoral. Rand created a school of thought called
Objectivism, which starts from the premise that reason and
rationality are the most important qualities of humans.
It is only by applying reason that any individual can achieve prosperity.
Now empathy, sympathy, and altruism, these come from emotions
and lead one to be more amenable to collectivism according to Rand.
The images of starting children, for example, are designed to make you think
that you are part of a group rather than an individual.
Rand believed group identification compromised the functioning of pure
reason.
According to Rand then, altruism therefore weakens our capacity to excel
as individuals and innovators and renders us susceptible
to the collectivist instinct to redistribution,
what Rand described as the sanction of the victim.
If prosperous individuals feel some sense of guilt
or obligation to help others, those emotions will be exploited by others
and their drive to innovate and succeed will ostensibly be stifled.
Rand would conclude that not helping others is actually the best thing you
can do for the poor for a few reasons. First, unleashing innovation benefits a
lot of people. And second, Rand would argue that selfishness
makes the poor realize that the only help coming to them
is self-help and that they will react appropriately
to these incentives.
Now a lot of other libertarians like, say, Friedrich von Hayek
or Ludwig von Mises or Robert Nozick do not agree with Rand
that altruism is immoral. And it should be pointed out that even Rand
would support, let's say, an anti-poverty idea like kiva.org,
a website that allows individuals to directly loan money
to entrepreneurs in the developing world. For libertarians,
the best way to help the less prosperous is through promoting private sector
activity and thereby helping them help themselves.
Libertarians all agree, however, that there is no ethical obligation
for the prosperous to aid the less prosperous.
Now the biggest flaw in the libertarian perspective
is that sometimes self-help is not enough. Steve Jobs, for example, would not
have been the Steve Jobs if he had been born and grew up
in North Korea or Bolivia or Mali. It would have been difficult for him to
learn about computers or get the necessary education to realize his
dreams. He benefited from being adopted by a
loving family and attending excellent schools.
He lived in an already prosperous country with strong intellectual property
rights and well-developed venture capital markets.
Put him in North Korea, however, and he would have been just another cog
in the totalitarian machine.
Now let's turn from a libertarian worldview to our second ethical lens,
which is called contractarianism. Contractarians start off with two basic
assumptions. The first is that all people are of equal
worth and value and therefore deserve to be treated with respect and dignity.
The second assumption is that we should think of society as a social contract
that binds together individuals. Political theorists like Hobbes,
Locke, and Rousseau traditionally thought of the origins of government
as an imagined social contract in which individuals ceded certain rights to the
state in return for certain benefits.
But what determines the just distribution of benefits
among the parties who have entered into this social contract?
Is it fair for a society to have a few very rich people
while others live in poverty? The political philosopher John Rawls has
argued that we can only think about this properly
by removing ourselves from our current economic understanding
and instead placing ourselves behind a veil of ignorance.
Now to understand what we mean by a veil of ignorance, consider the following
scenario. Let's say that today we held a global
lottery to determine what everyone's income would be over the next decade.
Now if this lottery was truly random, what would you want the possible
distribution of outcomes to be?
According to Rawls, you wouldn't want a lot of truly bad outcomes.
Indeed, you would want to make sure that your worst case scenario
still provided a pretty decent standard of living.
So that worst case scenario doesn't seem that bad now.
It's a way to hedge against downside risk. By using this veil of ignorance,
Rawls concludes that any redistribution of resources
should improve the position of the worst off, the least advantaged member of
society. Contractarians want to remind people
that where you are born is a matter of luck,
and that you should take actions to minimize the suffering
of those whose place of birth happens to be unlucky.
Now it should be stressed this does not necessarily mean a strict redistribution
of wealth. For example, we know that entrepreneurship
and innovation is an important engine for national prosperity.
If permitting entrepreneurs to earn more income
also raises the level of prosperity for the worst off,
then Rawls and other contractarians would completely approve of it.
Indeed, they actually call this the difference principle.
So Rawls would be perfectly fine with rewarding someone
who invents a new lifesaving drug many times over
than the least advantaged member of society because everyone would benefit
so much from that invention. Beyond those exceptions however,
Rawls would approve of policies like progressive taxation
that redistribute income from the most well off
to the least well off. So the key question for contractarians is
what does the global social contract look like?
In his book The Law of Peoples, Rawls made it clear that he did not believe in a
robust global social contract. The obligation to help the least well
off is largely confined to domestic societies,
to national societies. Now why did Rawls think this?
In essence, people tend to identify with a nation
more strongly than with an entire globe. National identity
is far stronger than cosmopolitan identity. Rawls and other contractarians
argue that most people believe they are part of a social contract
between themselves and their national government,
not with either foreign jurisdictions or with any kind of global governance or
multilateral international institution.
Now there is a historical lineage to this argument.
In his book Theory of Moral Sentiments, Adam Smith argued that individuals are
predisposed not to care about those living on distant shores.
In one of the most famous passages from that book,
he offers up the example of how a man of humanity in Europe
would react to a truly apocalyptic earthquake in China.
Smith concluded that because those people were so far removed from the
European man of humanity, he concluded, and I quote,
the most frivolous disaster which could befall himself would occasion a more
real disturbance. If he was to lose his little finger tomorrow,
he would not sleep tonight, but provided he never saw them,
he would snore with the most profound security over the ruin of a hundred
millions of his brethren.
Now there is also an economic logic to this argument.
As the North American Free Trade Agreement was being negotiated,
Canadian economist John McCallum compared the trade between Canadian
provinces with each other and with American states.
Now despite the prior existence of a free trade agreement between the United
States and Canada, and despite a common language and culture,
and despite peaceful relations between the two countries for more than a
century, he found that controlling for other
factors, trade between Canadian provinces,
was 22 times greater than with American states.
In other words, even in a world of globalization,
national borders matter a lot.
Does this mean that contractarians agree with libertarians,
that prosperous nations have no obligation to help those outside their
borders? Not exactly. Rawls argues that there is
a limited duty to assist the less prosperous across the globe.
Since the key to prosperity is having a well-ordered society
with the proper economic and political institutions,
traditional contractarians emphasize the duty of prosperous societies
to help what Rawls calls burden societies
to become self-sustaining. Now this can be done through a variety of ways.
Setting an example of good governance in one's own country
for developing countries to follow is certainly one obvious and certainly
cost-free possibility. Supporting cross-border
interventions to prevent famine or state collapse might be another
example. So if you're on the brink in a society
on the brink of collapse, Rawls would argue that others do in
fact have an obligation to intervene to assist you.
Now one flaw in the contractarian approach
is that it presumes we can know in advance just how much we can redistribute
within a nation or intervene across borders
without blunting incentives. If you are poor
but receive lots of benefits from the state, why should you work at all?
Similarly, how can we know in advance which innovations deserve rewards?
And perhaps most important, how can we be sure that the national agencies and
governments in charge of redistribution will do it
well? How do we know that it won't promote instead
things like rent-seeking or unproductive activity?
Okay, we started with a question. Do the prosperous people of the world
have a moral duty to assist the deeply impoverished people of the world?
And we've examined how two different schools of thought, the libertarian and
the contractarian approaches, answer that question.
Now let's turn to a third perspective, cosmopolitanism.
Cosmopolitanism basically argues that the prosperous
owe in fact a great deal to the rest of the world.
Now cosmopolans acknowledge that states and national governments and national
borders matter, but they argue that political
jurisdictions are not the only things that matter, largely thanks to
globalization.
Some contractarians have now become cosmopolitans
because they argue that globalization has eroded the significance of national
jurisdictions. That Canada-US study that I mentioned
earlier, for example, about trade between states and provinces,
was conducted back in the 1980s. Twenty-first century studies
of that same issue indicate an increasing amount of economic integration
between the two countries.
Newer contractarians, like Princeton political theorist
Charles Bytes, believe that the processes of globalization
have moved to the point where obligations can no longer be limited
to intergovernmental interactions.
And there are four principles that guide the cosmopolitan worldview.
The first is that globalization has badly eroded the argument
that individual welfare is primarily a function of the national government.
Closer interdependence means that principles of distributive justice
that used to apply only to the national level
should now apply at the global level.
Second, cosmopolitans agree with contractarians that all people
are of equal worth. So cosmopolitans agree with John Rawls
that we should think about the world as if we cannot predict who will be born
and where and in what circumstances.
Cosmopolitans, however, believe that Rawls's veil of ignorance
should apply at the global level and not just within nations.
This matters because, as we know from previous lectures,
where one is born has a profound impact on one's ability to prosper.
Cosmopolitans also believe that in developing countries
the road to prosperity is much harder than in the developed world.
Remember the plight of the North Korean equivalent of Steve Jobs.
Third, cosmopolitans hold that everyone should acknowledge the equal worth of all.
As Peter Singer has argued, if it is in our power to prevent something bad from
happening without thereby sacrificing anything of
comparative moral importance, we ought morally to do it.
Mitigating famine and poverty around the world is therefore not a charitable act
but rather a moral duty. And so the prosperous have an obligation
to help the global poor up to a minimum living standard.
And finally, the fourth principle. Cosmopolitans assert that because of
all people are of equal worth, those who are significantly impacted by
public decisions should have an equal opportunity,
either directly or indirectly, to influence and shape those decisions.
This means that there has to be some kind of global democratic deliberation
to determine who gets what.
Now this matters particularly if you believe, as some cosmopolitans do,
that those who are prosperous are responsible for creating so much of the
world's poverty. Now there is a compelling argument
that past exploitation explains the gap between the prosperous and the poor.
Yale University philosopher Thomas Poggi, for example,
argues that global poverty is the direct result of
unjust historical practices of the industrialized western world.
Things like the colonization and subjugation of indigenous peoples,
the spreading of war and disease, interfering with local
policies to foment ethnic conflict.
Now economists agree that these policies had long-lasting effects in places
like Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. But as we know from our previous
lectures, Poggi might be exaggerating these effects.
So because we live in an interconnected world and because some countries have
been made worse off by prior eras of conquest,
cosmopolitans often advocate for global taxes
to redistribute some resources towards the global poor.
Now Poggi has proposed global resource and global consumption taxes,
the proceeds of which could go to international organizations,
NGOs, or developing country governments to aid the poor.
Others have proposed taxes on activities that cross borders.
Let's say air transport between two countries, that's one example.
Another example would be a tax on cross-border financial transactions.
This is also proposed or called a Tobin tax after the Nobel Prize winning
economist James Tobin, who first came up with the idea.
Now the biggest flaw in the cosmopolitan perspective
is the decision-making process for redistribution.
There is no guarantee that a consensus would emerge
on how much to help whom and when. We know from previous lectures that
countries have fierce disagreements about the nature and scale of any
redistribution. There's no reason to believe that there
would be much common ground here.
Furthermore, as we know from previous lectures,
giving more money to the United Nations, International Monetary Fund,
World Bank, or national governments will not guarantee
any increase in prosperity unless the political and economic institutions
are just right, and changing those institutions
is fantastically difficult.
Now if we step back for a second, these three perspectives differ
based on three important criteria. The first is whether you think your
starting point in discussing this should be individuals or
groups. If it's individuals, then either the
libertarian or cosmopolitan perspectives will appeal to you.
The second criteria is whether you think that the prosperous got to where they
are by their own efforts, or whether the endowments of the past
and the structures of the recent past help people get to where they are today.
If you believe the latter, then either contractarianism or cosmopolitanism
should resonate with you.
Finally, if you think that international interventions are high-risk ventures
with lots of drawbacks, then either the libertarian
or contractarian approaches will be attractive. If not,
then the cosmopolitan approach has more allure.
Now that we've reviewed the three different perspectives,
this is probably the time when you were expecting me to provide you with the
answers to the ethical conundrums this lecture has offered.
Well, you know what? I'm not going to do that. You've heard me discuss some of the
facts and evidence about the foundations of economic prosperity,
so I'm going to encourage you to put what you've learned in this course to work.
What do you think are the strengths and weaknesses of each of these ethical
worldviews?
Without answering my own question, I will say this. There is a very good reason
such disparate sets of ethical arguments have emerged over the years.
There are no easy answers, and anyone who tells you otherwise
likely needs a dose of that humility that I mentioned in the first lecture.
As I suggested in the beginning, if you have the resources to purchase this
course and you're listening to me right now, you are likely to be one of the
prosperous. You will need to decide for yourself
if you have any obligations to the less prosperous
and if so, what they are. I wish you the best of luck
and a very prosperous intellectual journey.
