Why is it so hard to make robots do stuff?
And I'm not talking about cutely the robots that, you know, walk around and do simple
things.
But I'm talking about really complex systems.
And these systems are composed by a lot of subsystems that need to work together.
And well, they need to work together well.
Since the problem is very complex, let's try to break it down.
We can assume that robots are given a set of simple skills, such as, you know, perceiving
where an object is through a perception system, or navigating from a point A to a point B
while avoiding obstacles, or some other manipulation skills, like how to pick an object or how
to place it.
Now, how can we combine these skills such that a robot can perform something meaningful
in the environment?
My name is Corrado, and I am a PhD student at the Cognitive Robotics Department.
And I'm also part of AIRLAB, the AI for Retail Lab.
My job is to research on how we can combine the low-level skills of such complex systems
in order to reliably perform tasks in environments that are designed not for robots, but for
humans, like supermarkets.
So let's say that the task of the robot is to stock an empty shelf.
Well, how should the robot plan and execute its actions to achieve this goal?
And this might sound simple for a human, but I guarantee you that it's very hard in robotics.
And you should know that it's very easy for robots to fail in environments like this one,
do it for instance, do errors in the perception system, or just do unpredictable events that
might happen.
What I'm trying to define in my work is a control architecture to recover from these
kind of situations and cope with them.
So I'm trying to define a robot that has an adaptive behavior, and I'm doing so based
on active inference.
A newer scientific theory which tries to explain how the decision making happens in
our brains.
At the current state of my research, we can perform tasks that have some variability,
but I think we're still far from the level of autonomy that we all dream of.
However, we're working hard to get there in a responsible and a safe way, so that we
can help our society to advance.
And well who knows, maybe one day one of these guys will actually be part of our daily life.
