Welcome back to Carnades.org. Today, we are going to be continuing with our series on
Bayesian epistemology. In this video, we're just going to be doing a quick distinction
between subjective and objective Bayesianism to variations of Bayesian epistemology. So
the difference is going to be, imagine that you have an urn that's filled with only cubes
and spheres. You have no other information about the urn. What initial degree of belief
should you assign to, I will pull a sphere, and what initial degree of belief should you
assign to, I will pull a cube, assuming that you're pulling these things randomly out of
the urn. Well, subjective and objective Bayesianism is going to be different on this point. The
Bayseans that subscribe to subjective Bayesianism are going to say that there are no constraints
or very few constraints on the prior probabilities that can be assigned to either statement.
Some might simply say that we can't be certain that we can't assign the prior probabilities
of one or zero to the statements. But for the most part, they will allow any degree of
belief to be rational. So remember, subjective Bayesianism allows for most any degree of belief
to be rational. Objective Bayseans, on the other hand, will claim that we must assign
a 0.5 degree of belief to each statement. With no information, we must assign probabilities
that are invariant if the labels were changed. Or in other words, since we have no more information
about spheres than cubes in the urn, we must be assigned the same degrees of belief. Or
in other words, because we could switch the words sphere and cube in our information and
our information wouldn't change, we need to assign them the same degree of belief. Objective
Bayseans don't claim that there are prior degrees of belief that must be rationally
assigned in all situations. They simply claim that there are certain situations which require
degrees of belief to be assigned, even without specific information. Now, this is important
because the final objection, and to me, the most convincing objection to Bayesian epistemology
is going to be the problem of the priors. It's going to be the last objection we look
at, and it's going to deal with the assigning of prior probabilities. So, keep this distinction
in mind. That was variations of Bayesianism. The last thing we're going to be looking at
in our series on Bayesian epistemology is objections to Bayesian epistemology. It's not going to
be one video. It's going to be a whole series because there's a lot of them. Watch this
video and more here at Carnades.org. Check out the SEP for more information on Bayesian
epistemology, and stay skeptical, everybody.
