Welcome to the Future of Life Institute podcast. My name is
Gus Docker and I'm here with Johannes Aquar. Johannes is a
researcher at Founders Pledge where he leads the Climate
Change Fund. Johannes, welcome to the podcast.
Thanks so much for having me, Gus. Great to be here. I'm a big
fan of the Future of Life Institute. And yeah, happy to
talk all things climate today.
Perhaps we could start with your role at Founders Pledge. What
is it that you do there? How do you how do you see your role?
Yeah, so I think the way I usually describe it is like my
goal and the goal of my team is kind of to like find and fund
kind of the highest impact opportunities and climate and
those are like philanthropic opportunities, right? So like
things where we can wear a million dollars or something in
the quarter of magnitude can kind of make a difference by
supporting initiatives that are like extremely promising. And
yeah, as you mentioned, kind of in the beginning, right? So
there's kind of the climate fund, which kind of puts this
to life, the Founders Pledge Climate Fund, but also we're
advising kind of, I know for individuals kind of beyond that
and kind of trying to, yeah, trying to identify using
research and using privatization research, kind of to
identify where where are the biggest blind spot, what are the
blind spot generating mechanisms, if you will, and kind of
what does that mean for what you should fund on a margin as an
ex philanthropist?
Yeah, and I think that word is the key. So thinking on the
margin here, I see your job, or I think that that your job is
about thinking about the marginal dollar, where is that
dollar best spent? Would that be the correct frame?
Yes, the next dollar or the next million dollar. And I think
that's like really, really crucial frame, because I think a
lot of the things that I am going to be saying is going to be
like, controversial, and might be wrong. If like, if one would
interpret them as unlike, this is all we should be doing. And
that's, I'm not really talking about this is all we should be
doing. I'm talking about like, at the margin, this is what we
should be doing relatively, relatively more off. Yeah, we're
going to get into a broad overview of the whole climate
change issue. We're going to look at all the potential
technologies or government options that might help us
alleviate this problem. But I think we should start with your
personal journey as an environmentalist. So how did
you end up in this role? Where did you start? When did you
first become interested in the climate?
So, I mean, I grew up in the 90s in Germany, so it was very
easy to kind of become an environmentalist, I think. So
kind of in my, I remember, like some of my first childhood
memories kind of being very interested in saving the tigers
as like inventing a board game, save the Siberian tiger kind of
like, like, yeah, there was a, an animal documentary on like
three times a week and like the last five or 10 minutes of the
documentary would always be like, okay, and now humans are
destroying this beautiful nature, right? So that that was kind
of, I think, very big part of kind of, yeah, of this, of this,
I think, initial, initial education, or becoming an
environmentalist. And I guess I got more serious about this kind
of, yeah, in my, in my teenage years, when I was like an
environmental activist for the German chapter of Friends of
the Earth, and kind of like, protesting President Bush to
sign the Kyoto Protocol when he was visiting this kind of
stuff. So that's kind of where it started. And then I kind of
when I came to to university, I think the idea for me was, okay,
let's kind of study social sciences with a focus on like
understanding what's kind of what kind of makes climate
policies successful. So that's kind of what I spent kind of my
studies on. And then I was working afterwards, for, for a
think tank in Germany for five years, kind of working on
carbon pricing. And that's kind of, ultimately, after this kind
of joint joint foundry pledge kind of went into philanthropy.
So that's kind of the story.
Yeah. And what's something you've changed your mind about? Where
where have you gotten new ideas or learned new facts that kind
of changed your priorities?
I mean, lots, lots and lots over the years, right? So that was
kind of like a very short introduction to like a 20 year
journey. I think the first big change probably in college kind
of. So at that point, I was kind of, yeah, very strongly kind
of, yeah, as I said, like influenced by the environmental
movement kind of was kind of card carrying environmentalist,
if you will. And essentially, at that point, kind of, yeah, as I
said, I was kind of studying social science or kind of
focusing on political culture and understanding in a way that
like the things that I believed or the kind of people like me
would believe about how to solve the climate change, right? So
like, heavily focused on renewables, heavily focused on
energy efficiency, heavily focused on lifestyle change, being
anti nuclear being somewhat skeptical of technological
innovation, right? That essentially, all of those
beliefs kind of fit together kind of in a very systematic
fashion, right? And what unites them is not that they're kind
of an adequate response to the climate challenge, what unites
them is that they're kind of part of a specific ideology and this
kind of this case kind of like a kind of egalitarian green
ideology, which kind of is framing a large part of the
climate conversation. So I think that was kind of the first
really important realization that like all of all of the
responses to the climate and to other problems are kind of
heavily ideological shaped, right? And like, if you have a
situation like every other climate, which is kind of
dominated by one kind of ideology, this will kind of shape
the shape the results. So so I think that was kind of one, I
think another one a bit later, when I was studying in the in the
United States, this was like 2012, 2011, 2012. This was the
time where essentially in the US kind of the big push, the
big push under Obama to kind of push for climate policy. Waxman
Markey was the name. So that kind of a cap and trade bill in the
United States kind of had just failed, right? And this was like
a once in a generation moment with regards to climate policy in
the US, right? So like the Democrats had like won the
presidency had like a huge majority in the House and the
Senate as well, right? So like, was kind of a situation of
reckoning, like, what are we going to do now? Because like,
even even under such favorable conditions that we kind of can
expect every like 15 or 20 years, like, we're not able to pass
climate policy in the US. So I think in that time, kind of
discovered kind of I think what I would describe is kind of like
the innovation hawk argument in climate, right? So like people
that are like very heavily focused on innovation, which I
think at that time was kind of not that big a part of the of
the climate coalitions. I think that's kind of another thing
that changed around that time. And I don't think I go all the
way but it's kind of interesting. So because in a way, what they
did or what they were emphasizing kind of became a big part of
climate policy that later passed. So like that has just passed
with President Biden is kind of essentially putting this lots of
those ideas into practice. But so that's another one. And then I
think another kind of big one, of course, for me growing up as a
German environmentalist, I was heavily anti nuclear. And being
in the US also is the first time kind of exposed to pro nuclear
environmentalists. And for a time was kind of lukewarm about
nuclear and at some point kind of realized, okay, even though it's
very uncomfortable in the German context, because otherwise
reasonable people become like very unreasonable and very
emotionally aggressive, like, when you're talking about nuclear
and when they became pro nuclear, but that was kind of an
important shift of mind as well. I think those are kind of three.
And then two more recent ones, I would say, 2015, essentially a
success of the Paris Agreement. So up until 2015, I think
international climate policy by and large had always failed. And
this was kind of like, the expectations were very low. And
then the fact that the Paris Agreement kind of succeeded,
even though it's kind of a non binding agreement, but it can
has completely changed the conversations that we're having
in different countries. So it kind of serves as this kind of
North Star that kind of lots of national conversations that
kind of focused on. So I think that's kind of was another
surprise.
In what sense did the Paris Agreement succeed? What would
have been the results of it?
I mean, the Paris Agreement has succeeded. I mean, not only the
Paris Agreement, but like around that time. So like that was
in late 2015, and then like 2016, 2017, the nature of the
climate conversation has completely changed, right? Like
around that time in Western countries anyway, in the sense
that like before it was kind of a relatively niche issue, and
it kind of became like a broad societal consensus that like
meeting the goals of the Paris Agreement matters. I mean, it's
maybe not political consensus across the political aisle in
all countries, but at least kind of for the left, the central
left kind of in all countries. So I think that kind of really
changed and kind of the idea of net zero and that climate was
kind of a top issue. Yeah, so I think that's kind of I think
what the Paris Agreement achieved, right? And like, this is
kind of very significant, like compare it, right? It's like
it's a non-binding treaty, ultimately. So there is a
version, I think you could have had a cynical take on this
agreement kind of before, like it's not and I certainly had
this to a degree, like it's not going to do much because it's
like a non binding, very weak agreement on some level, that's
true. So that's not what it's doing, what it's doing, it's
kind of like transforming, conforming the conversation.
And you mentioned a last thing that you changed your mind on?
I think a last thing that I would mention is kind of that. I
think that's kind of maybe like 2020 or so. Essentially, that
the situation around climate has improved very, very
significantly, which is kind of funny to say this, because I
think most people have the have the opposite perception. But
like, in general, that like so like in 2015, 2016, people were
saying things like, there's a 5% probability of some of more of
six degrees, or more warming. And I think right now, if you
would make this forecast, the forecast right now would be
something like maybe like half a percent that we get to six
degrees at all, and not more than six degrees, like an order of
magnitude change. And so essentially, that the forecast
before we're probably with pessimistic, but also that the
situation kind of has has changed very significantly, mostly
through the success of renewables, the success of kind of
electric cars that essentially the the very high risk climate
futures are essentially almost ruled out at this point. And
that's a very significant change.
I'm wondering, when you're working with climate change,
this is such a complex issue. It's it's a it involves a lot of
disciplines, not just climate science itself, but economics
and law and the physics and engineering and all of these
disciplines, how do you form an all things considered view of
the situation in light of all of these disciplines? I mean, you
can't go get a PhD in all of them, I'm guessing. And so how do
you yeah, how do you how do you approach this?
I mean, in theory, you could but by the time you have those
PhDs, the problem was solved. Yeah, so I think the answer here,
I mean, has to be to kind of, essentially, you're always in
the state of like kind of being a reviewer and kind of like a
reviewer of different pieces of evidence. So that's like one
piece of the answer. Another piece of the answer is kind of
obviously, you do this on a team, right? So like, essentially,
right now, in my team, well, like we have a specialist kind of
for the technical economics, we have a specialist for Carmlock
and emerging economies, we have a specialist for philanthropy and
have other philanthropists behave. So that's kind of another
piece of the answer. But to, I think to answer it more
substantively, I think there's kind of like, three kinds of
expertise that are like most significant, when it comes to the
question of like, that I'm trying to answer, which is like,
what should we be doing philanthropically, right? So which
is kind of like only one way to answer the question of there,
I think it's kind of like one is kind of really the social
science question of like political visibility, like, which
kind of like carbon taxes, can we get where which kind of
policies can we achieve in a given country? So that's kind of
like, what does the option space actually look like? So that's
kind of, I think, one key expertise. The other one is kind
of like, what do different policies or different kind of
things in the world, what do they achieve, right? So like,
that's, I guess, policy analysis on econometrics and stuff like
that. And then there's kind of because climate change is really
a decadal challenge and the global challenge and like, it's
also a challenge of like, global technological transformation.
So then there's kind of this question of like, what do changes
and countries kind of what are the long term consequences of
that and kind of changing the technology stack, if you will,
globally, so it's a techno economic question. And I think
those three expertise was I kind of the most, most relevant
ones, from a, from a solution oriented perspective. And then
of course, if you're a philanthropist like myself,
then also like, what are other philanthropists doing, right?
Because like, doing the best thing on the margin is almost
always about kind of finding blind spots and filling the
blind spots.
Okay, so let's get to this broad overview that I would like of
climate change on the broadest possible scale. What is it that's
driving climate change? Is it mostly emissions? And if so,
where are these emissions coming from?
So it's like mostly mostly emissions, right? And so like all
of the mean all of climate change is about emissions. And so if
you kind of I mean, there's sort of different ways to slice it
by I guess, let's first kind of slice it by sector. So if you
kind of look at it by sector, then there's like 75% of
emissions are related to kind of energy and energy here like one
very important thing about climate electricity is only a small
part of energy electricity is about a third of energy. So like
when I say 75%, that's not only electricity, right? That's also
kind of transport fuels that's heating fuels and that's also
stuff like industrial heat. Essentially, the burning of
fossil fuels to produce energy. So that's about 75% of emissions.
Then there's about 5% of emissions that's kind of emissions
from industrial processes. So stuff like producing cement or
chemicals where you kind of have emissions that are not related
to fossil fuels that are called process emissions, right? And it
doesn't mean that industry is only 5%. This is about the kind of
the non energy share of industry. So that together gets you to
like about 80%. And then there's about 15 or like 18%. That's
kind of related to agricultural emissions, broadly. And then the
last 5% or so is kind of a combination of on the one hand,
stuff like deforestation, and then the other hand, stuff like
waste. So yeah, I think 80% of the challenge is kind of energy
energy industry. There's two important qualifications to
this. This is kind of where the emissions are coming from right
now, right? And like, that doesn't mean that this is exactly
proportional to what the solution looks like. So like, it can
definitely be the case of kind of land use change and kind of
like restoring wilderness, etc. It's like a bigger part of the
of the solution pipes. I think that's kind of one qualification.
And another qualification is that these percentages are kind
of heavily dependent on what warming metrics you use. So the
numbers that I cited right now are kind of for what's called
global warming potential 100. So like, if we're kind of assuming
over the course of 100 years, if you kind of take a shorter view,
if you would say something like global warming potential for the
next 20 years, then something like agriculture would have like a
larger share because methane, which is a very potent greenhouse
gas in the short term has kind of a relatively larger share in
agriculture than in other sectors. So that's another
important qualification here.
Yeah. And in global terms, our emissions still increasing?
Yes.
And how long do we expect them to increase?
Well, I mean, people have been talking about the end to
emission increase for a long time. And then there's always
something, something else coming up. So I think we will
probably see the end to increasing emissions this
decade. So I mean, it's mostly dependent on what China and India
are doing at this point. And they're both kind of, yeah, have
to go to kind of peak their emissions rather soon. So it could
happen, could happen this decade.
Yeah, you mentioned China and India, we should talk about
geographically where emissions are coming from, where, where have
they come from in the past and where are they likely to come
from in the future?
Well, so I think in the past, right, if you kind of take the long
view, then, and that's like, most of the emissions are certainly
like have been caused by, by Western countries, I think
that's, that's kind of clear. And like, we do have being in
Western countries, like a large historical responsibility. But
if we kind of look at the situation right now, like the US
right now, something like 15% of emissions, the EU is something
around like 10%. And like Asia is kind of something like close
to two thirds of emissions and then kind of the rest. And if we
kind of think this picture going forward, right, so like the
share of the EU and the share of the US is going to kind of
further decrease, I mean, probably to something like for the
US to something like 5% for like the EU, maybe something like
3%. And then, yeah, China is going to be something like 25% I
think over over the course of the century, then other other
emerging Asia kind of India and then Southeast Asia. And then
kind of at some point later in the century, Africa, hopefully
will, hopefully will grow strongly and like, I mean, yeah,
let's hope it's going to be low carbon. But like, I guess
there's kind of this kind of also part of the long game. So
like the emissions are very clearly the focus of emissions
is very much changing, right? That's kind of what I sometimes
call like the central conundrum of climate policy, which is like
the people that are responsible for a lot of the historical
emissions kind of have very little direct leverage and kind of
how the problem is going to become because kind of
essentially, in the EU, like there's not a lot of emissions
you can reduce like I mean, anymore, right? Like I mean,
already kind of reaching the goal of getting to carbon
neutrality by 2050 is like very ambitious. But at that point,
like there's there's no leverage left.
Because you project that EU is only going to be 3% of emissions.
And so reducing emissions by 3% would be great, but it's not
going to tackle the problem in a big way.
Essentially, most of the leverage that the EU has on
emissions does not come from the own territorial emissions,
right? So if we kind of look at the most significant things
that EU countries have done, it's like things like Denmark
making wind energy cheap, Germany kind of making solar
cheap. These these kind of things have like done way way more
to like transform the energy future than like emission
changes within Europe.
European countries have subsidized technologies that can
then be exported to other countries where they can decrease
emissions much more than they could in those European countries
themselves. From what you're saying that the biggest problem
or the biggest driver of emissions is energy production. I
wonder if that category is too broad. I mean, a lot of things
must must be covered by energy production. Is it? What what
does that category cover?
Yeah, so like I think, yeah, I mean, it covers kind of
electricity, it covers heating, it covers transport, and it
also covers, I mean, that's also heating, but it's kind of
very different than what we mean when we say heating like
stuff like industrial heat, right, which like steel and stuff
like that. And like on some level, it's kind of true broader
term. I still find it useful to think about as kind of one
piece, because especially if we're thinking about the kind of
the solution trajectory, right? So like, what like, I guess the
master plan plan and so far as there is a master plan to kind
of solve climate, right? As essentially electrify everything
or like mean electrify all energy consumption, right? So that
sounds like, historically, those sectors have been very
different, but like, or kind of also very different in terms of
the fuels, but like, you want to get in a situation where like,
the central problem is one of kind of on the one hand getting
electricity or energy production kind of low or zero carbon. And
on the other hand, kind of either directly right with
electric cars or indirectly through stuff like hydrogen,
electrifying kind of a lot of other stuff. So in that sense,
it's a cross simplification to speak of like energy as one
sector, but it's also, I think, if we're kind of at the broad
level, it's a useful one in terms of, yeah, in terms of the
solution landscape.
Yeah, so so the categories is kind of unified by the same
solution, the same solution would solve all of the the the
things that belong to that category. So electrification
would be a solution for many of the things that belong to that
category. Or is that too strong?
I mean, it's just a little bit too strong. But I think it's
kind of right in the, yeah, basically right, I would say,
right. So, so how far electrification goes kind of
depends on like, like things are differentially easy to
electrify. So like, things that are hard to electrify stuff that
kind of requires, I mean, either a long duration of storage or
like lots of kind of concentrated energy, or so like
stuff like heavy duty transport, right, like electrifying
trucks is much harder than electrifying passenger cars. And
like, like refining large or like decarbonizing large ships,
it's kind of much harder and airplanes much harder than
cars. So, and for some of those, you might either use kind of
indirect electrification, right? So kind of like hydrogen or
like using power to create hydrogen. But it might also go
another way, you can also kind of create hydrogen kind of with
natural gas and carbon capture and storage. Yeah, so that's kind
of where there is more, more nuance there, where we can kind
of dive deeper.
Why is it more difficult to electrify an airplane than a car?
Is it is it because the airplane will have will have a need for
higher peak energy output or something like that?
Well, it's essentially, I mean, batteries are very heavy. And so
like an airplane becomes much more efficient, because once you
burn the fuel, it's kind of not, it has no weight anymore. And
it's also so like that's kind of one part. And like the other
part is kind of like energy, energy density, right? So like,
in principle, like flying and air, like flying kind of requires
a lot of, like, it's kind of much harder than kind of moving
moving a car around. And so you kind of need, need higher energy
density.
Okay, so what I want to do is to walk through all of the
potential technological options we have. Start with that. I'm
going to start with talking about oil and coal, which is kind
of a funny place to start maybe, because in some sense, oil and
coal is is the whole reason for the problem. But I think it's
interesting to discuss oil and coal just because if we know
something about why they are hard to replace, we might know
something about how to how to best go about the climate change
problem. So yeah, I've written down that that oil and coal is
cheap, and it works in existing systems. Do you see other
advantages beyond those I just mentioned?
Yeah, I think those are kind of the the two really big ones,
right? And like work in existing systems, I think another way to
put this is like, we've essentially built an entire world
economy around them. So they fit with existing systems, because
we built an entire economy around them and not only in the
economy, right? Like the United States is kind of having
aircraft carriers in the Persian Gulf, because kind of
protecting oil reserves is kind of part of the, well, it's like
part of the overall kind of strategy, right? So it's like,
yeah, essentially, we've been spending more than a century
optimizing our energy and world economy for relying on oil,
alcohol, natural gas, I think another kind of advantage that
they do have, I mean, at least if we compare them to renewables,
to most renewables is that they do have higher energy
densities. So yeah, and then of course, I mean, in the case of
oil, right, like oil is easy to transport, coal is also relatively
easy to transport with gas, it's a bit harder. Yeah, so I think
this is kind of like broadly speaking, that's that seems like
the right characterization.
And of course, the enormous disadvantage here is that there's
very high emissions associated with oil and coal. And I think
additionally, there are, there are quite large problems with
air pollution, which provides us with an additional reason to
replace oil and coal, maybe you could talk about air pollution
from from oil and coal. How big of a problem is that?
So air pollution at large kills about 7 million people every
year. So it's like one of the leading causes of death. And not
all of that is related to fossil fuels, right? So like, we also
have the situation that some of that is actually related to
renewables, like to, especially in Africa, people burning wood
for heating at home and for cooking. So that that's actually
a situation where like using a fossil fuel, in this case, natural
gas would actually be much better because it would. But
essentially, so, in particular, coal and oil, kind of, yeah,
yeah, kill kill a lot of people. So gas is a lot cleaner. So gas
is about 15 times cleaner than coal in terms of air pollution.
But it's a very significant cause of death. And I think it's
also really underappreciated. So like, people usually talk about
air pollution is kind of like a co benefit of climate change.
Unlike climate change has to get really bad to kill like 5
million people every year. Like, right? So like, it's kind of
quite possible that resolving climate change and like the most
significant effect of that is kind of a reduction in kind of
air pollution casualties, right? Obviously, like this is not the
highest risk case, right? Like there are cases with there's no
case with air pollution, like killing 100 million people, right?
And there's kind of cases, there's a risk cases around
climate that kind of motivate caring about climate that are
more extreme than killing 5 million people. But like, we would
yeah, it's just just I guess it's not it's not a co benefit.
It's kind of a problem on a similar order of magnitude.
Yeah, makes sense. Air pollution is a huge deal. Why is it that
oil and gas is hard to replace? And here we might talk about a
carbon lock in also, which is a term that that's used.
The primary reason that if like energy transitions are, well,
energy transitions are hard for a couple of reasons, right? But
like, okay, let's let's kind of start with that with a lock in
reason to begin with. A lot of the assets, right, like pipelines,
or coal power plants, or highways, etc. Right? Like those are
very long lived assets, right? They have natural lifetimes that
are like 40 or 60 years. They're capital intensive assets. So
like, even if like, you're kind of in a situation where like
every new build is kind of the low carbon alternative, it will
take you like 40 years to kind of turn around like an entire
system, right? And that's kind of an optimistic case. So like,
it's like, there's a lot of kind of lock in and then there's so
like, this is kind of at the pure kind of technical or
infrastructural level, right? And then you also have stuff like,
like pipelines and infrastructure, which are, which are
even, even longer, longer lived than single assets. And then of
course, you have like a huge kind of political economy, like
political special interest kind of groups and kind of the
entire kind of fate of countries essentially build around
that, right? I guess like when people say like, Putin used to
behave like the CEO of like a gas company, right? Like, I mean,
kind of changed a little bit the way he's behaving. But like,
right, like, it's kind of like, like their entire countries or
entire kind of regions of the world that are like heavily
dependent on the fossil fuel economy. So I think that's kind
of another really big reason. And another reason of like,
obviously, is also like energy transitions in general move
towards denser forms of energy, right? So like what we're trying
to do right now, where we're essentially saying, okay, we want
to move from a fossil fuel dominated energy economy to one
that's kind of dominated by renewables, kind of not a natural
direction for an energy transition to go. So like the more
natural direction of energy transitions thus far has been
like from less energy dense fuels of like from biomass to
fossil fuels, right? And like, going from fossil fuels to
mostly mostly renewable powered systems, actually, it's not a
natural move of the energy system, probably wouldn't happen.
Like there are many other situations where it kind of
wouldn't happen.
Yeah, maybe here is a natural point to talk about energy
density. Why is energy density important?
So energy density, right? So like, essentially how much land or
how many resources do you need to kind of produce a given amount
of energy? So the reason that's important, I think, is kind of
like, two fold mean from an environmental perspective, energy
density is essentially a proxy for like, how much impact we have
on the environment, right? So if you're using less land, using
less materials, then you're kind of like principle, like lower
energy density means like lower environmental impact. So that's
kind of one, one part of it. The other part, which is more about
like what's useful for for human civilization, right? So like
having denser forms of energy, like if you're talking about
electricity, it means like you need less transmission, for
example, right? So like that's kind of another use. And you're
also kind of, if you want to power, like an industrial center
or like an urbanizing society, like having lots of energy, and
having relatively dense forms of energy is useful. One shouldn't
overdo this, right? It's like, I'm not saying like, on the limit,
kind of, we would have like one big fusion plant and we all kind
of just get from. So that's clearly not the case. I think
we've seen this with nuclear fission that like, having very
large kind of energy sources also as a downside, because demand
isn't always there. So like, not take it to the extreme limit,
but like, kind of, on some level, like energy density and
principle is kind of useful, a useful metric.
But when you when you talk about energy density, it's you're
talking about also the resources necessary to produce that
energy, not only the energy density, say, for example, of a 10
centimeter by 10 centimeter cube of coal or oil or fuel for for a
nuclear reactor, it's a broader term than that. That's energy
density, where we have historically been moving towards
forms of energy that are that are more dense. And now we're
trying to move towards forms of energy that are that are less
dense. I think before we get to renewables, we should we should
talk about natural gas that you mentioned a couple of times. And
what are the advantages here and disadvantages? I'm guessing
it's it's better than oil and coal.
Just to add on the energy density, like because we've talked
about why it's important, but we didn't talk about what does it
actually look like. So like, if you're kind of if you look at
the metric site, nuclear nuclear power would be something like
seven terawatt hours per square kilometers, natural gas, which
we're going to talk about next, it's like about half that. And
like solar is kind of about 100 or so, roughly, what nuclear is
right. So that's kind of why it matters. Like the differences
are quite stark, both from from renewables to fossil fuels and
from fossil fuels to nuclear, like natural gas, if we talk about
natural gas. So I mean, it's about half as polluting as coal, in
terms of CO2. And it's much, much less polluting about 15
times less polluting when we talk about air pollution. And
essentially, if we look at the decarbonization successes of the
last 20 years, like many of them have been coal to gas
transitions. So like, essentially, the fact that the US was
kind of able to reduce emissions, even though until like 2021
didn't really have much in terms of climate policies, like,
mostly the story of the fracking revolution in the United
States, and kind of the replacement of coal by natural
gas, a little bit similar in the UK, in the UK, there's kind of
natural gas is also like more of a renewable expansion. And
that's so like, that's kind of another select that's kind of
this has been a big story. It's like an easy win, right? It's
not a transformational win because you don't get to zero
emissions. But it's kind of the easy win. So if you're imposing
moderate carbon price, in a place with a lot of coal, that
will usually mean you're gonna substitute it with natural gas.
In which cases does it make sense to switch to natural gas?
I mean, that's kind of like, right, that that's kind of I
think something where the climate community has like two
different perspectives, right? I think there are people that
are more incrementalists that would say like, yeah, it's good
if you're switching from coal to natural gas. There's also
people that would say, okay, if you're switching from coal to
natural gas, you're locking in another fossil fuel source, right?
And it's kind of like better to maybe have coal run a bit
longer and then fully replace it with a zero carbon source. I
think that's kind of the debate. And I think different people
have like different opinions. And I think also the right answer
might be different in different places. The best case scenario
would be one for like, natural gas replaced with coal. And then
natural gas is kind of replaced with natural gas and gas and
carbon capture. So where you're kind of capping the emissions
or where you're using kind of part of the natural gas
infrastructure with like zero carbon fuels, right? So like
with natural gas kind of that's produced for electrolysis and
kind of like additional like adding CO2 there or yeah, so
it's a synthetic natural gas, essentially.
So that last point, is there a way to produce that natural gas
that's more environmentally friendly?
So I mean, natural gas is CH4. So in principle, you can, you
can get it from H2 like from hydrogen, like which you can
generate in a low carbon way. And if you would kind of then
take CO2 out of the air, so you can essentially produce like
carbon neutral, natural gas, right? Like this. Yeah, or you
could use hydrogen. Yeah. So essentially, there's ideas of
about using some of the kind of natural gas infrastructure for
like zero carbon gases. And that's I think something like one
way where carbon lock in can be made a little bit less severe,
right? Where you're like locking in like a gas infrastructure,
for example, but that gas could at some point be carbon neutral.
Yeah, if we build a new natural gas plant now, how much carbon
are we locking in? For how many years would this natural gas
plant have to run in order to be profitable or to make sense to
build? If you're building new natural gas plants right now, I
think they expect like most like if you're in a Western
country, I don't think the investor would have the
expectation that they're going to run this for 40 years, because
like running this for 40 years would mean they're not 2023. So
like 13 years after kind of most Western countries have
committed to like reaching net zero. That being sad, right?
Like even countries like Germany, that are kind of
priding themselves to be climate leaders are building new
natural gas capacity right now in an energy crisis situation,
right? So we're essentially, I guess the way this becomes
profitable is because we really do value energy security. So
like, as countries, we're willing to kind of finance
things that don't make sense in a long run perspective, if you
will.
Maybe we could say a bit more about energy density and why
it's important. Is it important because some forms of energy
take up too much space and then crowd out other other things
we would like to do with that space like having natural
habitats or yet using the land for agriculture or what's the
problem with energy sources with low energy density?
So like crowding out of like other land uses is definitely a
factor, right? So especially for biofuels, I think it's a
factor with like biofuels take up a lot of land and like kind of
agricultural land that that can compete with like food
security concerns. Yes, I think that is kind of one concern. So
like land use, right? So like if I looked at a paper where
essentially that's kind of modeling a transition towards a
lower carbon future and what they're essentially like, and like
a renewable heavy future, what they're essentially modeling is
like, okay, by 2050, there is some six fold increase in the land
required required for energy production compared to today. And
like to be fair, like it's not that it's six times less
efficient, because also like electricity production is like
assumed to triple over the time frame rate. So that's kind of a
halving of like efficiency in terms of like energy density,
that's like a still a significant change. I think to me, the
more the more fundamental challenge is really one of like, if
you're having lots of decentralized energy sources,
like kind of the requirements in terms of transmission and like
infrastructure, build out are kind of like much, much larger,
right? So essentially, when we're saying it is cheap, and it is
easy to build renewables, we're talking about is kind of on the
plant level where this is true. But when we're talking about the
energy system level and say like we want to build an energy
system that is primarily based on low energy density sources,
like I'm not saying this cannot work, but like this is like a
risky proposition, mostly for the for transmission and storage
requirements that are kind of related to low energy density
and intermittency.
Okay, so that's oil, coal and natural gas. What about if we if
we get into the renewables, so solar and wind? What are some
advantages of solar and wind?
At this point, solar and wind are pretty cheap. So at this point,
I think in many, in many places in the world will be the case
that like adding solar capacity to the grid is like one of the
cheapest things you can do. It's very important to realize
that like this is not a fact of like nature or like technology
itself, that's a result of like very conscious social choices,
right? I mean, it's essentially countries like Germany and
jurisdictions like California, and then later kind of China,
essentially saying, okay, we really want to have cheap
renewables, and we're really like heavily investing that. So in
that sense, kind of the fact that we have cheap renewables
right now is much more a function of their popularity
with constituencies than it is kind of like the principle
underlying technology, right? So like, if like nuclear would be
as popular as like renewables are, we probably also could have
like cheap nuclear now, this is kind of what I'm saying, or a
geothermal for that matter. So I think that's kind of an
important aspect here. So yeah, there can be quite cheap. And
also there are use cases where decentralized and kind of
smaller production is kind of good, right? So I mean, you can
kind of use deploy them where they are needed, right? Like if
you're, if you're a small town, you're not going to build your
own kind of big power plant, but you can build your, but your
solar's on the rooftop, etc. So I think that's kind of the main
advantage obviously produces no carbon, no air pollution. Yeah,
and can be can be built quickly.
Yeah, so you mentioned that that solar and wind have gotten
cheaper because of basically policies by European countries
and by California and so on. When when solar has reached the
price point that it has that it that it's at now, does it
require kind of continual subsidies to stay at that price
point? Or have we developed solar to a point now that it's
price competitive, even on an open market, let's say. So in
energy, you generally don't have open markets. I think that's an
important thing to realize. So solar is competitive in many
cases, right? But like, it's not like with oil, we're like, you
have a global price of oil, right? It's like, essentially, for
solar, like how costs affect on the solar, compared to
alternatives depends on like, how good is the solar resource?
Depends also on like, how much solar is already on the grid?
Because like, you can be in a situation where like installing
the additional solar capacity is very cheap, but it's not going
to produce a lot of additional value because essentially, like
the sun is shining at the time where you're already at 100%
solar, then like, it's easy to add an additional solar power
plant, that's kind of it doesn't add a lot. Unless you kind of
have cheap storage or cheap transmission, super cheap, sorry,
super cheap transmission. So that's what's called value
deflation. So it's not really like, it doesn't really make
sense to think about it as like, one price point that that is
being, being undercut, right? So like, we're in a situation
where there are places in the world where like, adding solar
kind of happens without subsidies, and it's kind of like,
essentially, the natural result of like market forces or like
mediated market forces. And we have also places with quite a
very high renewable penetration, right, places like
California, or Germany, where like, places that made renewables
so cheap, but that are now kind of struggling to add a lot more
because stuff like system integration, or like the value
of an additional plant is kind of, is kind of low.
How much of our energy production could be replaced by wind and
solar alone? The problem with wind and solar, or one problem is
that it's intermittent. So it requires the sun to shine or the
wind to blow, unless you have a really good storage technology,
basically, batteries. But how much of our energy production do
you think we could replace by by solar and wind?
You don't only need batteries, right? So like, essentially, you
need to solve, I think, three or four problems. So like, one is
kind of short term storage. For this, you can use batteries.
And right, that's kind of like, okay, you can run your washing
machine during the night, that that's kind of the use case.
Then you kind of need to solve in most places in the world, you
need to solve seasonal storage, right, so that there's kind of
like parts of the year where like, there's much less solar
available. Like, that's like a much, much harder challenge. And
I think that's kind of underappreciated, because people
talk about storage, they think about batteries, and they think
the problem was solved. And like, kind of essentially, being
able to have enough energy to like half a month, or like more
kind of work of like energy reserve requires a very different
solution. It's not probably not going to happen with batteries,
that's kind of for something like, right, what I've talked about
before, like, power to x, like producing hydrogen or kind of
other forms of like, low carbon energy, like gases or like
liquid to store energy. So like, that's kind of what you will
need there. And then there's kind of the problem of
transmission. And then there's a problem around essentially, do
we have enough land in the jurisdictions? I think the last
one will not be the decisive constraint, I think that that
will will probably work. But essentially, there's like, three,
three challenges, like storage in the short term, seasonal
storage, transmission, I can't imagine the world, right, if
when I think about the future, I always try to think of a
distribution. And like, there's like part of that
distribution where like, okay, wind and solar are kind of
really like 80 or 90% of the energy supply. And essentially,
seasonal storage has been solved, transmission has been
solved, and it's kind of that that's a large part of the
solution. Those are not the futures I'm particularly worried
about. Because I mean, those are really very best case futures,
it's like an AI safety of like AGI is inherently safe, that's
kind of the future. And then there are kind of the futures
where like, something has gone wrong, right? And like, that's
kind of like an hour climate response and like a natural thing
or things like one of the most likely failure modes right now
that we can like, if we kind of if we're kind of waking up in
2040, and like, we're on a trajectory to like, more than
three degrees, it's very likely that kind of, we've been
overbeating on intermittent renewables, that essentially,
that it is much harder, even though it's easy to get to like
20, 30% in electricity, like getting to like 100% in energy
right again, like, and then like, growing demand, like
something like 10x compared now that this is kind of really
hard. So this is an area where there's very significant
uncertainty, I would say we're kind of, yeah, on the top, you
can kind of do almost get almost 100%, but also where it's kind
of quite imaginable that you don't get over, over 50% of
energy, which will still be like a huge, huge role, right? I
mean, right now, it's kind of something like three to 4% of
like energy. You mentioned the seasonal storage, what are the
most promising approaches there? This is something where it's
not primarily about batteries, right? So it's primarily about
kind of using more energy dense form. So like, for example,
using using kind of excess capacity, excess power
capacity, to produce carbon neutral hydrogen and to store
this as hydrogen or to kind of store this like synthetic
natural gas. This to me seems right now, the most plausible
trajectory. I mean, there's also kind of like, there's, there's
lots of different technologies that are being tried out.
Okay, so that's, that's solar and wind, which could turn out
very, very well. But where there are challenges to be solved
before they can be implemented and can constitute a large
percentage of our energy production.
That sounds too pessimistic. It's more like, solar and wind
will definitely play a much larger role than they're playing
now. The question is, will they take us to 100% but like, yeah,
that's a different, yeah, it's a different framing, right? So
like, yeah, the short term story is definitely about the
expansion of, of mature renewables.
We should say something about the, to my eyes, insane decrease
in the price of solar, or at least it looks like a very,
very steep decrease when I look at these graphs. Yeah, can you
say something about how much cheaper solar is now compared to
20 years ago?
Well, it's essentially at like less than 10% of where it was
20 years ago, right? So like, that's, that isn't an insane
decrease. So I like, I remember when I was kind of entering the
climate conversation, and people were talking about renewables,
they were always talking about solar wind, geothermal, hydro,
bio, at some point, people only started talking about solar and
wind, right? Because essentially, those technologies
could like radically cheaper, in particular, solar wind also,
but a bit less so. Yeah, so that's a very, very steep decline,
right, which has been achieved. There's a great book about this
how solar got cheap by Gregory Named, but essentially, it's
kind of primarily a result kind of very aggressive policy. I
mean, it kind of goes back to the 1970s and like, the first
oil crises from like Jimmy Carter, but then kind of got really
picked up in the early 2000s, right, of like Germany, kind of
really strongly supporting it, also like not only Germany, also
like California, etc. And then like, at some point, China
essentially massively investing in production capacity. So yeah,
and that's kind of a big part of the story as well. It's not a
story of fundamental technological innovation. It's
really more of a brute force approach to making things cheap.
What about Hydro? Could Hydro ever constitute a large percent
of our energy production?
So Hydro could, I think, I mean, it's like, it's already, I
think it's still, if I'm not mistaken, it's still like the
largest renewable energy resource, right? It's kind of, it's
not really talked about because it's kind of like, static, it's
not like the, it's not sexy, it's not where the action is. But
like, it's a very significant part. I think like with Hydro,
like large Hydro has like large kind of environmental
downsides. And I think another kind of constrained, like, so
that's a couple of other constraints. And one is like
geopolitical. If you're kind of talking about them, hydropower
is often like a very kind of contentious issue if you're
thinking about denial or other other areas. So like, that's
another big problem. And it's also like very long term
infrastructure. So I think like, Hydro, I think, like from a
technical perspective, like Hydro could play a larger role,
but it's kind of, I don't think there are many people that are
kind of betting on like an abundant future with lots of
Hydro. Or at least I haven't come across them. I think I know
exactly like one charity that's working on hydropower. That's
mostly on making less clear paths. And the answer, they're
kind of trying mostly to use hydropower, making existing
hydropower or existing dams more efficient, like essentially
using them more to produce electricity.
Do we even have enough large rivers to, to generate enough
electricity by Hydro?
That's a good question. But I actually don't know the answer
because it's kind of so far out of the overturned window. One
other thing I want to say on Hydros that essentially Hydro is
affected by climate change as well, right? So like, essentially
that Hydro is becoming a less reliable energy resource,
essentially, as kind of climate patterns, precipitation
patterns become harder to predict and more extreme. So I
think it's kind of another reason why it's not like, it's not a
major bet that anyone I think is kind of really making at this
point. Okay, let's move on to nuclear energy. What do you see
as the advantages and disadvantages there?
Hey, like the biggest advantage is like related to energy
density, right? I mean, it sounds like ironic and very
counterintuitive to say this, but like from an environmental
perspective, like nuclear is kind of the cleanest, cleanest
form of energy production. Because it's like of those that we
have right now, because it's so, so energy dense, it doesn't need
a lot of materials, it doesn't need a lot of land. Yeah, so
I think that's kind of the clear advantage produces zero
carbon disadvantages, I think are are well known in the case of
nuclear. So accident risk, nuclear waste. Yeah, and also I
guess some dual use concerns around like nuclear weapons. Yes,
I think those are kind of the disadvantages and also right
now, but that's not a fundamental feature of
technology. That's kind of something of, I guess it's a
result of social choice. Right now, it's very expensive and
slow to build. Yeah, that was actually my my next question
would be, when I look at some new nuclear power plant, it has
often taken a decade or more to build. And it's gone over
budget. So so why is it so? Why does it take so long? And why
does it cost so much to build nuclear power plants?
Like I think right now, I mean, we were able to build nuclear
power plants in France and something like four years,
right? And right now, we're not able to do this in the West
right now, it would probably more take something like 20 years.
But so there's a lot of variance here that is like, it's not
like related to the features of the technology or like our
fundamental technological ability, right? There's like a 5x
kind of difference that's kind of related to regulation,
economy, societal commitment, etc. Right? That's kind of where
where the explanation ultimately has to be. So I think
there's kind of lots of different reasons. I mean, one,
like, I guess, one most general one, which is not nuclear
specific is like in general, in the West, we're not able to
build things, right? It's not only that we're not able to build
nuclear plants, we're also not in Berlin, we're not even able to
build airports. So, so I think that's kind of like the general
class of like, there's lots of general stuff around like
regulation and kind of interest groups. But then there's also
like nuclear specific stuff, right? And I think it's
essentially, I think the most significant part is that
essentially the supply chain for for building nuclear in the
West has essentially fallen fallen apart, right? So like,
we're building things kind of in the first of a kind style, or
kind of not first of a kind, but like first in a decade or first
in a decade more, which is not the way to build like anything
kind of at scale anything efficiently. That's not how France
kind of built the nuclear fleet, right? So like, the most
successful example of building out nuclear quickly is like
France from the like late 70s to like late 80s. So that's, I
think, most of the explanation. What did France do right? I mean,
France was in a situation of emergency. So like the 1970s at
the time of like the big oil price shocks and like France is a
country without significant domestic energy supply. So they
were extremely exposed to the oil price shocks. And at the same
time, they were already in nuclear power, right? Like they
kind of have like nuclear expertise, very centralized
government. So yeah, they essentially decided, okay,
we're gonna build nuclear as like a national project, and that
kind of standardized it like one of like, both the same kind of
reactor, both the workforce in a very centralized fashion, if
you kind of compare this to the US, for example, where like
utilities are kind of really spread out across the country,
and like we're like, essentially, there's like not
someone who's buying like 100 nuclear plants, right? There's
kind of utilities that are buying like one reactor, or maybe
two reactors and one plant or something like that, right? So
like, the way that this happens was like fundamentally,
fundamentally different. So these were very special
circumstances. And like, just to be very clear, I'm not
suggesting that those are transferable to today, right? Like
it's not that the kind of shock or stress that France was under,
it's not something we can replicate and say, oh, we're all
we're all gonna build like to 80% nuclear in like 15 years,
because of climate change, most countries are not able to do
that. Like, technologically, they are, but like politically
speaking, it doesn't seem feasible.
Do you think we we need to develop new designs for nuclear
reactors? Do we need to move to better designs? Do we need a
molten salt reactors or something like this? Or are the
reactor designs we have today enough?
And this is, I think, an active debate in the like, in the
nuclear community. And I think like, it kind of depends on how
how do we define need in this context, right? So like, I
think, from purely technical perspective, right, there's
nothing wrong with existing nuclear power plants. So what's
wrong is kind of like when the fact that we're not able to
build them is kind of lack of societal commitment and like,
lack of learning and stuff like that, right? So like, we can
imagine a future where we built a lot of that. So the question
is, can we actually get into that future? The most significant
benefit of kind of advanced nuclear, like small, small
modular reactors is essentially, it seems more plausible that
this is kind of like, like, or there are countries where it
seems more plausible that we're going to build lots of small
modular reactors, because you can produce them and factories,
you can essentially exploit the same learning curve dynamics
that made renewables and electric cars and all other kind of
technologies that we were able to make cheap cheap. So that's
kind of another aspect. And it's also kind of playing much
better with like renewable dominated grid. So it's kind of
more flexible. And it's also like a smaller, smaller unit. So I
think there, yeah, I think, I mean, we are like philanthropically
speaking, we are we are betting on advanced nuclear or small
modular reactors. But I wouldn't say it's necessarily related
to like, technological problem with existing reactors is more
like, yeah, the whole, yeah, yes, one of the themes here, it's
not only about technology, it's about the whole like, societal
kind of apparatus around the technology.
And so the small modular reactors would be easier to
innovate on because you would you would be able to develop one
such reactor and deploy it and get feedback much, much more
quickly than you can with a with a larger reactor, where it might
take 15 years for it to to be built. And only then can you go
back and think about what you could have done differently. Is
it also a question of potentially you can you can mass
produce these small modular reactors? What are the
advantages here?
So like it is the mass production, right, the mass
production in a factory. So it's not only the 15 year thing,
right, like under ideal circumstances, you could also
build a large plant and something like four or six years,
like you could also learn something from large plants,
and you could build the same plant design over and over
again. But it's much easier to learn. And like, obviously, it's
like a controlled production environment, right? So like when
kind of most of the reduction happens in a factory, I mean,
obviously, some of the assembly has to happen on site, but like,
that is where you can really kind of expect a high learning
rates, right? So that's kind of, yeah, essentially, applying the
same mechanism by which we make, make other kind of
technologies cheap to the nuclear case.
One last technology I want to run through is geothermal. This is
something that's maybe like hydro, it's potentially a bit
overlooked. But yeah, how promising do you think geothermal
energy is?
So I would say much more promising than hydro. But I think
also, geopharmals definitely having a moment right now, and
it's becoming radically less overlooked. There's traditional
geothermal, which is kind of great, but it's very location
specific, right? So you're low location dependent, you kind of
do it, build it in lots of places, because you kind of need
essentially not, yeah, you need kind of good conditions, you
need like, yeah, close to volcano, etc. So like, essentially,
you need to be closer to heat source near in the ground. And
then there's kind of like different forms of like advanced
geothermal. And that's a little bit like, there's like lots of
different ones, it's like six or seven different ones. But I
guess the one that we've been focusing on traditionally is
what you would call ultra deep geothermal or like a super
hot rock geothermal, where essentially, you're going so
deep, that you can kind of make it much less location
dependent, and also kind of get much, much warmer, what much
hotter fuel, so you kind of get more, more energy density to
get more favorable economics. And then that's kind of the idea
of like, geothermal anywhere. So if you're kind of able to drill
like, five kilometers or five down, yeah, that could be very
promising. And that's kind of like, in general, this is not
only true for super hot or ultra deep, but also kind of more
generally for like innovations, you're formal. What this does,
it's kind of leveraging the advances of the fracking of the
Shea gas revolution, right? So like our ability to drill has
been like, strongly increased through the through the fracking
revolution and essentially applying this to to geothermal
is kind of where a lot of the innovations coming from. And
it's kind of very attractive, because once you make it work,
right, you need to solve a couple of material science
challenges here. But like, once those are solved, you have like
a very mature labor force, and you kind of have like large
economic interests, oil and gas, that will be quite
interesting on that. So in that sense, it's kind of an innovation
that is kind of locked in, if you will, right? So like, it's kind
of not locked out, like
Yeah, but if we're talking about drilling five kilometers down,
this is not something you could do in in a person's backyard. So
this is not as decentralized as for example, setting up solar
panels on a on a roof in a residential neighborhood.
No, it's solving the same problem that small modular
reactors or like other kind of clean firm sources will solve,
right? So it's not this is not about everyone having a super
hot rock thing in their backyard. But this is about solving the
hard part of electricity decarbonization, which is kind of
clean firm resources, right? So like, not intermittent
renewables, but something that can be dispatched and it can be
used the entire time.
I guess technically, this is not a renewable form of energy,
but in a, in a kind of practical sense, it will take
billions of years for the earth's heat to dissipate enough for
this technology not not to work. So in practical terms, it's
it's renewable.
Yeah, in practical terms, I think the distinction renewable and
not doesn't matter because I mean, renewables also require lots
of non renewables, like resources to like, like, right, like in a
way, so like the minerals that you need for like solar and wind
and so like, so yeah, it's, it's not a, it's not a practical
thing to worry about. But nor nor should you kind of worry
about uranium running out or stuff like that.
Okay, we've, we've done an overview of a lot of the
technological options we have. If you were to to rank these
technologies and think about, you know, a plan for how we might
solve climate climate change using a combination of them. Where
would you where do you see most promise in the short term and in
the long term?
I mean, in the short term, it's very clear that like intermittent
renewables and natural gas will like do most of the like heavy
lifting and decarbonization in the near future. So like, because
they are quick to build and they're kind of quickly expanding
right and like, okay, in some places also adding nuclear
capacity, and also many other places like not prematurely
shutting down nuclear capacity, right? So like, yeah, so those
are I think kind of the short term and then hydropower, the
short term options. And the medium runs something like, well,
like advances in geothermal or advances in small modular
reactors, right, could kind of address what right now is kind
of a little bit of the Achilles heel of kind of electricity
decarbonization, which is kind of clean for power, right? So like
that's kind of why those are still important and like worth
doing, even though like renewables right now are cheap,
and there's kind of this like seduction of like only relying
on existing technologies. But like, the reason to not do that
is like the risk that we talked about before, but also kind of
the energy system function of like clean firm, which right now
is kind of not adequately solved. And when you say clean
firm, what do you mean? Well, so clean, right, means like zero
emissions and like zero air pollution and like otherwise
clean. So like that includes nuclear that includes geothermal
that includes fusion. If it were, if it were to happen. And firm
here means that it's essentially it is not an intermittent
resource, right? It's kind of not like solar and wind that is
kind of so yeah, it can in principle be run 24 seven. And
you will not use it for electricity 24 seven, but you
might use it for for producing hydrogen at other times of the
day. But like, yeah, essentially, that you're reducing what
storage kind of needs to do, right? Like it's becomes a lot
like building an energy system that has like clean firm
resources in it, like it's a lot more realistic to get to like
100% kind of clean than if you're kind of entirely batting
on intermittent resources.
Yeah, so you think thinking across the different climate
scenarios, it's a it will be smart strategy for us to also
invest in some of these clean firm technologies and not just
traditional renewables like wind and solar.
Okay, yeah, so I think it's kind of worth distinguishing two
separate strands of the argument here, even on kind of a normal
kind of trajectory where renewables are very successful,
like clean firm is kind of a useful compliment, right? And it
makes the overall system more efficient, it kind of like reduces
the like the necessity to like overbuild intermittent renewables
reduces the necessity of storage, etc. Right. So like, the case
for clean firms not entirely like hedging one, but then there's
also kind of the hedging one, which is like, I think we talked
about this before, right? Like, if we kind of wake up in 2040,
and like, our situation looks much worse than we're thinking
now, like, what has gone wrong? Well, one of the main things
that could have gone wrong is that like expanding solar and
wind was much hotter. And in that sense, investments in and
clean firm are like a hedge against that. And there's a key
fact of like climate that makes the hedging quality important.
And that's essentially like the shape of climate damage. So that
climate damage to kind of like, or our expectation of like how
climate damage looks like is that it's kind of strongly
nonlinear. So like, world with six degrees is like much worse
than twice as bad than a world of three degrees and the world
with three degrees much worse than twice as bad than 1.5
degrees. So it's kind of particularly important, right? I
mean, you need to control for how likely those are. But like,
it's like, even if you kind of control for how likely there
are, it's kind of important to like, favor solutions that work
in situations where a lot of damage is. So those are kind of
right now, I would say those little worlds kind of more
reflect 2.5 degrees like 2.5 to 3.5, like those are reasonably
likely and reasonably more damaging than the worst cases
that I kind of take a lot of the expected damage and the
function. And under those, like if you're in those
situations, right, you kind of, you know, something,
probabilistically speaking, you know, you know, something that
is likely to have happened in those worlds. Like one thing
is likely to have happened is that renewables will have like,
yeah, been more curtailed than we expect.
Okay, and I think we'll discuss this more later, thinking
about different climate scenarios and where we should spend our
money in, to kind of cover all scenarios. But before we get
there, I want to talk about some governmental options. What
could governments do in order to help this situation? You
mentioned before how European governments and California was
able to subsidize renewables to such an extent that they are
now quite cheap. In general, what's your sense of how well
subsidies work? Would you recommend that governments try
to pick out which which energy technologies they favor and then
subsidize those?
The broad answer to which Mrs. Canter relates to like, what is
what, how good is the government at picking winners and
like, how far should the government pick winners? I think
like, the broad answer is here, like, the government was
heavily involved in every kind of important technological
success when it comes to energy and climate, and also like
heavily involved in lots of different failures. So like on
the success, right, we have like solar, we have electric cars,
we have wind, we have nuclear, we have fracking. On the failure,
we have stuff like cylindra, we have stuff like biofuels in the
US, which are like subsidized because they're kind of big in
Iowa and Iowa is important for presidential elections. Like, so
like, you have like the good, the bad and the ugly kind of all
all together, right? So like, that's important, right? It's
like, it's not, there's essentially no example of
like energy technology transformation that kind of where
government has not played a huge role. So I think that that's
something worth, like worth remembering kind of to start. And
it's also there's no because there's no clear example where
essentially technology has been an energy technology has been
brought about primarily by market forces, right? So like, so
like there's demonstration projects, those are often
public or like at least publicly, partially publicly
funded. Then there's kind of about this basic R&D where like
government also plays a big role demonstration projects. And
there's kind of like early procurement policies like across
the entire chain of the environment of the innovation
process government plays a huge role. And I think there isn't
really an alternative to this or like we haven't really
observed an alternative to this. So I think the view that I
would kind of house like in general kind of government is
much better than its reputation. Because like once electric cars
get cheap, then we're all celebrating Elon Musk, but we're
like forgetting the fact that like, there's like huge electric
car subsidies that like may Tesla possible, right? Like, and I
mean, there's a similar story, like not to pick on Elon Musk,
right? There's a similar story for like most other kind of
technological successes. At the end, there's kind of a private
company that's kind of doing the last mile, that's getting a
lot of the attention. But like before, or even at that last
stage, there's huge, huge involvement by the government. So
I think that's that's what I can say to, to start. So government
will make mistakes. But I think the alternative is not to not
let the government pick. Ideally, and I think that's what we're
kind of seeing in the United States right now. You're
essentially trying to support technology at the right, at the
right level, right? So like, you shouldn't choose all
technologies. And you should also like be humble in terms of
like, you cannot pick all the winners. But right now, if you
look at the the inflation reduction act, and the
infrastructure bill selected to major pieces of kind of climate
policy change in the United States are now, they're
essentially like very broad, that's unlike lots of different
technologies. And they're very kind of on the one hand, like
then an infrastructure bill like R&D driven, in the case of the
inflation reduction act more like subsidy and later stage
technology driven, like, I guess they're a very strong form of
government involvement. But in a way, they're taking a lot of
winners, or like some of them will not be winners, right? So
like, they're, they're kind of very, very broad on their, their
approach to their credit.
And do you think that's the right strategy to subsidize or to
support from the government side across the right range of
technologies and across different stages of technological
development?
So if we're saying that history is informative, then I think
that's kind of what history teaches us about like innovation
and energy. Yes.
Are there any research and development into one of the
the forms of energy technology we talked about that you think
the government should spend more money on? Should the
government be subsidizing at a later stage of development, some
of these technologies?
So like, I guess the contextualized the moment that
we're in, right? So like we're in, well, mid 20 or mid to late
2023, and like, both in the United States, and to a lesser
degree also in Europe, like we've seen like major climate
policies over the last year, right? So like, like in the, in
the United States was focused on that case, right? So like the
inflation reduction act was passed, like essentially almost
exactly a year ago, a year before the infrastructure was
passed. Like both of those are kind of like, putting support
for clean energy, essentially on a whole order of magnitude,
kind of different levels. So we're now subsidizing or the
inflation reduction act, we're going to subsidize renewable,
like only renewables, clean energy, and other kind of
clean technologies on the order of like, 300 billion, at least
and could go, could go, could go higher than this. We are in a
situation where like, money is not the primary constraint right
now, for most kind of energy innovation, or it's kind of
like, it's much more harder to make that case, right? Like,
that doesn't mean we're in a situation where everything is
kind of going great, right? It's more that kind of the
challenges maybe more like stuff like permitting reform, or
kind of making those demonstration projects
happening, or like, in the case of nuclear reforming the nuclear
regulatory commission. So it's not so much about money being
the limiting constraint that and like, for the second part of
the question, should they support at a later stage? Yes,
absolutely. So I think the basic, the basic problem in the
discourse, I think is that there's relatively broad support
for like, basic research and development, right, like support
for that is kind of very kind of mainstream, right, like lots of
conservatives will kind of support investment and basic,
basic R&D, because there's a very clear market failure there,
it's very well recognized. So it's kind of very bipartisan, or
at least there's kind of like a broad kind of set of people
that will support that. But like the like the area where most
failure happens kind of in the later stages is kind of like
getting 100 million for a demonstration project. So that's
something that historically in the United States, for example,
has been hard to kind of get political buy-in to fund this
work, right? Because it's also like, when you fail, you fail
very recently, right? So like Mitt Romney in 2012, like started
his campaign at the Solyndra plan, right? Like Solyndra being
like kind of the example of the failure of kind of the clean
energy investments of the Obama administration. So maybe, maybe
explain what happened there. I'm not familiar with the, is it
called Solyndra?
Yeah, so like Solyndra was kind of like an advanced solar company
that kind of was kind of heavily supported by the American
Reinvestment Act, so kind of the small scale version of what
Biden did now, like enlarge with inflation reduction act, kind
of like so the recovery after honey, 18, the clean energy
spending there. And Solyndra was kind of a very, very public
failure of a company that was kind of heavily backed by the
government. And yeah, essentially became the symbol of
like, okay, the government is really bad at picking winners,
right? And like, that kind of happened. At the same time as
kind of the shale gas revolution was playing out, right?
We're like, also the government had kind of played a big, big
role in supporting that. So it's just like, we're very selective
and like picking our examples.
What do you think about carbon taxes? This is a solution to
climate change that's often favored by economists, where
you you simply price the negative externality of
emissions, and then you let the market figure out how to
implement the how to reduce emissions. Do you think carbon
taxes could work? So and I guess I mentioned this in the
beginning, but just just to recap. So before I joined
founder slash, I spent five years working on carbon pricing
emission trading system, carbon taxes. So I'm very familiar
with those debates. I mean, I think they can work. But I think
they will not play, like a major role in kind of the solution.
And just like to give a couple of, couple of like arguments,
why? So if you're like thinking again about kind of the
example of like solar, and how solar got cheap. So the
subsidies that kind of Germany was able to kind of that were
politically feasible in the early 2000s in Germany. You could
have achieved them with a carbon tax between like 700 to 900
something in that range, dollars per ton. That's an
insanely high carbon tax. So like at that point, most of the
world had no carbon taxes at all, right, like Germany had no
carbon tax at all, like the only kind of countries having
carbon taxes for like, Scandinavian countries. And like
even then, like the highest carbon tax will be something like
$50 a ton, right? So like, the really kind of transformative
price signal that you need to like drive an immature
technology, you will probably never get where the carbon tax
that's politically feasible, right? Like you could not, it's
not that you could have had the carbon tax at that level at that
time. So I think that's kind of one reason, right? And now we're
essentially like now we're essentially this situation where
like solar were kind of the difference to the fossil fuel
alternative was kind of zero in many cases, right? You wouldn't
need a carbon tax. Essentially, to solve climate change, you need
fundamental technological transformation. And for that, you
need like very, very strong push and you cannot get this kind of
push with a with a politically feasible price. So that's kind
one constraint. And the other constraint is kind of the
international situation. So if you were in a situation where you
would have a global carbon tax, right, like maybe or a global
kind of carbon price, maybe that would be enough to kind of
induce some some innovation, etc. But like, you never, like,
it's very far, very far from getting there. So I think right
now we're in a situation where it's very clear that the most
significant things that like individual countries can do, like
in a situation where international coordination is
relatively weak, are not about kind of introducing a carbon
tax, like had Germany introduced the carbon tax in 2005,
this would have or sorry, in 2005, we got the emission
trading system. So let's say if we had like introduced like
reasonably high carbon prices early in the 2000s, would have
kind of accelerated like transition from like German
coal to Russian gas, that would have been the main effect
would not have had like transformative effects,
globally speaking, right? So like, that's, I think, the really
big constraint there. So essentially, yeah, carbon
taxes might play a role. Once all technologies are reasonably
close to competitiveness, and then kind of iron out a little
bit on the on the margin. But I guess that that's kind of like
not not the point where it really matters anymore.
Yeah, and just just to check with you, what do you what do you
think about planting trees? Is that with that work at all? Is
that on the kind of what would that have a large enough effect
to matter? You sometimes hear claims about the importance of
the Amazon rainforest, for example, as a way of decreasing
CO2 in the atmosphere, could the government initiate a large
kind of projects of planting more forest for that work?
So I mean, in principle, the easier thing had should always be
avoiding deforestation, because planting trees to like to have
a carbon effect, right, like it takes 20 years. It's not
instantaneously useful. I mean, I guess, I guess to start with
again, now we kind of need to refocus on, we're talking here
on the margin. And when we talk about trees, everyone loves
trees. Like the person I meet the most, like the superficial
kind of climate person I meet the most, right? Like the first
like, they want to like they want to plant trees, like that's
the first thing that essentially everyone kind of coming into
this conversation jumps to.
Yeah, this is exactly why I brought it up, because I'm
guessing that this proposal would be extremely popular with a
kind of broad public and maybe that itself, even though planting
trees may may not be the most effective thing. Just the fact
that it's so popular might mean that it's it's easier to
implement. And that could be an argument for it.
Yeah, I mean, I think, I mean, you would need to do a certain
insane scale. But so if you if we're thinking about the kind of
the existing solution on this base, which is essentially about
like rainforest protection, right? And like there we have kind
of an international carbon market around protecting rain
forests, like called web plus. And the basic idea there is like
you're rewarding countries for avoiding deforestation. So and
like the most significant example of this is like between
Norway and Brazil, where like Norway kind of tried to like pay
Brazil lots of money to kind of like, yeah, save kind of like
deforest less. And the problem with that is I think
fundamentally that you're rewarding something you can't
observe, like you're rewarding counterfactual, like you're
rewarding, of additionally avoided deforestation, which is
not something you can observe, right? So like your and so like
that is kind of hard on the best case. And it's like,
essentially impossible when you have like sovereign nation states
that all can kind of have their own, their own estimates. So
that's one of the problems. And the other problem, of course,
is kind of a snot. Like the main benefit of like avoiding
deforestation comes from the long term again, right? So like,
but you can't really have like credible, credible commitments
over like decades in terms of protecting trees. So like it's
a solution that like looks seductively simple, but kind of
in practice, kind of doesn't work. Yeah, so like that's kind of
the case for avoiding deforestation and for planting
trees. Yeah, I mean, you need to do those on an extremely
massive scale. And like, it's not going to have large effects
kind of in the, in the short term.
Yeah, are there any other non technological options that you
like, or that you find promising?
There's lots of other things we can do, right? So like, I think
one thing that we should talk about briefly would be climate
finance. So which is essentially the idea of like
incentivizing lower income countries for like building or
like paying essentially paying more clean energy
infrastructure. Yeah, in principle, that's one of the
things that you would expect if we had a global carbon market,
right? Because like abating abating emissions should be
cheaper in a lower income country. So that's another
approach of kind of a software from many of the problems I've
now talked about with regards to with regards to rainforest
protection. So that's another approach that I think we should
mention. And then there's kind of when you're kind of in a
situation where you have a lot of growth happening, right? So if
you're kind of an emerging Asia right now, there is a lot of
variance and like how emission intensive that growth can be. So
like we've just hired a carbon looking specialist who like she
will kind of look at what what are the interventions we can do
there. But like if you kind of look at the literature, you can
kind of see like clear differences related to, yeah,
like how our city is being built and these kind of things like
kind of shape essentially shaping long run behavioral
patterns by like different forms of infrastructure
investments.
Yeah, and you mentioned supporting innovation or
innovation policy.
And that's kind of ties to what we've talked about before,
right, which is like, the government is essential for
technological transformation. What the government does can be
affected by advocacy, you can kind of fund through like where
you can find a charity to do this kind of work. And it is it
locks it kind of souls for this like what I described is like
the central conundrum of climate policy, right, that kind of
essentially the gas that you have like way more leverage through
innovation on like global emission outcomes than like
through their territorial emissions. So you have this
potential for trajectory changing dynamics, right, that we've
kind of been discussing with the example of solar electric cars
et cetera that relatively small changes in the world, like in
the large in the grand scheme of things, right, like California
aggressively supporting electric cars or Denmark aggressively
supporting wind power, these are like small changes on the world
but like huge long term consequences. So I think that's
kind of the thing and like the other things that I would
mention, so like kind of on the on the carbon carbon lock inside
would be stuff like, yeah, essentially regulatory reform,
right. And the US this would be something like permitting
reform, which which will become like a hot issue or is already
becoming a hot issue because the financing for clean energy is
there but the permits and the regulation is not there. And
they're similar similar issues and like emerging emerging
economies. So it's not all about technological innovation, not
at all. Right. It's also about like, yeah, shaping the
regulatory frameworks, etc. And here you're using
some amount of money in order to influence a much bigger amount
of money. Basically, you're using philanthropic dollars to
influence the dollars or the money spent by governments.
Yeah. So for everything that we're kind of funding and
there's always there's always kind of advocacy and the broader
sense of the term. So I'm kind of saying essentially, using
philanthropy to influence much larger budgets, right? And like
like that reasoning comes from the fact that like, all government
budgets are like several orders of magnitude, like two to three
orders of magnitudes, larger than philanthropy. And also, I
think what we've already touched on, right, like, there's
things that kind of essentially need the government, even if it's
like changing regulation, etc. Right. So like, most impact
focused philanthropy and climate is ultimately about kind of
shaping actions of the government, you know, or other large
actors.
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. I do wonder, though, aren't
there a lot of kind of interest groups trying to get the
government to spend money on on various things. And so you might
there might be a lot of competition for influence over
over the government's resources.
When I just talked about like the different sizes of the
changes in the world, that kind of relates relates to this. So I
think that the best case or like the kind of the highest impact
case for like philanthropy to have like a large impact on
government policy is kind of in situations where there's like
relatively little attention, right? So like, if we're kind of
thinking about the counter example of like the carbon
tax, like needs national attention needs like bipartisan
support to be passed definitely needs national
conversation. Like that's probably a situation where like an
additional fund traffic dollar will not make a large difference
because kind of like lots of other money is involved. But when
you're kind of in a situation where like, you know, okay, we're
going to pass this big climate bill. And like, there's a big
national conversation about we want to do this, the climate
bill, but ultimately, like how exactly does this climate bill
look like, which technology does support and how that is kind of
a thing, the sweet spot for kind of philanthropy, right,
because we're essentially lots of political science literature
for like how this kind of works. It's what's called like
legislative subsidy. So there's kind of special charities that
kind of specialize and like knowing which legislation would
be needed to kind of promote a given technology or given
approach. And yeah, essentially providing providing that
knowledge to the policymakers. So I think that's kind of a way
in which in which charities can have a large influence and kind
of policy fields that are less politicized and that are kind
of like under, yeah, that are kind of not not not super not
super crowded. Yeah,
let's give an overview of the different climate scenarios. So
what's most likely to happen with the climate and specifically,
I think we should talk about the worst cases and how likely
those are.
If you kind of look at the forecast, there's something like
one third probability that we will kind of meet global climate
targets. So that would be like limiting warming to two degrees.
Then there's kind of about another third for something
like between two, two and three degrees. And then there's kind
of another third for everything kind of above three degrees from
up to like five degrees. So this is kind of from a we can we can
link this in the show notes, but like that's kind of from an
from an LSE paper that kind of try to try to estimate those
last year. And but like, there's different ways to estimate
this, but it's kind of like broadly, broadly consistent. So
like, we're probably not in current trajectory is not going
to meet the global climate targets. We're gonna overshoot
them by a degree or so. At the same time, right, kind of the
really extreme scenarios, like six degrees or something like
that has become like, very, very significantly less likely
compared to what we believe like five or six years ago.
Yeah, maybe you could describe some of the effects of the
these different degrees of heating. It's a bit abstract
when we're talking in terms of degrees, could you describe
some of the effects of different degrees of heating?
I mean, again, like this is of course an area where there's
always like huge uncertainties, right? So like, we're like, if
you look at the bars, like when do certain phenomena starts
is kind of always like, okay, this could start at two degrees,
because start at four and five degrees. I mean, the thing that
we're kind of like right now, we're kind of in a situation where
we can, where we can essentially see climate change in our
daily lives, right, where kind of the temperature extremes
have clearly changed. Also, like where like many, not all, but
like kind of many kind of natural disasters have a climate
change signal on there, right? So it kind of become more likely
or more intense related to climate change. So that's kind of
where we are right now. It's broadly kind of, I guess, probably
think these things have become more, more intense. Then if
you're kind of, I guess if you're hitting two degrees or more
than like tipping point, tipping points become somewhat more
likely. So there are elements in the climate system that either
would kind of have like local environment effects or like
dieback on the Amazon, for example, or kind of have like
global climate effects, like shifting global temperature up
by a half a degree or something of that sort. So those kind of
things become kind of become happening, happening more as we
moving higher up. Yeah, I think that's kind of the main thing.
So I would say this is pretty abstract. The reason for that is
this is not really what I'm not really spending a lot of time on
that. I'm mostly interested, like, give them what I'm doing
day to day, I'm mostly interested in understanding the
shape of the curve, and how likely the different futures are
because that's kind of what's most relevant for me to prioritize.
And so are you prioritizing the worst case scenarios?
No. And I'm really happy that you asked this because this is a
very typical misunderstanding. So what I'm essentially arguing for
and I will talk about this, which we can also link like on the
structure of climate risk and its implications for high
impact philanthropy. What I'm essentially asked arguing for is
we treat this the same that we will treat other problems. So
like, we're essentially looking at expected damage, right? So
like an expected damage is the product of two different things
is like the probability of different futures and how bad
those futures would be. And right now, most of the probability
mass, so when we put these things together, based on the
current estimates would be on the other side, I think, like
above, like most of the damage would be above 2.5 to 3.5. But
crucially, it would not be in like six degrees or more. Because
that's like, even though those worlds will be extremely
damaging, they've become so much less likely that they're so
that kind of the degree, like the low likelihood kind of
dominates the strength of the signal. So it's not about just
focusing on the worst world is kind of taking an expected
damage. And the alternative to this, that I'm criticizing is
essentially much of the focus of the climate community, where
it's like, black and white, like either we meet the goal of the
Paris Agreement or we don't, like there's all of this massive
complexity that you talked about. And we're just reducing it
to, okay, on a two degree trajectory, we will need this
and this and this. And like, that's kind of, I guess, in a way,
the wrong question. Where do you see the most expected damage
then? Yeah, so and the last time we ran these numbers, and we
should run them again this year. But like, it's kind of, I
think, in those worlds that are both reasonably likely, and
also much more like significantly more damaging
than kind of the best case worlds, right? So they will be like
worlds of like 2.5 to 3.5 degrees, roughly, that's kind of
where the bulk of the damages. So those are worlds where the
Paris Agreement has not succeeded, right? Because me, the
Paris Agreement's goal is to limit temperature to two
degrees. They're also like worlds where like, yeah, some
things must must clearly have gone wrong. They're also not
worlds like those worlds are not consistent with like, super
cheap renewables, easy seasonal storage, etc. Yeah.
Yeah. And in those worlds, what are the most promising
interventions to alleviate the expected damage?
The method here is, let's think about, because we're in a
situation of extreme uncertainty, about lots of
different things, like how much our economy is going to grow,
how carbon tensiles is going to be, how will different
technologies play out, how strong will the climate react? And
all of these things are highly uncertain. But we're trying to
understand, what do we know about the structure here? Like,
what do we know? What is more likely to be true in a worse
world, essentially? So like, on the technological level, or we
already talked about this, right? So like, okay, a typical,
like there's kind of two, two typical, or two, I think, failure
moods that people would expect. Like one is kind of like,
renewables do not scale as much. Another would kind of be that
electrification doesn't scale as much, right? So that's kind of
related. So if renewables don't scale as much, then like, the
clean firm power sources that we talked about, right, those are
kind of, we're gonna play a relatively larger role. So like,
a significant part of the motivation of like, investing in
geothermal, investing in advanced nuclear kind of comes not all
of it, but like, comes from that. There's of course, also like
other aspects to this, right? It's not only about the choice of
energy technology, it's also about like, different kinds of
solutions. So if you're kind of thinking about those futures,
like those are not futures, where, as a side, like, international
cooperation on climate, like being in a great shape is not
consistent with being in the 3.5 world. So that means that
things that kind of maybe look very good on the best case,
right? Like if the best case is kind of like the case that we're
in right now, or probably even better, let's say, saving trees
on the Amazon, like, if we could kind of get this to work,
right? Like, even if that were very cheap, and the best case
where we solve this regulatory problem that so far, we were not
able to solve. Now, that's not going to work in this kind of
world, right? So, so, so that's, I think, something that's kind
of contraindicated on this case, right? So it's kind of like, this
will look worse. And similarly, if you kind of think about the
structure of the world economy, like, and kind of like the future
for predictions, you probably have like, more of the higher
warming worlds are like, in situations where like emerging
economies have been growing very strongly, right? So like, yeah,
we're making us like, let's say Africa is kind of growing, and
growing very strong. So it also tells us something about like,
regional prioritization, some level,
I think actually, that's, that's a great segue to where I would
like to, to, to end this conversation by talking about
kind of interactions between climates and, and other areas we
could call them. What are the tradeoffs between economic
development and emissions?
Yeah, so that depends on where you are with regards to economic
development. So there's a very strong relationship between
economic development or human development more generally, and
use of energy. And that's like, not like a one direction
causation, right? So like, we shouldn't say like, more energy
causes more development. But we should say that it would be very
surprising that the world gets a lot richer without losing a lot
more energy. So I think that's very clear. And like, there's
papers on that that show this very clearly. And like, it's like
kind of really, really strong kind of relationship. And the
relationship is much, much stronger in the earlier part of
the ladder, right? So like, high income countries right now are
able to grow without growing their emissions, right? So there's
like, about 20, 25 countries or so that have been able to grow
over the last decade, grow the GDP without growing their
emissions, what would be kind of like the, the weak kind of
condition of decoupling, right? It's kind of not doesn't mean
they will meet their climate goals, but it kind of means that
kind of growth is kind of possible without increasing
emissions. But that is not true on the, on the lower end, right?
And like, broadly for, for three reasons, if you're kind of
very energy poor, then like, so if you can kind of save more
energy, like energy efficiency gains, etc. will just use like
probably translate into into more energy use. I think that's
kind of one reason there's two other ones. So one is kind of
like earlier economic development is kind of more, more
carbon intensive, right? So it requires stuff like that
requires little steel and cement, the kind of stuff that's
kind of hard to decarbonize right now, or which we actually
have not decarbonized to this point at like, reasonable cost.
So that's kind of another aspect to this. Yeah, so that
essentially you're doing lots of infrastructure investments
that are very early. And of course, also like the willingness
to pay for climate policy is like, very low and rightly so very
low if you're not in a very energy poor context, right? If
you're in India and have like 400 million people without
access to electricity, then like the first thing that you're
thinking about is not implementing a carbon tax.
And so we mentioned one very large benefit of using less oil
and coal, which is to add, which is a decrease in air
pollution. Do you think there are other additional benefits?
Here I'm thinking in terms of greater food stability or less
conflict or something like that?
I would call it the more sophisticated case about caring
about climate change is probably less about like extreme
weather events and the like the dire impacts of extreme weather
events, but more like political instability and conflict,
especially in places that are heavily dependent on like, well,
environmental conditions, right, right? So if you kind of in
sub-Saharan Africa, and you have like rain-fed agriculture,
like that is probably the most likely case where you can get
social destabilization because of climate change, because
you're like the vulnerability is very high. So yeah, I think
that's kind of an important effect. This seems like very
important from like, like, ethically speaking, from a
perspective of like, okay, this is like climate change is
hurting the global poor the most. And like, it's kind of the
most destabilizing probably in those in those areas. So I think
that's a very important effect. And something that I think
effective altruists, it's easy for effective altruists to forget
that, because in a way, if you kind of think about climate as a
civilizational risk, I think I would agree that the civilizational
risk aspect of climate is kind of low, because it's kind of hard
to imagine a great power war because of climate change. And I
guess, like, if you're kind of caring about the long term
future, like great power wars are just like, extraordinarily
important. But kind of from the from the more near term suffering
perspective, like, I think that's a very significant effect.
And another one that comes more from essentially making clean
energy cheap, right, is kind of thought like reducing energy
poverty. So I just, I just mentioned, like, I guess 400
million people in India, not having access to electricity,
right? So like, we're living in a world where like, what we are
thinking about first when we're reducing emissions, right, like
we can use we can all use a lot less energy, without like,
sacrificing a lot of our living standards. But we're not living
in a globally representative part of the world. Both of us and I
think most listeners. So it's kind of a very different
situation, like the average human on this planet is like very
energy poor and like, we're the human development benefits of
access to more energy are very significant. Yeah, so and ideally
if it's quite clean and cheap energy, that's the ideal, ideal
case.
Yeah, that's a great point. Your Highness, thanks for coming on
the podcast. It's been a real pleasure. Thanks for sharing
your knowledge with us.
Yeah, thank you so much.
Great to be here.
