Okay, I guess we might as well get started.
So all good things must come to an end,
and this is the last in our distinguished lecture series
on emergence, and of course we saved the best for last.
So we have Dr. Robert Hazen,
of the Carnegie Institution of Washington Geophysical Lab,
and let me tell you a few things about Bob.
So he started off as a mineralogist in the 1970s.
That was an exciting time for mineralogy,
and I'll just point out why,
because I think it indicates a lot of things.
It was shortly after the perfection
of the automated single crystal diffractometer,
which did two things to the mineralogy community.
One, it turned determining a crystal structure
from a PhD thesis to a relatively short project
so that you could use what you determined
to really understand something
instead of get stuck in the determination.
Two, a lot of people who could not make that transition
were very resentful of the new technology and the new people.
And I bring this up because I think this happens
in science all the time,
and of course Bob was one of the people
who took advantage of the new technology
and invented the field of what at that time
we called comparative crystal chemistry,
where you look at crystal structures
as a function of composition, temperature, pressure,
whatever else you think is important,
and because you can determine those structures
fairly conveniently, you can look for systematics,
you can look for trends, you can create a lot of data.
Those are themes, I think, that have characterized him
ever since, and we've all moved on since the 1970s.
And Bob has moved into many things.
He's a Renaissance man, he's a writer of serious science,
of popular science, of fiction,
he's a concert quality trumpet player,
he's engaged in teaching large undergraduate classes
at George Mason University,
and he's now leading a big project
called a Deep Carbon Observatory,
a Sloan Foundation project,
which is sort of a seed for hopefully much larger things.
And we talked a lot about what he should talk about,
and we sort of emailed back and forth,
and he could talk for five hours,
but you probably don't want that,
especially those of you that have to attend
my 8.30 class tomorrow.
So we finally selected a topic
which really highlights emergence,
and perhaps highlights emergence,
and what finally is perhaps the most definitive thing,
at least from our selfish point of view on Earth,
namely the emergence of life on Earth.
Bob Hazen.
Thank you.
Thank you, Alex, and it's such a pleasure to be here
to talk about this subject,
which I really feel very passionately about.
The question of the origin of life
is one which has not just deep scientific implications,
but deep philosophical implications as well.
Indeed, there's probably no subject
in which the conflict between science and religion
is more clearly defined as a subject
and religion is more clearly etched
than in this question of the origin
and the evolution of life.
And so I want to start off by stepping back from emergence
and thinking more about the ways
that you can think about the origin of life.
And I think there are four different possibilities
for thinking about emergence.
One is that life was a miracle.
God created life, and for many people,
that first chapter of Genesis,
God created the heavens and the earth,
God created plants and animals,
God created us and his own image.
That's sufficient, but scientists want to know more.
If the origin of life was a divine creative act,
a miracle, something by definition outside natural law,
then it's beyond science.
Science cannot address a miracle by definition
because it does not conform to natural law.
There are other possibilities.
The origin of life could be something
that's completely consistent with chemistry and physics,
and yet so improbable, so rare,
that in a universe of 100 billion galaxies,
each with 100 billion stars,
and many of those stars having multiple planets,
earth-like planets in many cases,
that perhaps life only arose a few times,
maybe only once, and if that's true,
then again, science is really at a loss
to discover in any detailed way how it happened
because if it took a trillion,
trillion planets billions of years,
then a graduate student's not gonna be able to do it
in one four-year thesis,
even if we have some good chemical hints,
it's gonna be very difficult.
Then of course, there's the philosophical stand
that anyone who does origin of life research takes,
and this really is interesting.
This is one field of science that if you decide
you're gonna go into this field,
you better believe that this is true,
and that's belief, this is not truth,
it's just a philosophical stand
that the universe is pregnant with life,
that life arises through an emergent process,
and therefore, studying in a laboratory
has some reasonable chance of gaining insight
into how the process happened.
I can't prove it, it's just a hunch,
but that this is something that just happens.
Okay, and if you accept that as your hypothesis
and you can imagine an approach to the origin of life
that involves doing chemistry,
that involves doing benchtop science,
studying step by step.
The key here then is that life began
as a series of emergent steps,
of increasing complexity,
going from a geochemical world,
a non-living world, to a biological world.
Okay, so that's the point of view
that most scientists who work on this have,
and of course, there is also this fourth possibility,
which you can argue philosophically
whether it is unfolded into some of the earlier ones,
but this idea of intelligent design.
Now, the reason I'm bringing this up
is I'm sure that this audience does not need to be convinced,
but I lecture around the country,
around the world even, about this subject,
and this is a very clear place
where people are questioning the validity of science.
So what's intelligent design?
It basically says that life is irreducibly complex.
It's intuitively obvious, people say,
that if you're walking along and you look down on the path,
and you see a watch, and you pick it up,
you look at it, and you say,
you know that there had to be an engineer.
You may not know who the designer was,
but this is vastly too complex,
the intricacy of the parts intertwined,
and working the materials, the workmanship,
and this isn't something just arose spontaneously,
this was engineered, that's intelligent design.
They say by the same token,
as simple as single cell is vastly more complex
than a wrist watch, and therefore looking at it,
it's intuitively obvious there had to be
an intelligent design,
natural, supernatural process,
something we can't know,
and so this requires you to accept a combination
of both some physical and chemical process
that the design used,
but also some supernatural or beyond knowing,
something extra scientific, pseudo scientific,
if you will, type of approach.
And so we come to this question,
is intelligent design science?
The proponents, of course, argued that it is,
and in one very narrow sense,
it passes one of the litmus tests of science,
and we think we need to accept this,
it does make testable predictions, testable hypothesis.
They say there's absolutely no natural process
by which an eye could evolve from a non-seeing organism,
and you can test that.
There's no process by which the bacterial flagellum
could have evolved, there's no process
by which the first single cell could have arisen,
and if you think about it, then those,
if we can go into a laboratory environment
and show step by step a project of emergent complexity
by which you go from simplicity to complexity
from no eye to an eye,
or from no flagellum to a flagellum.
If you can show that can be done,
then you've disproved a prediction of intelligent design.
So it is falsifiable in that sense.
However, it still fails the litmus test of science,
that there's this untestable unseen designer
that's lurking in there,
and whether they wanna claim it's God or not,
that's a separate issue altogether.
So intelligent design is difficult.
What are we to do as scientists who face with this?
Some people argue we should teach intelligent design,
teach Darwinian evolution, and let the children decide
as if these are two equally weighted things.
And then the scientists say, no, no, we can't do that.
And individuals and societies all around the world,
they constantly are coming up with these statements,
which makes us actually look bad.
It makes us look like we're clothes-minded,
like somehow we're afraid of this debate.
And I would argue, yes, every educated person
in this country should understand this debate,
but it shouldn't be taught in a science class,
it should be taught in comparative religion,
or in current events, or philosophy, something like that.
But it really is a problem for science when you have,
there it is, yeah, this kind of statement
in the American Chemical Society and everybody else.
So what are we to do as scientists?
How do we approach this?
Well, my point of view is that you have to design
a research program, and that research program
has to demonstrate a transition
from a non-living to a living world.
And if you can do that step by step,
if you can basically show that there's a series of steps
that go from simplicity to complexity systematically,
then you have disproved that tenet of intelligent design,
you've shown that there's a simple natural process.
Now, you still could argue on the other side
of this point of view, and you may recall
that there are a number of people who have said,
for example, that Stonehenge was built by space aliens,
that they came in with their flying saucers,
and they picked up the large stones and set them into place.
And the sad thing, I mean, no scientist, no anthropologist
can disprove that hypothesis.
That is a hypothesis that is basically
unfalsifiable at this stage.
But what we can do,
what we certainly can do is demonstrate
a much simpler process by which a prune
is made.
A thousand able-bodied people who had rope
and had wood and had stone tools and had time
and had an organized society and the will to do things
like this, as humans have always had the will to do things
like this, could have built it
with all technologies that we understand and know.
And so using Occam's razor, using this principle
that scientists must rely on that you take
the simplest possible explanation or phenomena,
you have the minimum number of extraordinary assumptions.
Then this has to be accepted as the true way
that Stonehenge was built.
And we can falsify, again, that the idea
that there were intelligent designers associated
with Stonehenge.
Okay, so my outline tonight
is to kind of take it as an assumption
that there is a natural process by which you can go
from geochemical simplicity to biological complexity.
And the process is called emergent complexity.
I want to look in detail what emergent complexity is
and then apply it to the emergence of biomolecules,
the first step in the origin of life,
then the emergence of organized molecular systems,
and a key step in the origin of life,
then the emergence of self-replicating systems.
And finally, the emergence of natural selection,
which follows logically from number four here.
So this is the outline of tonight's lecture.
Let's look at this thing, emergent complexity.
There's so many definitions of emergence.
We had a wonderful dinner this evening.
We were talking about this and we really didn't agree,
but we all said, yeah, we're sort of talking
about the same thing.
Well, as far as I'm concerned,
all emergent phenomena arise from the interaction
of many different agents.
They can be physical particles.
They can be some other aspect of a system
which can assume combinatorically huge numbers
of possible configurations.
And then you pass energy across that system
and what occurs then is some kind of patterning
or behavior or some kind of interesting property
which is selected for by the fact
that you have energy interacting with those particles.
So ripples, sand dunes, the various kinds of braiding
that you see in stream beds,
these are all examples of emergence.
At the much larger scale of stars, you see this too.
And what you'll see is common to these systems
is that in each system there are individual objects
which are responding to the local force environment.
A sand grain only experiences a few contact forces
with adjacent grains plus the wind
or the water that passes across it.
The case of stars, the spiral arms arise simply
by the local gravitational attraction,
the fields of each star,
and yet you see these larger patterns emerging.
And in a rather more complex case,
but still intrinsically the same,
consciousness arises from the interactions of neurons.
Each neuron only in contact in this case
with potentially thousands of others
with variable interactions of those, but still.
Each neuron is just experiencing a local environment
and yet the collective property,
the emergent property of consciousness
is something that goes beyond what any one neuron experiences.
This is the character of emergence.
One of my favorite examples is slime mold,
dicteostellium, a social amoeba.
This organism lives most of its life
as a single isolated cell.
You can see the nucleus, this is the eukaryotic cell.
But under certain circumstances,
when the temperature, the humidity,
or the nutrients in the forest floor reaches certain value,
these individual cells will send out chemical signals.
And those chemical signals are then
causing responses by adjacent cells.
They begin to come together to coalesce.
They form a slug-like organism
that actually can crawl across the forest floor.
Remember, these are amoebas,
these are single-celled organisms
that are acting cooperatively.
And then ultimately what happens is you get a patterning
and that patterning results in these stalk-like structures.
New cells spores are released from the tops of the stalks.
They go spreading out in the forest.
And then these things melt back into the forest floor
and they become single-cell organisms again.
An amazing behavior, collective behavior,
an emergent behavior, which results
from the individual objects responding
to their local environment.
You can think of our own bodies in the sense
as that kind of emergent phenomenon,
not only our consciousness, but the whole body.
We're a collection of single cells
that interact in this way.
And so we see this in so many different kind of behaviors,
the consciousness, again,
this idea of an individual nerve cell
that has many dendrites.
You have a neural connection.
You have these electrical impulses,
which cause this collective phenomenon,
and that's consciousness.
So you can mention thousands of examples of this there.
All around us all the time,
it's a part of our natural world,
and it must have been part of the origin of life.
We see it at so many scales,
in astronomy at the scale of planets,
we see it at the scale of stars,
exploding stars, we see it at the scale of galaxies.
And of course, in biology,
we see it at scales of molecules.
For example, in cell membranes,
we see it at the scale of cells.
We see it also at the scale of organisms
and their social behavior.
I think it's astonishing.
This is a photograph of ants tending aphids.
Now, how in the world can that be?
How can ants?
Each ant is only responding to local signals.
By the way, it used to be thought
it was only chemical signals,
but recent studies have shown the ants
also emit little very high-pitched squeaky sounds
so that there's a kind of oral communication as well.
But whatever it is,
each ant is only responding to its local environment,
and yet there are these amazing collective behaviors.
That's emergence, okay.
So, central assumptions about origin of life research.
And you have to make some of these,
just as an experimentalist,
you have to make your system simple.
Of course, the first one is that life is carbon-based,
and you don't have to do any exotic chemistry.
We're not talking about silicon chemistry,
as much as silicon chemistry is very interesting,
but we're really looking at carbon-based chemistry,
organic chemistry of a classical kind.
We also think that life's a chemical process
that used the raw materials of an early Earth,
a planet with oceans, atmosphere, rocks, and minerals.
Nothing exotic there.
And finally, there's a series of emergent steps.
Now, what do we mean by emergent steps?
Well, basically, I think you can reduce the origin of life
to four main kinds of emergent steps.
And this is really the heart and soul of my talk tonight.
The first is you have to make
the basic building blocks of life.
The biomolecules, the amino acids, which make proteins,
the sugars that make carbohydrates,
the lipid molecules that make cell membranes,
the building blocks of DNA and RNA.
That's fundamental.
You have to have those,
and so there has to be a process to make those.
Next, you have to organize them into the larger structures,
the membranes, the polymers that are so fundamental
to the functioning of life.
The third step is organizing into self-replicating systems,
collection of molecules that actually make copies
of themselves.
And once you have molecules that make copies of themselves,
then the natural selection follows inevitably.
That's just something, and we'll see how that works
through the course of the evening.
So the idea here, though, the idea of going from
geochemistry to biochemistry is it's a vast gulf.
It's very, very hard to understand that.
But if you can imagine the origin of life now
as a series of separate experimental programs,
make biomolecules, make the polymers and the membranes,
then find a self-replicating system,
and then that system begins to evolve.
If you can think of it that way,
then you can set up a series of experiments
that are focusing on the individual steps
of the process that makes them much easier.
So the first step, how do you make the biomolecules?
Well, one of the things that seems to be fundamental
to all of these studies of the origin of life
is that you can't produce complexity in the system.
By complexity, I mean an information-rich small volume.
That's what life is.
Life is a very tiny volume with a huge amount
of information collected from the environment
and concentrated on it.
You can't do that unless you start
with a complex environment.
The complex environment provides the selective pressure
to give you that information in a small volume.
And so what kinds of complexity am I talking about?
It's very simple.
You need gradients, temperature compositional gradients.
You need cycles, hot, cold, wet, dry, day and night,
high tide, low tide, all sorts of cycles.
You need to have fluxes.
These are fluid fluxes that pass over
from one environment to another that move things around.
You need to have interfaces.
That can be mineral surfaces in contact with water.
It can be the surface of the water in contact with air.
It can be aerosol particles in the upper atmosphere.
You need interfaces.
And finally, you need to have chemical complexity.
And one of the real key things here
is that the geochemistry of Earth
is incredibly complicated.
You're talking about dozens and dozens
of major and minor elements, not just trace elements,
major and minor elements that are
in a typical geochemical environment.
And to do an origin of life experiment
and only use this carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen
is just an unrealistic way to think about this process.
OK, so the first step is to make biomolecules.
And it turns out, I'll just give you the punch line.
For the last 60 years, this has been done with a vengeance
in virtually any energetic environment on Earth or in space
where there's carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
and energy of some source or another.
You make these molecules.
You make the building blocks of life.
So the idea here is to make carbon-carbon bonds.
One way of thinking about it, you start with volcanic gases
like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
hydrogen disulfide, water.
And you basically build carbon-carbon bonds,
making two carbon molecules, three carbon molecules,
and so forth.
That's what we're trying to do.
Now, it turns out that this was discovered very early,
a way to do this in a very efficient way.
And that's the classic Miller-Urie experiment.
I'm sure you've heard about this experiment.
Just a tabletop piece of glass apparatus,
very simple, very elegant.
It has a boiling fluid, very gently boiling water
that represents the early oceans.
It has an atmosphere of various gases.
The original gases they used include ammonia and hydrogen,
water, methane.
And there are little electric sparks
that simulate lightning.
And if you run this apparatus for two or three days,
it starts first the solution starts turning pink,
and then brown.
And you get this black, oily goo that starts forming.
And you get a lot of really interesting organic molecules.
In fact, many of the building blocks of life,
you'll see in this list amino acids.
You'll see lipids.
You'll see carbohydrates.
You'll see metabolic molecules.
You'll see building blocks of DNA and RNA.
In fact, this was so convincing.
It looked like a balanced diet to people.
And in fact, the experiment, in a sense, worked too well.
Because Stanley Miller and many of his followers,
his disciples, people became religiously convinced almost
that this had to be the way.
It was so obvious that this was the origin of life.
And so they basically denied any support for anybody else.
Stanley Miller, of course, justifiably
got a great deal of fame from this experiment.
But the price of that fame was that he
got leadership in a field, which he then
dominated for at least three decades, until NASA came along.
NASA came along because there are other environments
that NASA specializes in besides the surface
of a warm, wet planet.
If life is confined only to a warm, wet planet with lightning,
you're talking about Earth and maybe Mars early on.
And that's it.
But there's deep space.
So people like Lou Almondola and NASA Ames
try to study deep space environments
by building vacuum chambers with very cold conditions,
about 10 Kelvin, shining ultraviolet radiation on ices.
And you can produce all kinds of interesting organic species
when you do this, including amino acids,
including carbohydrates, including lipids.
And then the work that we began about 15 years ago
is looking at high temperature, high pressure, black smoker,
or deep volcanic environments on the floor of the ocean.
Something Stanley Miller hated.
He called us ventists, as if we were some kind
of weird cult religion.
And yet, here's an energetic environment
where you have a lot of chemical energy, redox energy,
the very reduced sulfides coming out of these fluids
in contact with much more oxidized water.
And that's what life uses as its energy source, redox couples.
Life are little like electric circuits
where electrons are flowing through.
And this is a great way to give you
that electric potential energy.
And so what we did in our early experiments
was to begin looking at these environments.
And NASA loved this, because if life could have arisen
in deep, dark, hot hydrothermal zone,
then that gives you a reason to study not just Mars today,
because there's deep zone, but Europa and Callisto
and Ganymede and Titan.
And you can go down the list of all these,
even some asteroids, all possibly have hydrothermal zones
where this kind of chemistry could go on.
So what we did was take little gold tubes.
We put various chemical ingredients, water,
and maybe a little bit of organic material in there.
Sometimes just CO2 and water.
We ran it on high-pressure, high-temperature devices.
Some of this was done with Hat Yoder, who is a great colleague.
He was in the laboratory every day
until shortly before his death at the age of 75,
an amazing guy to work with.
And so we'd do these runs.
We'd analyze them using various classic chemical techniques,
analytical, organic chemistry, like gas chromatography.
And the idea here is we are trying
to make carbon-carbon bonds in these environments.
Now, there's two kinds of carbon-carbon bonds
that pop up frequently in origin of life discussions.
One is making longer and longer molecules
by a process called Fischer-Trop synthesis,
basically making molecules longer by adding CH2 groups
and just sort of bumping these things longer.
So that's one standard process.
Very typical, this is an industrial process
of great importance.
And it turns out this is something
that you can do very easily in the lab.
Another thing that you might want to do,
other kinds of carbon,
oh, let me show you first one of our first experiments.
This is something we did,
like one of the very first naive experiments we ran in 1996.
So you have just carbon dioxide, hydrogen,
and water in your capsule,
and you put a little bit of iron metal.
We thought that might be a good catalyst.
Conditions are very simple, 300 Celsius, 500 atmospheres.
The kinds of conditions you might find
in a deep ocean volcanic vent
or in a subsurface environment,
ran a thing for 24 hours.
And what we got was just an explosion
of Fischer-Trop reactions.
What you're seeing here is a small piece
of a gas chromatographic trace
in which you basically pass a mixture of molecules
through a column, a long column,
which is coated with materials
so that some molecules, small molecules,
pass through it more quickly,
the larger molecules take longer.
And so, versus time, which is the horizontal axis,
you'll see a series of spikes here.
Each spike representing a different compound.
And the big spikes are just long chain molecules,
these alkanes, and the number 18, 19, 20, and so forth,
that's the number of carbon atoms that have been added.
And remember, we only started with carbon dioxide.
That was the only source of carbon in these runs.
So we're making some really interesting things very quickly.
You'll also see other little bumps and wiggles.
As you expand this, there's some alcohols in here.
There's some alkenes.
There's some branched hydrocarbons.
So, you know, there's a lot of interesting chemistry
going on in these capsules.
It was very, very easy to do this.
Now, there's another kind of process, too,
and this is called hydroformylation,
where instead of adding that CH2 group
to make the molecule longer, you can add a CO.
This is carbonylation or hydroformylation.
You basically, you're adding these,
and you can make longer and longer molecules.
And this leads to molecules that are very important
in metabolic cycles, at least the kind of molecules
that are in the reductive TCA cycle or the Krebs cycle,
which is a metabolic cycle.
We'll meet that a little bit later.
And so this is a very interesting set of molecules, too.
And some of our experiments yield to these.
And indeed, if you look at a variety of transition
metal sulfides, we've used lots of other minerals as well,
but these are iron and copper and nickel cobalt sulfides
and so forth on the horizontal scale here.
And what you see in blue, I hope there's not anybody
who's colorblind who can't see this.
I apologize for the color scheme.
It should be changed.
But some of these are very effective at Fischer-Tropf
synthesis.
And when you start with a small molecule, sometimes
as much as 20 or even 30% of those molecules
are elongated through this process.
And others, particularly the cobalt and the nickel sulfides,
are very efficient at hydroformylation.
In that case, sometimes over 30% of the molecules
are elongated in this way.
Now, what this is telling us is that if you
have a natural geochemical environment on the ocean floor
and these black smokers, where you have nickel and cobalt
and iron and copper sulfides all mixed together,
that the molecules are going to be produced in perfusion,
and you're going to have to do a hydroformylation.
Here, you're going to do a Fischer-Tropf reaction over here.
And this doesn't even bring in nitrogen
when you start adding amine groups and making esters
and all sorts of interesting chemistries going on.
In fact, you just get a flood of chemistry.
So this kind of process is really interesting.
And for those of you who are wondering
about why this chemistry works, it really
has to do with the bonding of CO particularly strongly
to these.
That's where the hydroformylation comes in.
So there's a lot of details here.
I mean, George Cody could give you
an incredible lecture on every chemical step
that he's found, and it's a fascinating process.
But the really bottom line is that making these molecules
is straightforward.
We now know half a dozen different ways
and plausible prebiotic environments
to make the small molecules of life.
This was really a critical part.
And I'm pleased to say, as a card-carrying mineralogist,
that it looks like minerals played a fundamental role here.
Minerals are going to come back again.
And I have to give you a warning here
because there is a curiosity about origin of life research.
It's just a fact of life that humans
see in the natural world what they know best.
I'm a mineralogist.
Therefore, the origin of life revolves around minerals.
There are other people who are molecular biologists
as they study DNA and RNA.
And for them, the origin of life is all about DNA and RNA.
There are lipid chemists who propose the lipid world.
There are people who study polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
For them, it's the POW world.
Everybody sees in the origin of life
what they've got their PhD in.
I got my PhD in mineralogy.
But I am pleased to tell you, in spite of that fact,
it's why the kind of minerals have played a key role
in the origin of life.
And so it's really fun to be able to talk about that tonight.
OK.
So you made these molecules.
It's easy to make the molecules.
But then you have to do something useful with them.
And one of the difficulties here
is that the prebiotic processes I've told you about
make vast numbers of molecules, not just a few dozen
or a few hundred molecules.
They make tens of thousands of different molecular species.
But life, life isn't like that.
Life is an incredible degree of molecular selectivity
and idiosyncratic use of molecules.
There's a catalog of all the known organic species,
relatively small organic molecules.
It's called Bielstein.
And last time I looked, it was six or 7 million
different molecules.
Now E. coli, that's a very common single-sode organism
that you've probably heard about.
Guess how many different small molecules there are in E. coli?
Remember, it's 6 to 7 million to work with.
It's 500.
It's 500 different small molecules in E. coli.
Now that's incredible selection
out of all those possible molecules.
So that was a really good guess, though.
Some people, I would have guessed 100,000
or something like that.
So you have to ask this question,
what prebiotic processes contribute
to this selection and concentration?
That becomes a really fundamental thing.
Well, I think there are two processes that we're working on.
I think we understand both of them fairly well,
at least in general terms.
And the first is self-selection or self-organization.
And let me tell you the story about one
of the very first experiments that we did
was actually kind of naive in retrospect,
but it was clever at the time.
This reverse citric acid cycle, or the TCA cycle
I was telling you about, has several steps.
And what we thought is if we could show that minerals
catalyzed those steps, then you could
show that the citric acid cycle is a core metabolic
foundation of all life, and it just arose spontaneously.
And you'd have that cycle, and that
would be problem solved, basically.
So one of the key steps in that reverse cycle
is going from three carbon molecule pyruvic acid
to the four carbon molecule oxaloacetic acid.
And so we thought if we went to high pressure
and took pyruvic acid and added CO2,
that you'd just go from 3 plus 1 to 4.
And we'd make a lot of oxaloacetic acid.
That would be a nice science paper.
And we'd be able to do this in a week.
That's not what happened.
We ran these pyruvic acid in very simple conditions,
200 Celsius, 2,000 atmospheres, two hours, just
perfectly normal conditions.
So you start out by putting this tiny little drop,
tiny drop of pyruvic acid into the capsule
with a small amount of water and CO2.
And so it's just a colorless liquid.
There's just not much stuff there.
And after you pull the capsules out, they're all puffed up.
They're all swollen.
So we knew there was a lot of internal gas pressure.
So you've got to be a little careful with these things,
because you can generate a lot of gas
if you break down the pyruvic acid.
So we first put it in liquid nitrogen.
We froze it down and then snipped off the end.
And we go, bang!
It just was like there still was a lot of pressure,
even after you froze the thing down.
Drop it into a vial and it just sits there.
And after about 30 seconds, it starts hissing and foaming.
And this yellow, brown, oily goo starts pouring out
of the capsule.
We started with one little drop of pyruvic acid.
Weird all of this stuff come from.
And then the smell, organic molecules
can smell a lot of different ways.
At lower temperature, 200 Celsius or so,
it smells like molasses, a very sweet, sugary smell.
And if you get up to around 300, it
smells exactly like Jack Daniels.
It's the most amazing thing.
And it just fills the room.
And people would walk by our laboratory
and they'd say, can I have some where's the party?
You know, they want to.
And it's just, so you're making really interesting
organic molecules, right?
I mean, the thing is you're not making oxaloacetic acid here.
We're making something else.
And so then we run that GC that I was telling you about.
And it's just a mess.
This is what chemists call hump pain.
That is, it's 10,000 or more different molecules
are being produced here.
I mean, this pyruvic acid, it cyclizes,
it deals elder condensation, it polymerizes,
it fragments in different ways.
Every one of those peaks, it's just a complete mess.
And the trouble is here, this is very, very typical
of these kinds of experiments.
The problem is that you're making
too many different molecules.
Remember, life only uses a few.
And yet here you're making this vast number of molecules.
So how do you deal with this?
And we just sort of lamented that we just
run into a complete dead end because this couldn't
have anything to do with the origin of life.
And then we talked to our friend, David Deemer,
at the University of California, Santa Cruz,
who's a world's expert on lipid self-organization.
He said, well, have you tried putting in the water?
I said, what do you mean?
He said, well, maybe it'll self-organize.
And then we said, you need to characterize it.
And so we went to Marilyn Fogel,
who's an analytical organic chemist at our laboratory.
And she showed that we had made a huge number of molecules
that were 10, 11, 12, 13 carbon atoms long,
lipid-type molecules, very interesting links
for self-organization.
By the way, you notice everybody's
smiling, origin of life, people are very commonly smiling.
This is a lot of fun.
So that's just something.
And yes, indeed, what was happening,
they said, well, maybe these things will self-organize.
And the self-organization they're talking about
is what basically goes into forming cell membranes as well.
It's a lipid bilayer.
These are molecules that are hydrophilic.
They like water when they're hydrophobic at the other end.
And so when you put them in water,
the molecules find each other.
They line up so that the water loving ends
are on the outside and on the inside of the sphere.
And all the little tails that hate water
are as far away from water as possible.
And when we threw this stuff in water, pingo.
These just appear.
And they're fluorescent.
I mean, they're just gorgeous little objects.
And so in spite of the fact that we made
thousands of different molecules,
some subset of those molecules in water self-organize,
and they make these membranes.
And it's very clear now.
I mean, you find this when you extract molecules
from the merches and meteorite.
When you extract molecules from Lou Alamondola's experiment,
just from the Miller-Yuri experiment.
Anytime you do that, you get this phenomenon.
So clearly, one step in the origin of life
is the selection and concentration
of molecules through molecular self-organization.
They find each other, and they select it.
They make these structures.
Now, these aren't cell membranes,
but they show that this process is so intrinsic.
It's a deterministic aspect of that early world.
OK.
Is it cell-organized water?
Oh, that's a really interesting question.
I know we haven't done that experiment.
It's a very robust process, though.
I mean, you can boil this water, and they still
organize themselves.
You can put salt in this water.
I mean, this is stuff where if you use pure molecules,
they tend not to do very well under these extreme conditions.
But this stuff, this just goes gangbusters.
So it looks like this is really a very intrinsic part
of the nature.
We're making these kinds of tiny units
with insides and outsides.
Now, as many molecules are important to biology
or water-soluble, many of the amino acids,
certainly the sugars, they dissolve in water.
So they're not going to self-organize in this way.
And furthermore, there's an additional complication
that many of these molecules come in left and right-handed
pairs.
And the trouble is that when you do the prebiotic synthesis,
you make a 50-50 mixture of them.
And yet, when you look at life, life
uses the left-handed amino acids predominantly,
and it uses the right-handed sugars.
And so there's a chiral handedness,
a chiral selection that's going on.
And that's a big mystery.
And so one of the things we're wondering how in the world
does that happen, as a mineralogist,
they went back to the mineral world.
And one of our hypotheses was that perhaps
mineral surfaces play a role.
What you see here is a schematic diagram
of a crystal of calcite, a very common calcium carbonate
mineral.
It's the mineral that forms the shells of snails and clams
and limestone coral reefs and so forth.
And it has left and right-handed surfaces.
And our hypothesis is the surfaces
might selectively concentrate left and right-handed molecules.
And this would be a way then to organize things to select them.
Well, it turns out that this is a very important question.
Chirality is important.
You can imagine how left and right-handed molecules
form, because you have a central carbon atom
with four different things attached to it.
And you can attach them clockwise or counterclockwise,
if you will.
So clearly, this is important to questions
of the origin of life.
But it goes far beyond that, because if you bought drugs
lately, the chances are that some of the drugs you're buying
are chirally pure.
That is, they have to be refined.
And most of the synthesis processes,
it's easier to make a combination of left and right-handed
molecules at the same time.
So to make them chirally pure is very expensive.
And so this is now $200 billion a year industry.
And any new ways of separating molecules is important.
It's important for a number of reasons.
Some of them are just kind of amusing.
There is a left and right-handed version
of a molecule called limonene.
The one version smells and tastes like oranges.
The other version smells and tastes like lemons.
And these are both used as fragrances or flavors.
And the reason this happens is because, of course,
the molecules that form your taste buds are themselves chiral.
And so they're sensitive to just like a left and a right
hand fitting a glove.
They react differently to different shaped molecules.
More sinister aspect is the thalidomide story,
where one version cured morning sickness,
but the other version caused birth defects.
And the trouble here is even if you have a chirally pure form
of thalidomide, in your body it undergoes
a process called racemization that
is flipping from the left to the right-handed form and back.
So over a period of 24 hours, you
might take the chirally pure form,
but within a few hours, you've been poisoned by the other.
And so this really is a very serious concern.
OK.
So here we have this conundrum.
Prebiotic synthesis makes 50-50 mixtures.
Life uses very pure forms of left or right.
And so you have to ask, what's the mechanism of symmetry
breaking?
And so again, one of the hypotheses
we've been looking at is the possibility
that minerals do this.
There are natural minerals that are chiral.
Quartz is the most common example.
And the reason there are right and left-handed quartz crystals
is because one of the structure elements is a helix.
It can either be a helix up to the right
or a helix up to the left.
And so you get these two different versions
of quartz left and right.
Now, one of the things people always
used to do is take quartz crystals, a left crystal
or right crystal, and crush it into an extremely fine powder.
And the reason for that is if you
want to do experiments on surfaces,
it's better to have a large surface area,
and a fine powder is going to increase your surface area.
The trouble is that destroys a very important piece
of information.
And I first sort of realized this when
I was a mineral collector as a teenager.
I went to Paterson, New Jersey, and I
collected this sample of quartz crystals, the biggest ones
here, about a millimeter across.
So when you look at these under higher magnification,
what you see is that there's a red coating.
That's hematite.
That's iron oxide.
And the iron oxide is not uniformly
coating these crystals.
Rather, it's coating only alternate faces.
Quartz has three-fold symmetry, not six-fold symmetry.
So the six little triangular faces
include three of one kind and three of another kind.
And what we're seeing here is the fundamental importance.
If you're talking about interactions
between a molecule and a crystal,
the different faces are fundamentally important
because they have completely different surface structures.
So hematite sticks to one face.
It doesn't stick to the other face.
That's going to be true of any kind of molecular selection.
So if you want to try to understand chiral selection
of mineral surface, and you grind up the crystal,
you're destroying all that information.
So a lot of our research in the last few years
has been devoted to taking single crystal specimens of minerals,
things like feldspar, the commonest mineral of the alkalis
and aluminum silicate, diopsoid, a member of the pyroxene
family, which are the commonest magnesium and iron minerals.
And here again is calcite.
All of these minerals have natural chiral surfaces.
If you find really nice crystals with mirror smooth surfaces,
you can do experiments on them, various optical,
spectroscopic, chemical absorption experiments,
and actually see the difference in the absorption.
And that's another whole talk, exactly how we do that
and the experiments.
It's really fascinating work.
The bottom line is this works.
And you can take crystals and show
that you get significant concentrations of left
and right-handed molecules separating onto faces.
Now, as many of you will anticipate in the early Earth,
there were equal numbers of left and right-handed faces.
But what you get here is the advantage
is you get local environments, local surfaces, local volumes
where you're concentrating left-handed molecules over here,
right-handed molecules over here.
And if you think about the origin of life,
it really had to be at a collection of molecules
at a place and a time in a very small volume.
And so here you have an incredible number
of experiments going on on different mineral surfaces
in different places.
Each one of those is an experiment
of molecular selection, concentration,
templating, organization, and maybe then further,
we see polymerization on some of these surfaces.
We can also understand in some detail why this is true,
by the way.
This isn't just sort of magic.
If you look at the surface structure,
this is a density functional calculation
of left and right-handed aspartic acid
on that calcite surface that I just showed you.
And when you bring the molecules close,
you can basically try different configurations
and find the minimum energy configuration
of the molecule on the surface.
And when you do that, the de aspartate
attaches very nicely on three different points of attachment.
In order to have a chiral selection,
you need to have three non-colonial points.
It's like if you go bowling, they're
left-handed bowling balls and right-handed bowling balls.
And if you're right-handed, you can't use a left-handed bowling
ball on vice versa.
Well, it's the three points.
Well, when you look at the L assortment,
there's only two points of attachment.
And the surface becomes much more distorted.
And it's just simply a geometrical fact
that these three points fit on that surface and these don't.
And of course, then, if you look at the mirror image surface,
the right-handed one fits better than the left-handed.
So the thing that's really amazing,
there's an 8 kilocalorie of all difference in this.
That's a huge energetic difference, which essentially
means that under room temperatures,
and if you had an idealized surface of this sort,
that you'd have more than 99% in antioselectivity
on the two faces.
So it's a pretty major effect.
Now, there's still a huge number of experiments to be done.
There's so many surfaces.
There's so many different molecules.
And to understand all the details,
it's going to take a lot of years of work.
But the fundamental thing here is
that the second emergent step, that is selection
and concentration of just the right elements,
we know it can happen by self-organization
of some molecules like lipids and by surface templating
of other molecules on mineral surfaces.
So we really have the basic idea of how this works.
OK, now step three.
And this is the biggie.
And this has not been solved yet.
But there's a huge amount of work,
both experimental and theoretical,
on how you make a self-replicating system.
How do you make a set of molecules that copies itself?
One of the sort of fundamental systems in all biology,
a core metabolic cycle of every living thing,
is this reverse citric acid cycle.
It's a series of molecules going from very simple molecules,
CO2, two carbon acetic acid, three carbon pyruvic acid,
four carbon acetylacetic acid.
You go around this cycle to six carbon citric acid,
and then that splits into 2 plus 4, and then 2 plus 4.
And then you have two cycles, and then those split,
and then you have four, and then you have eight,
and you just double each time you go around the cycle.
This is an ingenous synthesis.
And furthermore, as you go off the side here,
if you add amino groups and other kinds
of very simple chemical steps, just a few steps away
are all the amino acids, the building blocks of DNA and RNA.
So you can do a lot with a citric acid cycle.
This is a great source of metabolic creativity.
And one of the things we've been trying to do
is come up with experimental approaches
where you use mineral catalysts and make
each of these steps go.
Our guiding light in this has been Harold Morowitz
at George Mason University.
He, for many years, was at Yale, theoretical biologist
who has basically been pushing this idea that a deterministic
aspect of life anywhere in the cosmos
is going to be this reverse citric acid cycle.
It uses just carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
And the small molecules are very simple.
There's no chiral step in this, by the way.
So this is a pre-chiral kind of situation.
And he's very persuasive about this as one possibility.
Now, we've been trying to do this.
This is mostly work of George Cody
in this very complicated spaghetti diagram,
shows some of the pathways that we have demonstrated.
But also, there are a few key ones that we have not.
So of the 11 main reactions in that cycle,
we've basically got nine of them to go.
Eight of them go pretty easily.
The ninth one is sort of a tenuous thing.
But two of them, including that pyruvic to oxaloacetic,
we've not had any success in getting that to go
into any of the catalytic circumstances.
So maybe it is.
Maybe there's some special set of circumstances
that allows that to happen, but that's one possibility.
So we're studying this as a possible self-replicating
cycle that may have gotten going just
through mineral catalysts.
There are other ideas out there, though.
Stuart Kaufman at the Santa Fe Institute
came up with this idea of an autocatalytic network
of molecules.
And this is really kind of the opposite.
Instead of just using a few molecules making a simple cycle,
he says, let's take advantage of the fact
that we have tens of thousands of different molecules.
And when you do, some of those molecules
are going to catalyze the formation of others.
And they're going to catalyze the breakdown of others.
And so eventually, you're going to end up
with a network of molecules, all of whom
reinforce themselves, but destroy anything that's
not in that network.
So this becomes a collection.
And he says it may be 1,000.
It may be 10,000 different molecules to begin with.
And so you have some chemical milieu
in which all these molecules are interacting and breaking down
and reinforcing and catalyzing each other.
And that becomes kind of the core network
of self-replicating molecules, even though it's not bound
by any membrane or anything like this.
And then gradually, as the molecules
become more efficient at replicating some of them,
they're going to start forming new combinations that
catalyze a smaller number.
And the core set of molecules gets smaller and smaller
and smaller until you get basically down to something
that can be encapsulated.
Now, when you ask Stuart Kaufman, well,
what chemicals are you talking about molecules?
He says that's for the chemists to figure out.
So I'm not sure if this is going very far experimentally.
It's very hard to deal with a collection of 10,000
unspecified molecules and see if they, in fact,
are autocatalytic.
But it's an interesting idea that's out there.
And it does make reference to the fact
that the early geochemical environments on Earth
are going to be extremely chemically complex.
And this builds in that complexity.
And then there's the people who promote the RNA world,
the idea that RNA has this ability both to carry
information.
Presumably, you could have a self replicating RNA molecule
that could also act as a catalyst,
because there are these ribozymes, enzymes,
that use the RNA building blocks.
So that RNA does it all.
And the idea that this has been very
seductive to people in molecular biology,
and that's why I say, for them, this
is the answer to the origin of life.
They say, all you need to do is show us
a way to make a self replicating RNA molecule,
and then we've solved the whole thing.
And then metabolism just sort of gets layered on it somehow
to make things more efficient.
Well, the RNA world dilemma is that it's a great way
to potentially make copies of yourself.
It's a great way to carry information.
It's possibly a great way to catalyze reactions.
But there's no known way to synthesize it.
No one is able to figure out a way how to do that.
And so you really have to figure out,
you've got the prebiotic soup with all these potential
building blocks of life, and then you've got the RNA world,
and that gap's a big one to fill.
So that's really a mystery.
And I think the conclusion for step three
has to be that we haven't solved this yet.
The self replicating system is the fundamental divide,
is the fundamental gap.
And that's what the most exciting work in the origin of life
is all right now.
I think it's going to be done.
I think there's going to be a laboratory system,
a plausible prebiotic system that will be shown.
There's work at Harvard.
There's work at Scripps.
There's work at other laboratories in Europe
that I think are really on the right track here.
But if we knew all the answers, it
wouldn't be fun to get up in the morning, right?
That's why we do science.
Anyway, once you have the emergence
of a self replicating system, I will
argue that the emergence of natural selection must follow.
It's inevitable to follow, is this kind of selective process
is going to be inevitable when you have a self replicating
system of organic molecules.
Because organic molecules are incredibly mutable.
With very, very small energy differences,
you can replace a hydrogen with a CH3.
You can replace an OH group with an SH group.
You can do all the different things
you can do with organic chemistry.
And this is going to have happened.
And so it's inevitable that when you
have self replicating system of molecules,
they're going to be variants of those molecules that
come along that do things slightly better.
And because they're making copies of themselves
and therefore competing for the resources
in the environment, any increased efficiency
is going to be rewarded very, very quickly.
OK, so this just, I think, is going to happen.
But I don't have to just wave my arms about this.
There is actually a laboratory demonstration
of how this can happen.
And some of you may know about Jack Shostak, a colleague.
He's at Harvard University.
Won the Nobel Prize a few years ago for work not related
to what I'm going to tell you about.
But he has worked on something called aptimer evolution.
This is molecular evolution.
It's now a billion dollar a year industry,
because it's such a powerful way of taking one molecule
to target another molecule.
So here's what he does.
OK, he starts with a molecule that he wants to target.
He wants to basically have a molecule that's
designed to bind to another one.
And so he uses a molecule called GTP.
The molecule of GTP is attached to little beads, which
are put in test tubes or beakers.
So they're just sort of hanging out there into a solution.
And then he makes an amazing random pool of RNA fragments.
10 to the 14th different randomly produced strands of RNA.
And these RNA strands are typically
on the order of 100 MRS, so 100 RNA letters long.
And a strand that's 100 RNA molecules long
will fold up in some way.
And most of the times it folds up in ways
that have absolutely nothing to do with binding to a GTP
molecule.
But once every so often, and when
you make 10 to the 14th different versions,
some of those will sort of loosely bind to the GTP.
So the neat thing you can do is a sequence of experiments
where you take that beaker filled with little balls that
have the GTP on it, you pour in your solution of 10
to the 14th molecule, sum them stick,
you let it sit there for 20 minutes or whatever,
stirred around, and then you pour out the solution.
And you're pouring out most of those 10 to the 14th molecules.
But remaining on the GTP are a few RNA molecules
that stick fairly well.
And so you basically wash those, you collect them,
you then go through a series of standard genetic processes
that turns the RNA into DNA, you copy it,
you then basically mutate it while you're doing that,
and you make another 10 to the 14th strand.
But in this case, every one of those 10 to the 14 strands
is now a mutant of one that used to stick a little bit.
And so in the second cycle of this process,
it sticks much better.
And some of those stick extremely well.
And when you do this, just a half a dozen cycles,
you end up with a molecule that sticks with absolutely
the optimum theoretical maximum binding energy.
It's as good as anything could possibly stick.
Now you think about it, it's 100 mer.
And so there are four different DNA or RNA letters.
And that's four to the 100th power
different possible combinations.
If you were to ask a theoretical chemist to calculate,
for me, an RNA 100 mer that's going to bind optimally
to a DNA target.
At this point, there's not enough computational power
in the world to come close to that.
Maybe someday when we have principles, there will be,
but now you can't do it.
But using this, you can do it in a couple of days.
You basically use evolution, molecular evolution,
simply by selecting for a particular function.
And every time you do it, you come up with a molecule
that's optimally engineered to do this.
So it turns out evolution is an incredibly powerful way
to design something.
If you want to, why would you use intelligent design
when you could use evolution to do this?
So the other thing that's kind of intriguing
about this process is remember what I said
right at the beginning, that if you're going to generate
complexity, you need complexity in your environment.
You need to have gradients, you need to have fluxes,
you need to have cycles, you need to have interfaces,
you need to have chemical complexity.
And that's exactly what you have
in Jack Shostack's experiment, right?
I mean, you have random RNA pool,
that's chemical complexity.
But in vitro processes, that's interfaces.
You have fluxes, you have gradients, and you have cycles.
It's all there, and that's what drives evolution.
It's not, by the way, a random process.
It's a selective process, and selection, by definition,
has deterministic aspects.
So it's really intriguing to see this come into play.
And this is going to happen on the prebiotic earth
because you have all those selective processes going on.
Okay, so I think what we see is you can imagine
the origin of life in four emergent steps.
First one is synthesizing the biomolecules.
The second one is assembling those molecules
into some kind of functional polymers
to membranes and so forth.
Then comes the big question mark.
That's how you get to the self-replicating system.
We're still working on that hard,
but once you have the self-replicating system,
the natural selection just follows inevitably.
That's a really exciting,
experimental approach to the origin of life.
I know time is getting late,
but I want to tell you about one other new thing
that's come along, which may short-circuit
this whole process in a way that a few years ago
we couldn't have imagined.
I've been fortunate enough to be involved
in a new scientific program called
the Deep Carbon Observatory.
We're studying all aspects of carbon within the earth,
including deep life.
And all around the world now,
people are drilling deep wells to look for microbes.
It turns out that anywhere you drill,
mile two, three miles down,
and you bring up the drill cord,
there's microbes living in the rocks.
And typically, if you get below temperatures
of about 150 Celsius,
you don't see cellular life anymore.
But there are now a couple of anecdotal reports,
I can tell you more about it if you want to know,
but there are a couple of anecdotal reports
that something is happening above 150 Celsius.
And it's not cells,
but it seems like there's some kind of
organized molecular systems down there,
and what is it?
And here's one possibility
that I've been talking to my colleagues about,
and right now this is a very viable thought.
Imagine that cellular life as we know it today
with DNA and RNA and proteins
really does have a temperature limit
because some of those molecules are relatively delicate
and so the whole system is breakdown.
And that cellular life as we know it
probably doesn't survive.
But that doesn't mean that there couldn't be
self-replicating molecular systems
that go to much higher temperatures,
that are much more robust.
The suggestions from these early anecdotal accounts
is there's some kind of biofilms being formed.
They're not cells, they're two-dimensional surfaces
that are multi-molecular thick
and they're growing on mineral surfaces,
they're growing laterally,
they grow more intensively on surfaces
that have lots of redox potential.
They look like electrolytic gels of some kind.
And it's possible these self-organizing systems
on mineral surfaces really represent
a kind of, I don't know, do you want to call it ur life?
We just don't have a taxonomy for what it is.
It's something.
No one knows yet.
They have not yet done the sufficient molecular analysis.
It looks like there's polysaccharides.
I, but you know, this has not been published yet.
There's some data from China,
there's data from the Wanda Fuca Ridge.
And so the question is,
if you have a kind of molecular system
that can self-replicate, may not be cells,
but if it has the chemical energy,
if it has the resources to build itself
and grow however slowly.
And if it lives above 150 Celsius,
where it's beyond the predation of cellular life,
then there has been a continuous subsurface network
of environments that are above 150 Celsius
since the Hedians,
since the earliest kind of Earth's history.
This could be a remnant of an early stage
of life's origin, of molecular self-organization,
which is persisted because it's self-replicating
and very robust and has survived
because it's at a temperature higher than cells can eat it.
And it could be in fact a remnant for the origin of life.
So one possibility is that we can then actually find
on Earth today those precursor biochemistries,
the ER molecules of life and how they're organized.
And how deep could these go?
Well, it's pretty amazing.
If you think about seduction zones,
certainly they're 150 Celsius environments
at 40 kilometers.
So 40 kilometers down in a very fast cold subducting slab
you could have cellular life.
That's pretty amazing in itself.
But isn't it not possible that even much deeper
there's this other domain of something,
some kind of organic chemistry
that can give us real hints about the origin of life.
So if you wanna know more about the deep carbon observatory
and the kinds of things we're studying,
there's a website and I'd be very happy
to tell you more about that later on.
A conclusion is I think you're pretty straightforward.
I think the origin of life is best understood
as a series of emergent steps.
Go from geochemical, relative simplicity,
to biochemical complexity as a series of steps
that can be replicated in laboratory experiments.
It's clear we don't have all the answers at this point.
But that's the excitement of science is to find out
and we're certainly well on our way.
And I have to end on one sort of philosophical note again.
This whole scenario described you as very disturbing
to some people.
Some of our friends and relatives and colleagues
around the country and around the world
are very disturbed by the idea that origin of life
is just a chemical process,
a geochemistry that's led to biochemistry.
How can we be created in God's image
if it's just a bunch of random molecules
that get mixed together?
And I understand that and I sympathize with that.
I think we all need to recognize
that that's the point of view out there.
What I would like to be able to communicate to them
is a different way of thinking about life
and in fact the universe is a sequence of emergent steps
which are inevitable and inexorable.
They're part of the very fabric of the cosmos
that from the big bang inevitably came hydrogen.
From hydrogen came stars.
From stars came the whole periodic table of the elements.
From that periodic table came earth-like planets.
Earth-like planets, again, another emergent step leads
to the early steps in the origin of life itself
and eventually to us and to a universe
that is learning to know itself.
Thank you very much.
Please, questions, I'd love questions.
Please, questions, I'd love questions.
What is wrong with that, Michael?
Yeah, so okay, couple of questions.
About this hydrothermal system that we said we need a cycle
and wondering, in that environment actually
we don't have that and we need to mention that.
I wonder if it's miss broken or something
you do expect on the outside, we see that in arms.
Well, one question.
Yes, certainly in hydrothermal zones,
deep on the ocean floor,
what you're much more experiencing,
very intense fluxes, geochemical complexity,
you have interfaces, you have very strong gradients.
The cycles are much more subtle
and may not play much of a role.
One interesting hypothesis that's out there though
is that water has a critical point
and it's a specific temper and a specific pressure
and there are depths of the ocean
where there are volcanic systems
which are very close to that critical point
in terms of temperature and in terms of pressure
and just simply the tides rising and falling
will cause the critical point to go through
a volume of rock on a daily basis
and as Alex can tell you, there are amazing things
that happen chemically at critical points
and it's very possible that those specific volumes
of the crust are where the most exciting action happens.
So there's a cycle that does occur
but I agree with you that on ocean floor
the day night wet dry cycles are not nearly as,
they're not going to occur.
So the second question of volume is of the chirality
that I realized were coming from your large background
and probably lying on mineral surface with the trip
but it's out of my implication
that you have your high sayings actually,
somehow all the life actually originated
from that one accident rather than sort of
just talking about all over the place.
If it's all over the place then there's inevitable
that some surface actually gets stained
in other surfaces at the right hand
and life actually somehow about all or left-handed.
So I don't think mineral will do the job.
Yes, okay, this is a very interesting point.
It addresses some of the philosophical questions
but let me get you thinking me out this way.
Okay, what is the reactive area that's important
in any one of these experiments?
And I would say it's probably a few hundred nanometers
on the side, that's the kind of molecular surface area.
And if you basically do a quick back
in the envelope calculation,
I could be off by many orders of magnitude
but basically if you look at the surface of the earth,
the total surface area of the minerals,
you're talking about something in the order
of 10 to the 30th, to 10 to the 40th
separate little experimental surface areas.
And then you integrate that over
and say an experiment takes a few seconds
and the molecules then rearrange themselves.
And you have 500 million years to play with.
You're talking about on the order of 10 to the 50th
different molecular experiments of juxtapositions.
So yes indeed, it's certainly true that it may be random
whether it starts here, it starts here, or someplace else
but start thinking about those combinatorics
of the number of different individual experiments
on surfaces.
You know in a laboratory it takes us weeks
to do one experiment of one kind of molecule on the surface
but in a prebiotic environment,
you could have this huge number
and therefore it becomes perhaps not a random thing,
it becomes totally deterministic.
No actually I'm not talking about the deterministic,
I mean, unless you rely on one particular mineral
and one particular surface that happens
to select only the left-hand side
and keeps going on like that.
Here's a different scenario.
Initially you have a lot of mineral surfaces,
you create little left-handed universes,
little right-handed universes.
Then through the next sense of synthesis,
one of those becomes more efficient
and after a period of competition,
one of them will prevail simply because it eats the others.
That's the idea, yeah.
So if you have enough of these experiments going on,
some of them are gonna be more efficient than others
and they're going to eventually arise.
The concept of heavy blast is actually,
you'll be, for example, perversely
with the left-hand side or the right-hand side.
And you're absolutely right about this
that there are many other ways
that chirality may have arisen.
That there may be some cosmic scale,
the CP violation actually has built-in chirality
when you have beta decay.
Electrons are chiral only in one sense
and if that could cause a chemical effect,
biasing towards one kind of molecule or another,
or if there's circularly polarized
synchrotron radiation from a rapidly rotating neutron star,
that could also cause local environments
where you had a predominance of one candinus or another.
Or in a completely different vein,
individual chiral molecules are themselves
very strong chiral centers.
And you can have chiral organization around a molecule
independent of a mineral surface completely.
So there are many different hypotheses,
many, many hypotheses about how chirality arose.
What I was trying to indicate tonight more importantly
is that there are plausible ways to explain chirality
and mineral surfaces are one of them.
So, but you're absolutely right that there,
when you go to chirality conferences,
you'll have 20 people with 20 different ideas about this.
Hi, Julia, yes.
So is the self-suffocating system
necessarily made of organic matter?
There is one very highly publicized point of view
by a British scientist named Graham Cairns-Smith.
And he argues for the clay world.
He's a clay mineralitist, so you know what else is new.
But he suggests that clay minerals
because of their very complicated layer structures
and their variability, the fact that they can stack
in different ways, could carry a kind of genetic information
which might make more copies of themselves.
And then under certain pressure, temperature,
and aqueous fluid compositions,
certain clay combinations become self-replicating
and they dominate a suite of clays.
And then some became the templates
for organic molecules which followed.
And that the first life, he talks about clay life
as being the first life form.
Crystal chemically, it just doesn't work.
It falls apart.
If you accept this, as any crystal chemist knows,
that nearest neighbor interactions are much stronger
than more distant interactions,
there's no way for a clay layer up here
to communicate to a clay layer down there
what its orientation is.
And even spiral growth mechanisms,
there's no clear way to break clays apart
into many little fragments.
But you form polytypes that are huge.
You form polytypes that are huge,
but then how do you break those clay fragments apart
to then essentially replicate in two different environments?
And then how do they mutate?
And then how do you template the clays
with organics to make the organic life form?
I mean, it's such a complicated
and implausible mechanism to my point of view.
But it is out there, there's whole books about this.
And yet if the major activity on clay is not on the layers,
but on the edge side,
there's an almost imagine that you've got one clay,
it's got these edge sides,
and then it goes to the next one, I don't know.
It's certainly, it would be nice to be able to test it.
Unfortunately, the biggest impediment to testing this
is that huge billions of dollars
that we put into learning how to sequence DNA and RNA,
no one's going to put billions of dollars
into learning how to sequence clays.
So it's really hard to test.
It's going to have immense contamination for all of us.
Yeah, I don't know.
Yes.
What are the faces of nanomotors of being more common
in a particular environment?
So we hope that for instance,
more beneficial environment for writing
and lecturing might be formed.
For instance, we were talking earlier
about the root house structure of the outside of the sewage
being a one, one, zero,
and then you hydrate that surface,
it might become a vehicle for this kind of adic.
Sort of this camera stuff.
Yeah.
So would the environment maybe have a...
Marine environments.
Well, it's more the energy that they're available for.
Is it better to communicate with them?
Yeah, so the question has to do with the interjects
and the amount of mineral surface area.
And the two things that come immediately
in mind are those black smokers,
all the sulfides that are coming out are nano particles
and of course, clays,
which are formed as weathering products.
So both clays and hydrothermal systems.
So zones of serpentinization, for example,
you're going to have huge surface areas
being produced there as well.
So there are natural geochemical environments
in which the surface areas are very, very high.
The first thing about supercritical water
that's triggered in my mind is chemical engineers
are using supercritical CO2 as a remarkable solvent
for organic reactions.
And they're making little vesicles
that produce CO2 ways, et cetera.
So then the obvious question is,
are there environments in the early earth
and other planets, and wherever,
like that's basically the sheltered environment.
Maybe, that's interesting.
Yeah.
If you look at the origin of the universe,
you start from a big bang and then the thing
that comes from that.
And it's true that you form galaxies and stars
and planets in an ultimately human being.
But as I understand it, and this is not my complete area,
as I understand it, you're always going to find
to make the whole system more random.
But in order to give what you want to do,
you've got to make it less random.
And so, now I understand you can overcome the entropy
by making it more stable in some way.
But has anybody just looked at the overall thermodynamics
to make sure that all of this makes sense?
Yeah, I'm pretty sure you got a Nobel Prize for that.
Yeah, he talked about dissipative systems
and it's non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
It's your idea of concentrating in a small world
at the expense of the rest.
This is, yeah, so Ilya Prigazin is the name of the person.
And everything I've said about concentrating information
is just parroting things that have been said for 30 years.
So it's a, I think it's a fundamental organizing principle
of the cosmos and the fact that it's not sort of
a separate law of thermodynamics.
I'm not sure what allows something to become a law
of thermodynamics as opposed to just a corollary
or a lemma or whatever.
But to me, this is an absolute,
as important a principle, as important a law of the cosmos
as the first and second laws of thermodynamics.
And it just hasn't been articulated that way.
Just observation, so 60% of the United States
sees and don't believe in evolution.
So there is this sort of face separation
between scientists and a big part of the country.
So somehow what you're saying is sort of
a variation for the majority of the day.
And on the day, I was wondering how to communicate
with the other 60%.
We should have big problem with the science.
So the question is, how do I communicate these ideas
to audiences that are not as sympathetic as this one?
And I've done this.
I mean, I've gone to creationist groups in Iowa
and in South Carolina and in Kansas and other places
where this is a huge debate.
And what I try to say is that,
I mean, look, if you wanna understand
the origin of life, if you believe in a creator
and you wanna understand origin of life,
read Psalm 19, the heavens declare the glory of God
and the firmament showeth his handiwork.
And what that says to me is if you wish to believe
that there is a creator that's done this,
the way to know the creator is to study creation,
is to study what the universe is like.
And when you do that, you see that there's this tremendous
creative drive, this evolutionary drive built
into the cosmos.
It's a fundamental part of what we see
it all around us all the time.
That in spite of the second law that was alluded to earlier,
you know, in springtime, new plants arise
and we see children born and grow from a single cell.
I mean, we see this all the time.
We see it all around us.
It's not a violation of natural law.
It is in fact a fundamental natural law
and it's an extraordinary part of
if you wanna believe in a creator,
it's part of understanding how the creator did it.
And so I don't see the conflict between that.
I mean, that's a very spiritual way of thinking about
what we as scientists study.
And so I try to make that connection.
And for some people it works in a lot of people it doesn't.
But I try to, I respect people who are of faith.
They have a deep faith,
that's one of their ways of knowing
and you can't tell them they're wrong.
What you have to do is say,
here's how the way I see the world
meshes with the way you see the world.
Yeah.
But they don't see how they see the world
meshes with the way you see the world.
I know, I mean, but it's a matter of being respectful
to different ways of knowing.
I mean, epistemologies,
can we as a scientist prove that our way is better?
I mean, we believe it is.
But that's a belief,
but there's no concrete way of
bringing that to somebody else.
So you have to basically understand where.
I suppose another way of saying it is
we provide mechanisms as to how,
if there's a question as to why,
and I'm not sure there's a question as to why,
but if there is a question as to why,
then that is basically in the realm of religion.
But we can inform that question.
Yeah.
And if you really want to understand a creator,
why wouldn't you study?
Well, even more simple than that is
if I'm created in God's image,
then how am I supposed to turn around
and visualize what or who is God?
Because then I'm creating God in my image,
and that's seriously.
I wouldn't go there with these audiences.
Yes, hi.
The steps of this are successful,
are basically inevitable,
and co-over and over again,
and without much difficulty.
And the critical step,
which is one of self-replication,
seems to be very difficult to manage in some way.
And the thing is that if it was relatively easy,
we would be new life-olds who would be
repulsive all the time, in real time.
There is a missing link here in the argument,
and really it speaks to the sort of
uncomfortable situation that there is some kind of
a special event or occasion or process or environment
where this must happen,
and then this happens, this process, this phenomenon,
doesn't repeat itself in the sort of
geological history or the history of the environment,
or maybe since the New Testament system,
the state of darkness that you're working with.
So it points to kind of a special
situation which is uncomfortable if you're a scientist,
anyway, right?
But is it uncomfortable?
Is it really uncomfortable?
No, actually, I don't find it uncomfortable,
but I can see how it would allow,
open an argument for special creation.
But if that special situation were something like
that deep environment that doesn't have cells,
but has the molecules,
and that's where they learn to replicate.
What we're saying is we're stating that
I think the deep environment is a good place to look,
but I think there are things that are fine.
But there can be no sense if it just says
we have not done the right experiment.
Well, that's the point I'm trying to make,
is that all these other experiments,
they're going on all the time,
different kinds of natural environments.
So, but this experiment for replication,
that experiment is not going on.
At least we haven't recognized it yet.
That's true.
But that's fine, I mean, that's another way out.
But can I?
You know, the other side of the problem
is that there's a special situation.
Yeah, but special situations have happened
throughout the history of Earth.
The moon-forming event was a singularity.
The beginning of plate tectonics from going
from a vertical kind of plume tectonics to,
that was a transition in Earth history.
A physical chemical special situation,
rather than a new kind of.
But there've been lots of irreversible singularity events,
and this is just one of them, I think.
Physical chemical.
Physical chemical, yeah, I mean,
you can think of the initiation of subduction,
which was not modern plate tectonics,
the radioxidation, of course that was biological,
but it certainly was, you know, the snowball Earth events.
Yeah, yeah.
No, I understand your point.
It's a very interesting one.
It's, again, philosophical to the extent
to which something is.
There's a lot of points in terms of it,
and there's also, since it seems more difficult,
that may be the case when you really need
to focus your attention.
A lot of people are.
A lot of people are.
There are some people who say that the horizon of life
really didn't occur here on Earth.
It occurred.
Thanks for being honest.
Yeah, it occurred here in Spain,
and life, or the biological molecule we brought here
in the early bombardment of the Earth,
which was much more intense in the early history of the Earth,
and therefore life was once it got here,
or once you got these prebiotic molecules here
on Earth, they make them rapidly assemble
and become what we see in the fall outcome.
Now, this is a singular activity,
and that is one of the reasons
why people are studying as far as the context
of life.
Yeah, of course, one of the very serious speculations
right now is that all life on Earth came from Mars.
Mars was warm, wet, habitable, probably sometime
before Earth, if life arises quickly,
then it could be life arose on Mars.
You had an impact event, lifted Martian meteorites
that came to Earth fairly easily
through gravitational transfer,
and then Earth becomes seated by Mars
before it starts itself.
And there are plenty of people who are talking about,
let's go to Mars and find the precursor of Earth life.
So.
One question, how life originated in Mars?
Yeah, of course, it just transfers the question
to someplace else.
So, I mean, in that sense,
that you still have to ask the origin question,
but it is intriguing that now there are a lot
of serious NASA scientists who are arguing that could happen.
You can also argue that life, if the synthesis,
really occurred in the interstellar medium.
And the trigger for the self-replication point
was a singular astronomical event in the interstellar
medium, which irradiates, say, the dust particle
still keeps on moving.
Irradiates the dust particles in such a way
that you make right-handed predation
to the Earth's work.
So, you would expect to find, if that is true,
if we can have a fine life someplace else,
then you would expect to find, I think,
both right and left-handed versions of life
in other solar systems of the Earth's systems.
And so.
So, did life start 4.856 billion years ago,
or 1 billion years ago?
How do we have it?
Well, the oldest fossils are 3.5 or so.
There seem to be, if you believe in certain kinds of,
if you accept that certain kinds of isotopic signatures
can point to life, there's isotopically light carbon
at 3.8 in some rocks, but who knows?
I mean, the window could be 4.4, there are oceans,
there are deep, wet environments very early.
I think of this as a biological system,
and I think that's what I am.
You're basically, it looks as if life is monophyllic,
but that's still being surprised.
Lots of things are monophyllic.
If you look through the tree of life,
there are huge groups that were arose
from one species back then, among them,
million of them existed, that's still being here.
And certainly many people have talked
about multiple origins of life,
life arising a million times,
but then it was a highly competitive environment,
and eventually, if you do various,
various computer models can give you different answers,
but if you have one form of life that becomes sufficiently
more efficient than everything else,
it just eats everything else.
So that's one possible explanation.
So we don't know if there may be
self replicating cycles arising all the time,
and they're just immediately consumed by cells.
We just don't know at this point.
So I think that's one of the very exciting frontiers,
and kind of...
I see the lab, really.
It's gonna be done.
It's gonna be done in the lab.
And on that note, let's thank Bob again.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I wanna thank Bob and you for coming
to most of these seminars.
I wanna thank the class in particular,
and of course remind the class that they can ask Bob
for more morning and eat 30.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
