Hi, welcome back. I ended the previous lecture by identifying a disconnect.
When people talk about the rise of diversity, they mean identity diversity.
But when people talk about the benefits of diversity, they typically mean cognitive diversity.
Now, these are different things. Identity diversity is who we are, ethnic background, gender, and so on.
An Nigerian woman and an English man belong to different identity groups.
Cognitive diversity is how we think. Do we think like an engineer, or do we think like a doctor?
This course talks about the power of cognitive diversity.
We're going to learn how diverse representations, categorizations, and heuristics enable an individual to find better solutions,
make better forecasts and decisions, and be more creative.
We're also going to learn how teams, groups, organizations, and even societies that learn to leverage diversity
can be more successful, more robust, and more innovative.
So these are really good things. They're also lots of fun.
But there's this disconnect between identity and cognitive diversity, and it's a gray, hulking presence.
It's an elephant, if you will, sitting in the corner of the room.
So let's talk about the elephant. By that, I mean, how does all this material we're going to cover,
all this thinking about cognitive diversity, how is it going to relate to what people think of as quote, unquote,
real diversity, differences in who we are?
So first, what do I mean by real diversity?
Well, here's how one university describes it on their website.
Diversity includes, but is not limited to, age, ethnicity, gender, physical abilities, qualities,
race, sexual orientation, educational background, geographic location,
income, marital status, military experience, parental status, religious beliefs,
work experience, and job classification.
Each of these classifications can be unpacked even further.
So David Harris, a friend and former colleague of mine at the University of Michigan,
has shown that there are at least three different notions of race.
For example, there's the race that you express, the race that others perceive,
and then the race that you feel internally.
So for example, if you're a mixed-race child, you might act white in public,
but you might be perceived as multiracial,
but deep inside, you might feel as though you're black or African-American.
Now, if you ask that child his race, he may well give you different answers depending on where he is.
So at home, he may be more likely to say black.
At school, he may be more likely to say,
well, I'm going to define myself as mixed-race.
Now, many of you might be thinking right now, Scott, that's real diversity.
That's what schools, organizations, the government mean when they talk about a diverse workforce.
They don't mean cognitive diversity.
Well, I'm not sure.
Maybe they once did, but I think that's less so now, and it's true less so every day.
And this isn't a hope.
It's not what Emily Dickinson called the thing with feathers that perches in the soul
and sings the tune without the words and never stops at all.
It's not that. It's not just hope. It's reality.
I spent nearly a decade visiting schools, universities, government agencies, nonprofits,
for-profits, professional societies, and to quote someone else, Bob Dylan,
the times they are exchanging.
We think about diversity very differently.
How we think about diversity is undergoing a huge transformation society-wide.
And this transformation doesn't have anything to do with political ideology.
It bats left-handed and it bats right-handed.
It's based on pragmatism and personal experience.
So in the previous lecture, I characterized the rise in diversity thinking,
and I described a confluence of two trends, increased identity diversity,
and increased team-based work.
So that means that people now have more interactions with identity diverse people.
And it's those interactions that have led to a rethinking,
and that rethinking has happened in stages. It isn't just a one-shot thing.
So what I want to talk about in this lecture is these five stages, how we,
and by here, the we, I mean Americans, think about diversity.
Because what I'm going to tell is an American story or some analog of it.
And this story is being played on other countries as well,
but I'm going to focus on how we as Americans have seen this trend in diversity thinking.
So there's five stages. Here they are.
First, moral equality.
Second, legal equality.
Third, I'm going to call it the bigger pool.
Fourth, the diversity bonus.
And then fifth, restructuring.
Now as I describe these stages, I should be really clear that different individuals,
different communities, and different organizations are all sort of at different points
on what we could call a diversity journey.
That's right. I just said diversity journey.
I know that sounds kind of new agey for someone who's a mathematician like me,
but it's apt because we really are on a diversity journey,
and most of us are following a fairly similar path.
And that path starts with recognizing the moral argument,
the moral component of equality thinking.
Now morally, arguments for equality go way back.
Let's start with two of the best-selling books of all time.
But the Lord said to Samuel,
do not look at his appearance or his physical stature,
because I have refused him.
For the Lord does not see as man sees,
for man looks at the outward appearance,
but the Lord looks at the heart.
So in the Bible, we see this focus on seeing people for who they are internally,
not on external differences.
Or, as the Buddhists put it,
cherry, plum, peach, or damson blossoms,
all just as they are,
are entities possessing their own unique qualities.
In other words, we differ in how we look,
but we should recognize the abilities in each of us
and treat one another fairly and with respect.
That's the moral argument.
Unfortunately, that is an easy always, right?
In the United States, we have a long troubled history
in our attempts to treat one another equally.
Consider our experience with slavery,
the Civil War, the women's suffrage movement,
the civil rights movement.
We could have been better, right?
We could have treated one another with more respect.
Now one can read U.S. history as a struggle for inclusiveness.
And many see the 1960s for a variety of reasons,
as a watershed period,
when we began to embrace the moral argument fully.
One need only read this short excerpt
from Martin Luther King's letter from a Birmingham jail
to see the moral case.
So here's what King writes.
He said, when you suddenly find your tongue twisted
and your speech stammering,
as you speak to explain to your six-year-old daughter
why she can't go to the public amusement park
that has just been advertised on television,
and see tears welling up in her eyes
when she is told that fun town is closed to colored children.
Those are King's words.
Now when kids cannot go to fun town
because of the color of their skin,
something must be wrong.
And it was wrong.
And Americans woke up.
How did we wake up?
We responded with laws.
Specifically, laws of legal equality.
And this comprised what I'm going to call Stage 2.
So President Johnson pushed through civil rights legislation
that made discrimination based on race and gender
in schools, the workplace, and the voting booth illegal.
Now that doesn't mean that it all stopped right away.
Words on paper have limited power to change behavior.
Change also requires sticks and carrots,
sometimes pretty big sticks and sometimes pretty big carrots.
So the change in the law resulted in changes that were worthwhile,
a more diverse workforce and more diverse society.
And that experience led to the third stage
in our thinking about diversity,
that people of every identity could bring talent.
Now I call this the bigger pool logic.
And this is Stage 3 after moral equality and legal equality.
In Stage 3 schools, organizations, businesses, and voters
began to recognize that talent could be found in people of any race,
any gender, any ethnicity, any sexual orientation, and any religion.
As we opened up our doors to everyone,
we realized that we could access more talent.
Now the bigger pool logic shifts the argument for moral grounds
to pragmatic grounds. This is really important.
So no longer did one need to appeal to what Lincoln
is in his inaugural address called
The Better Angels of Our Nature.
One could make an argument for diversity solely on pragmatic grounds.
Equality of opportunity would produce better outcomes
by opening up a larger talent pool.
So the logic was very simple.
Firms and organizations that hired women and people of color
would have access to more talent.
So in the long run, they're going to outperform their competitors
because talent is going to wood out.
Now would that this realization have made all the issues
related to diversity and inclusion disappear?
It just would have gone away, but it didn't.
There were three problems that remained,
and they still remain today.
Now I'm going to call these the starting line,
the smart just like me effect, and structural discrimination.
Let's talk about them each in turn.
So the starting line argument goes as follows.
It states that you can't give one group, in this case,
white man, a 50-yard head start in a 100-yard dash,
and then say, okay, let's now have a race.
Because equality now is not sufficient to address past discrimination.
That's one argument.
Second, the smart just like me effect.
What do I mean here?
I mean the fact that people tend to be more comfortable
around people who look like them and think like they do.
So therefore, we tend to undervalue diversity.
We'll come back to this idea in a lot more detail in a later lecture.
But for now, here's what I want you to keep in mind.
Most people have a slight preference for hanging out with,
working with, people who look like themselves.
So what this does is it often puts women and minorities
and other historically disadvantaged groups at a disadvantage,
because two equal candidates will be,
in evaluation of two equal candidates,
will be biased in favor of the one who looks like the person in charge.
Now third and finally, structural discrimination
refers to policies and procedures put in place for entirely different reasons
that end up producing discriminatory outcomes,
even though no one wanted them.
So for example, many colleges and universities,
fortunately not the one I work at,
but many set aside seats for legacies.
So these are students whose parents attended the school
or whose parents work at the school.
Now you can support a policy like this on many grounds,
not the least of which is being the creation of a lasting bond
between families and institutions.
But here's the problem.
If the institution used to be biased against some ethnic group,
these legacy programs are going to maintain that bias.
And they'll do so literally for centuries.
Now that's not a brash claim.
If you do the math, you construct a very simple model
in which there's small amounts of discrimination based on legacy effects.
You'll see that literally takes hundreds of years to reach equality.
Now for a similar reason,
many organizations allow children of employees to serve as interns during the summer.
And this reason is to build this lasting bond.
It builds loyal to the organization
and can foster mutual respect between the parents and their children
because they see each other in this work context, in this new context.
So it's totally admirable in some respects,
just like the legacy programs are,
but they structurally discriminate
because if one group is not allowed to attend a particular college
or not hired by some organization,
then that group is not going to be an alumni
and that group isn't going to be in upper management
and they won't be able to offer their children summer internships.
So there's these three reasons.
The starting line effect, the just like me effect
and the structural discrimination effect
that led to the creation of affirmative action programs
because the idea was we need to somehow make these programs more equal.
So programs in affirmative action gave members of underrepresented groups
advantages to equalize opportunity.
Now affirmative action had and continues to have a lot of critics
and those against it argued that you don't fix a wrong with another wrong.
So they don't deny the three effects I talked about,
but they just say the second wrong, discrimination against whites,
is something we don't want to have as well.
Now in reaction to affirmative action,
voters in some states have passed referendum
making race and gender based preferences illegal
for public institutions and universities, such as my own.
So in the state of Michigan, we passed just sexual law.
Now let's go back to this bigger pool logic,
even though there's a lot of issues with it.
Notice what it's doing, it's separating out talent from identity,
saying don't discriminate based on identity, focus only on talent.
Now what's going to happen is an organization should be diverse
because of the fact that talent doesn't know any color,
talent doesn't know any gender.
So if you want talent, you should be color blind and you should be gender blind.
So notice this and this is very important.
In the bigger pool logic, this is our step three, diversity doesn't matter.
It doesn't play any direct role.
Performance depends entirely on something that we're calling talent,
whatever that is, and that's independent of diversity.
Now it gets interesting, now it gets really fun and here's why.
The talent different.
Identity diversity correlated with cognitive diversity.
People who live different lives, who have different experiences,
well they tend to think differently.
And so the very best teams in the workplace often turned out to be diverse teams.
And this actually led people to seek out diversity for performance reasons.
I'm going to call this the diversity bonus logic.
Now the diversity bonus refers to the fact that people have diverse identities,
people who look different often also think differently.
And as a result, when you become more inclusive,
what you do is you add new ideas and a collective becomes more productive.
Now let me be more precise.
This diversity bonus logic has two parts.
Here's the first one.
Part one is that identity diversity often correlates with or produces cognitive diversity.
Now it's not the only cause, but it's one cause.
And then part two is that cognitive diversity improves collective performance.
So in this course, we're focusing on part two.
That's what we want to think about.
That's what we want to explore.
We're going to engage that claim deeply and we're going to engage it from several angles.
So we're not going to state it as some sort of fact.
We're going to question it.
We're going to poke it.
We're going to think through it.
And here's what we're going to figure out.
We're going to find out that that's way too broad and imprecise.
So it doesn't say at all what cognitive diversity is,
and it doesn't say what types of collective performance it's going to improve,
how much it will improve them, and through what mechanisms.
It's just too blunt.
Look, it's not scientific to say diversity good.
It wouldn't be of any value.
Just like it's not scientific to say friction bad.
Because in fact, some types of diversity are going to be good,
and some types will be bad.
And the same is true as friction.
Sometimes friction can be really good.
Otherwise, we couldn't stop our cars.
So our goal is going to be to understand how diversity can improve outcomes
and when it does.
But again, to do this, we've got to know what types of diversity
and what types of outcomes.
And so we'll define types of diversity, cognitive diversity,
perspectives, heuristics, interpretations, models, and so on.
And then we're going to define types of tasks,
problem solving, prediction, innovation,
robustness in the face of change, those sorts of things.
And then we're going to see when and how these various types of diversity
produce benefits for these different types of tasks.
So that's the exercise before us.
Now, it's actually going to be, I hope, a lot of fun.
Now, at the risk of partly spoiling the plot,
here's what we're going to find.
We're going to find that cognitive diversity contributes substantially
to collective performance on all sorts of cognitive tasks,
like prediction and problem solving.
We're also going to see when it causes problems
for things like preference aggregation,
for voting, where people have differences of opinion.
Now, we're going to do this using models and logic,
just like we did for specialization compared to advantage.
That's what's ahead.
But in this lecture, we're talking about that elephant,
that relationship between identity diversity,
differences in what we look like,
and cognitive diversity, differences in what we think.
So note that this is an empirical question,
and it's a question whose answer is going to change over time.
Because gender-based differences, let's just take those,
those lead to differences in experiences.
And as a result, they lead to differences in how people think,
and those are going to vary by place and by time.
But there's a lot of evidence that suggests
that identities do influence how we think,
and they do so in two fundamental ways.
First, we filter many of our experiences
in our interpretations of the world through our identities.
We can't help but do so.
So when Barack Obama became president,
we saw him differently based on who we are.
Most white people categorized Obama as black.
Most mixed-race people categorized him as mixed-race.
So who we are affects how we see the world.
Second, the experience and opportunities that we have
differ based on our identity.
Honesty can be really useful here.
Try as we might, people are not blind to identity.
We're aware of someone's gender, ethnicity, age,
physical capabilities, and so on.
And as a result, we treat people differently.
So for example, most of us tend to be more comfortable
with people from our own identity group.
Remember I talked about that before?
We're more open around people who are like us.
Well, this matters because it means
that we all experience slightly different realities
as a function of who we are.
So I'm keenly aware that some of what I see
and how I'm treated is just a function of me being a white man.
I can't avoid that because it is what it is.
So I want to make two obvious points.
First is that if people from distinct identity groups
have distinct experiences,
then they're going to think differently about the world.
That's just unavoidable because they're experiencing
a different world.
Second, if we think differently about the world,
then even if we did have identical experiences,
we would filter them differently.
So it'll be as if they're different experiences.
So therefore, identity diversity and cognitive diversity
must be related.
Now, how much?
How much they're related, and the linkages
between the various types of identity and cognitive diversity
are going to depend.
It's going to depend on the types of identity diversity
that we're considering and on the cognitive tasks.
Now, for fun, let's think about cultural ethnicity,
religion, country of origin, cultural background, et cetera.
How does that affect how we think?
Well, our cultural identities influence the stories we hear,
the books we read, the movies we watch,
the music we listen to,
and what we're told at Graham's knee.
So for example, my colleague, Twyla Tartuff,
has found that eastern parents, people from Asia,
use more verbs.
So they say things like push, go, run, et cetera,
when talking to young babies.
But if you think of westerners, they tend to spout mouths,
they tend to point ball, truck, tree, dog, so on.
So there's a difference in even how we speak to our children.
Now, cultures also influence the parables, the myths that we hear,
and these in turn become the analogies that we use
to make sense of the world.
Thus, our ethnicity plays a substantial role
in just our basic cognitive building blocks.
So here's how I think about it.
You may think about it differently,
but here's how I think about this sort of messy conflation
of identity diversity and cognitive diversity.
Identity diversity contributes to our experiences,
to how we see the world, and to how we're taught.
Now, all of these are going to contribute to cognitive differences.
Now, in some cases, the cognitive differences are going to be germane.
In other cases, it may not be.
So for example, suppose we're putting together a team
working on healthcare policy.
Now, in light of the fact that women's bodies
differ from men's bodies, we probably want a team
that has gender diversity.
But suppose we're coming up with a new package for toothpaste.
Well, now the link between gender diversity
and cognitive diversity for that test may be less direct,
may be weaker, may be less important.
So in light of that, one should expect
that often the two parts of the argument should hold.
So remember, what were the two parts?
Part one is a group or team that's organization,
organization that's identity diverse
will have relevant cognitive diversity.
And part two, that group team organization
will be better at a cognitive task.
That's the diversity bonus.
So that's the fourth step in the argument.
So now that the diversity bonus,
we now understand what that is,
note that it comes from the second part of the logic,
that cognitive diversity is the ability to improve collective performance.
Identity diversity often correlates with cognitive diversity,
but it's not doing anything.
It's not carrying in any water.
It has no direct effect.
It's what's inside our heads that matters,
and not what's on the outside.
Now, one could fill hundreds of hours with anecdotes,
case studies, and summaries of empirical research
demonstrating this diversity bonus
and linking that bonus to identity.
I meet with lots of people who study diversity,
and nearly all of them tell me some story of the diversity bonus.
Let me tell one of my favorites.
So when I was in sixth grade,
they split the boys and the girls in separate rooms,
and they taught us about reproduction.
My recollection was that as they described the sperm
involved in a race to reach the egg,
there were only the fittest, bravest, strongest sperm one the day,
this great conquering by the sperm of the egg.
Now, in fact, if one reads the academic literature on fertilization,
as summarized by Emily Martin,
at that time, scientists described semen as propelled with, quote,
a whiplash motion and strong lurches
that allows them to burrow into the egg, coding, right,
and penetrate the interior.
This is the whiplash burrow penetrating, right?
Well, in the 1980s, Helen Shotten and her husband Gerald
decided to look at this a little bit more closely,
and they're reversing the interpretation.
So they watched the same video, probably the same ones that I saw,
and they looked and they said, you know,
it looks like the egg is partly choosing which sperm to select.
After all, look, there's one egg, there's millions of sperm,
and the active egg theory is what's taught today,
not the conquering sperm.
So the current model that the egg picks,
oh, and by the way, it does so with an eye toward diversity,
aligns with actually more balanced view of dating,
because think of the egg as the woman, the woman also gets to select.
So the earlier model, with all the conquering by the brave sperm,
well, it seems a little bit like something
a 1950s man might have thought up, right?
Okay, so one can feel hundreds of hours, literally, right,
with these anecdotes, case studies, summaries of research
showing that you get benefits from identity diversity.
Well, you can do the same thing, showing that identity diverse groups fail.
Diverse groups of people can be dysfunctional.
How come? Well, they can lack trust, mutual respect,
they might not validate each other's opinion.
After all, right, a camel is said to be a horse built by committee.
Okay, so we've got two contradictory sets of facts.
We've got the diversity bonus, that's a step in a sort of diversity journey,
and we also have the dysfunctional group.
Both exist, just as they're happy families, they're unhappy families.
They're productive diverse groups, and they're unproductive diverse groups.
Now Tolstoy, in Anna Karenina famously wrote,
happy families are all alike, but every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
With diverse groups, I think it's the opposite, right?
I think that functional groups, functional diverse groups,
are functional in different ways,
and dysfunctional groups are dysfunctional in the same way.
Now we're going to learn a variety of mechanisms
through which diversity improves performance.
We're going to see that dysfunctional groups tend to fail for the same reasons,
and it's going to be a lack of validation, a lack of respect of the talents of other people.
So let's go back to the diversity journey.
We spent a lot of time on this, but let's go back to it.
So let's suppose you're at stage one or stage two.
So being inclusive is morally correct or legally required.
You join a team that's got a specific task, say organizing a summer festival,
and you see people who look different from you.
And so you might interpret the group composition from a political perspective.
You might think that these other people were included for political or legal reasons.
The problem with that is that perception may hinder group performance.
But in contrast, if you believe in the diversity bonus,
or if you recognize its possibility,
then when you see this identity-diverse group,
you're going to say, wow, you know, I should be optimistic,
because this group is likely to produce new, exciting ideas.
And that attitude would seem to help the team.
And in fact, you know what? It does.
So Robin Ely and David Thomas, who are at Harvard,
they spent a lot of time studying diverse team performance.
They found that these attitudes do matter, and to agree they're self-fulfilling.
So if you accept that diversity can be useful,
and you expect it to lead you to better solutions,
you're going to find that it does.
And if you don't, if you think diversity is going to get in the way,
then you're likely to be part of a dysfunctional group.
So we've talked about the diversity bonus.
Now let's move to the next stage.
Attaining functional diversity often requires restructuring,
changing the way things are done.
Let me give you some examples.
Many companies that hire, including Microsoft and Google,
give tests to their applicants.
Now talent-based logic would imply you should hire the top performers,
the people who do best.
Well, let's consider a firm with three applicants,
and they've got two positions that they can hire.
And let's suppose that they ask each of these three applicants,
what's called an Allie, Bourne, and Charles, ten questions,
and they're going to get scores on these tests.
Let's see who they should pick.
So here are their test scores,
and what we see is that Allie got seven out of the ten questions right,
whereas Bourne got, and Charles both got eight right.
So if you use talent logic, this is an easy hiring decision.
What you should do is you should just hire Bourne and Charles,
because they did better.
But let's think about diversity logic.
What does diversity logic say?
It says, well, we shouldn't just look at these scores.
Maybe we should look more deeply at how the people did.
So let's look at how they answered the questions.
So there's ten questions, and what you see is Allie got four through ten right,
and Bourne and Charles both got one through eight right.
So notice that Allie got questions nine and ten correct,
but neither Charles or Bourne did.
And in fact, Charles and Bourne got the exact same sets of questions correct.
So Allie missed questions one through three,
but both Bourne and Charles got those correct.
So if you use diversity-based logic, what would you do?
Well, diversity-based logic would suggest that the best team doesn't consist of Bourne and Charles,
but it consists of Allie and then either Bourne or Charles,
because in that way, you get people who are able to answer a more diverse set of questions.
Here's another example.
Suppose an organization has a problem, such as reducing electricity costs or saving space,
and on this problem, it's possible to determine immediately in almost no cost
whether an idea works, whether it saves money.
Talent logic would suggest that, well, it makes no sense for the firm to open up this problem
to less talented people.
You should just give it to the smartest person,
because these less talented people have nothing to add.
Diversity logic suggests that, look, anybody might have a really good idea,
because each person might bring some different way of thinking and might make an improvement.
So therefore, what the organization should do, provided it doesn't cost too much,
is let anybody propose solutions.
But this requires restructuring, requires sharing power.
It requires what Yale Law Professor Vicki Schultz once described to me as disruption,
and this disruptive diversity is always acceptable to everyone.
Now, I'm going to think of this disruption as softer terms, restructuring,
and this restructuring oftentimes can lead to better outcomes.
Here's a last example.
One company I visited lacked sufficient diversity on difficult problems.
So they found that when a problem got really hard,
people tend to hunker down within their silo.
So the Institute of Policy, where each manager in her end-of-year evaluation
had to write down what is the most important problem,
the one single problem that you faced during the year that they had tried to solve.
Then underneath that, they had to say,
who from outside my silo did I bring in to help me solve it,
to help me come up with that decision?
So in other words, what they did is they enforced diversity on the part of their managers.
Now, these examples haven't addressed identity.
Now, it's also possible to do that as well,
to restructure so that groups and teams exhibit identity diversity as well.
Now, if you have an identity diverse team,
you've got no guarantee of cognitive diversity,
or that you've got the appropriate types for the problem at hand.
But your prior belief should be that there's probably some cognitive diversity,
because if the room is filled with people who all look the same,
then there's some reason to question whether you actually have as much cognitive diversity as you could,
and whether you have sufficient cognitive diversity.
So we've identified the elephant, and we've taken it for a stroll.
We've seen how identity differences were framed initially morally and legally.
We've seen how equal opportunity and affirmative action were created a bigger pool.
But in fact, once the pool got integrated,
many groups and organizations found this diversity bonus, which was the fourth step.
And then we saw how to really sometimes realize that diversity bonus.
We need to restructure.
Now, much of this course is going to consist of trying to make sense of that bonus,
of figuring out when it exists and how do we leverage it so we can make the world better.
Okay, so let's put the elephant to bed.
Let's get on with the course. Thank you.
