Hi, welcome back. In these past few lectures, you've been talking about the importance of
diverse models in making predictions. We've talked about how that's true for groups, that
you want people to use different models, and for individuals. You want to be a fox, not
a hedgehog. Remember the dictum, all models are wrong, but some are useful. Now to be
a fox, you need more than one model, more than one way of looking at the world. So in
this lecture, what we're going to do is we're going to learn how to be better predictors.
We're going to learn four methods for how to estimate and to predict. That's going to
put us on the path to being better able to forecast the future. Now predicting isn't easy,
is the great philosopher Yogi Berra, and before him Niles Bohr once said, it's difficult to
make predictions, especially about the future. Now Yogi's prescience depends on how we interpret
what he's saying. On the one hand, he's clearly wrong. Making predictions isn't difficult
at all. In fact, it's easy. It's too easy. For example, every year I predict that mighty
Detroit Tigers are going to win the World Series. If I'm making accurate predictions,
that's a different matter. We can rarely foresee the future, though we can at least at times
place some reasonable bounds on what we think might transpire, so we can be close. So in
this lecture, we're going to have three parts. In the first and only the briefest parts, I'm
going to take a brief detour to Delphi and discuss some of the history of prediction.
Then the second part, which is the bulk of the lecture, I'm going to discuss four methods
for making predictions. The first is going to be analogies, which is going to be another
way to think about our boxes from the previous lecture. The second will be Fermi's method,
what's called dimensional analysis. The third will be linear decomposition, and the final
will be trend analysis. Now for some problems, one of these methods will be more relevant
to the others, but for most problems, we'll find that actually multiple methods will apply.
Now in the third and final part, I'm going to talk about why in this so-called information
age we need to make estimations in predictions. Can we just look this stuff up on the web?
Well, not quite, and I'm going to explain why. Now I was promised one quick digression
before we get into the guts of the lecture. I want to provide a short history of predictions.
I'm doing this because really, I guess it's going to be a lot of fun. So I want to start
with the Greeks. For nearly 2,000 years, from 1400 BC to 400 AD, Greeks who wanted another
future went to the oracle at Delphi. Now the Greeks considered Delphi to be the navel of
the world, the belly button of the world, and upon visiting the oracle, they'd encounter
a virtuous older woman who was sitting on a three-legged stool. Now this woman would
be known as Pythia, the priestess of Apollo. Now obviously the oracle wasn't a very good
predictor, but its failures were typically chalked up to misinterpretation and not error
on the part of the oracle. In fact, questioning the oracle's veracity would come at a huge
risk. The historian Walter Birkett writes, those who doubted divination could be accused
of godlessness. Now the oracle at Delphi was just one historical method of prediction.
But even a partialist inspires awe in the diversity of attempts, astrology, palm reading,
tarot cards, the Yi Qing, the naing of horses. At one point they looked at patterns of moles
on a person's body, and some people even looked at secret codes and sacred texts. So
lots of ways to predict. Let's be honest here, some of these seem quite silly. Can you really
accept a flip of a playing card to tell our future? No way, of course not. That is unless
we believe in what the card says and then we consciously or unconsciously try and create
that very future. But of course none of these methods, not even the naing of horses, has
passed scientific scrutiny. You don't want to invest your family's assets based on the
flip of a tarot card or the behavior of your cat. Far better to use models because unlike
astrology they're actually going to work sometimes. Now to get us going before we use these models
I mean to make a distinction. I want to distinguish between estimation and prediction. To estimate
means to make an approximate calculation of some quantity amount or value. To predict
means to estimate in advance to tell the future. Predicting is harder than estimating because
it depends on information that we don't yet know. So what's important for us to see is
that predicting is just a kind of estimation. So if you want to learn to predict we first
have to learn how to estimate. So let's get started with our first method which is estimation
by analogy. Now an analogy is just an inference that if two things agree on some attributes
then they likely agree on others. So to estimate by analogy simply means find something analogous
or similar whose value you do know. So something that goes in the same box or even better several
some things and then try to infer the value of the object of interest from those several
things that you know. Let's do an example. Suppose I'm asked to estimate the life expectancy
of a coyote. Now I haven't spent decades observing coyotes although they are some in the field
next to my house so I see them sometimes in the morning. Now formally these are called
canis latrons that's what they're called in the wild. However I do know this that a coyote
is a type of dog and I know that domesticated dogs live between well about 8 and 15 years.
So then I might say well since coyotes are like dogs I can guess that that's about how
long coyotes will live. But I can do even better though and build from the analogy and
here's a key to using models properly. Not to take the predictions as fact but use them
as baselines from which point we start to think. So let's think about the difference between
coyotes and dogs. Coyotes aren't overbred so this means they might live longer than
dogs but on the other hand coyotes don't get yearly trips to the vet. So if you take those
things and balance them off I might estimate maybe a coyote lives between 10 and 12 years
and guess what that's exactly right. So let's now do a prediction using multiple analogies.
So for years rumors have circulated that Steven Spielberg is going to release a sequel to
the movie ET. Now he claims no but there's still those rumors. Let's try to predict how
much such a movie might make at the box office. So what do we need to know? We need to know
an analogous movie. Well here we can use the web. What's the closest movie to so called
ET2? Well the closest movie would be ET itself. Well how much money did it make? It made $800
million. But ET2 would be a sequel so what we need is some sequels. We need analogous
sequels and ideally we'd have Spielbergian sequels. So what does that lead us to? Well
that leads us to Star Wars in Indiana Jones. Well let's look at the original Star Wars.
It grossed about the same as ET, $800 million. The sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, grossed
$550 million. So that's approximately 70% of the original. What about Indiana Jones?
Same thing. Raiders of the Lost Ark, it grossed $250 million. The sequel, The Temple of Doom,
grossed $175 million. Pretty darn good. Also about 70%. So then we can ask, hey does this
70% rule always hold? Well let's check. Let's look at another sequel. Take the movie Gremlins.
That's kind of like ET. It's got cute little aliens running around. It's sequel grossed
about a third of the original. So now we've got a bit of a problem. If you didn't see
it, Gremlins 2 is not Spielberg so it's not as good of a movie. So maybe we sort of stick
with our 70% rule. So let's take all these analogies into account. The sequel to Star
Wars, the sequel to Raiders of the Lost Ark, and the sequel to Gremlins. We might predict
that a new ET would draw maybe two-thirds of the original. Now obviously the quality
of the movie, who stars in it, and a bunch of other factors are going to matter, but
two-thirds seems like a better prediction than, oh man, ET2, $4 billion. That would be crazy.
So what we do is by drawing analogies we get better predictions. Now two last points about
drawing analogies. Different people draw different analogies. We put the world in different boxes.
So that's a good thing. I once asked my students to guess the height of the Saturn V rocket
and they were way off. I mean some people guess 10,000 feet. So then I said, let's use
some analogies. By the way, it is around 375 feet. So I said to students, make some analogies
and then predict. So one student who's from New York used the Empire State Building as
an analogy. Now that's a pretty good analogy because the Sack of Liberty is about 300 feet
from its base to its top. So that's not too bad. Now because we live in Ann Arbor, a lot
of students do an analogy with the campus' famous Burton Tower, which is only 212 feet
high. Now the tower is impressive as it is. It doesn't seem as big as a rocket. So a lot
of them, they saw it with the towers 200 feet. I bet the rocket's bigger. But still, because
they had different analogies, they made different predictions. Now the Burton Tower analogy hints
at my second point. Analogies can also be helpful instead of placing boundaries on value.
So even if you don't know much about rockets, you might think it's probably bigger than
a flagpole that's 40 feet high, and it's got to be shorter than a skyscraper, a thousand
feet high. So now you've got these two bounds. You've got 40 feet, you've got a thousand
feet in between those two. Now once they're in place, you've still got a lot of wiggle
room, but you're not going to be off by a factor of 20. You're not going to say 10,000
feet.
Let's go to our second method. This is called the Fermi method. Now it gets its name from
the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi. Fermi's a brilliant man, but he was known as having
this amazing ability to make accurate estimates using seemingly no data or very little data.
So for example, at the Trinity test site for the first atomic bomb, Fermi scattered some
papers in the air as the bomb blew off, and the shock wave for the nuclear test hit those
papers and they sort of scattered around. Fermi thought for just a very short time, based
on how far the paper went, he said, boy, I bet that the blast was 10 kilotons of TNT.
Now, people are sort of amazed. The actual value was 19 kilotons, so he's off by less
than a factor of 2. How does he do it? How did Fermi do it? Well, his approach does the
following. He breaks an estimate down into parts, and then he multiplies the parts together.
So formally, this is now known as dimensional analysis. It sounds a little more fancy than
Fermi's method. So to see how dimensional analysis works, I'm going to take a stab at
a question. Now, this is an interesting question because it's a question that Google used to
ask people who were interviewing for jobs there. So a lot of people want to work for
Google, you'd come in and ask you these really tricky questions. One of those questions would
be, how many golf balls can you put on a bus? You might wonder why Google would ask a question
like this. Well, here's why. They want to see how people think. How do they solve interesting
problems? So to solve a problem like this, using dimensional analysis or Fermi's methods,
all we have to do is first identify what is the ratio that we want to solve, and then
we just do some math. Let me show you how. We have this puzzle, how many golf balls fit
on a school bus. What we want to do is we want to break this down into two different
ratios, two different dimensions. So what we're going to do is the following. We're
going to say we can think of this as the number of golf balls per cubic feet and then the
number of cubic feet in a school bus. That's it. Fairly straightforward. Now this seems
much more like a manageable problem than the first one because now we just have to ask
how many golf balls fit in a square foot? How do we do this? Well, let's think of golf
balls as being little cubes for a second. That'll be easier. And maybe they're a little
bit bigger than an inch and a half in diameter. So if we have square golf balls, maybe they're
an inch and a half on a side. So that means if we've got a square foot, right, that's
12 inches on a side. We're going to get 8 times 8 times 8, which is going to be 512
golf balls in a square foot. So let's make this an even 500. Now, how about the cubic
feet per school bus? Ugh, this is a bit harder. So how big is a school bus? I don't know.
So the inside of a school bus, maybe, I don't know, 40 feet long. How high is it? Well,
when I think about last time I was on a school bus, I had to duck a little bit. So maybe
6 feet high. And how wide? Well, if I put my arms out, I can't quite touch the side.
So maybe 8 feet wide. So if I multiply 40 times 6, you know, 40 feet times 6 feet, that's
240. And then I multiply that by 8. That's roughly, say, you know, 2,000. So I get 500
golf balls for cubic feet. And I now get 2,000 cubic feet for school bus. So to get
our final answer, I just multiply those together. I multiply the 500, the number of golf balls
per cubic foot, times the 2,000, the number of cubic feet in a school bus, and I get
a million. Now, is that right? Well, now this is a benchmark. This is where I start thinking.
So I use the model as a benchmark. I got to think, okay, wait, a bus has a curved ceiling.
So that's going to take out some space. And then I think, oh my gosh, there's seats in
the bus. And the seats take up space. So maybe we can get around that by, you know, subtracting
some space for the curve and subtracting some space from the seats. And maybe we'll say
750,000. Is that right? I don't know. Probably close. Well, let's next apply Fermi to estimate
something we couldn't possibly know. Something really goofy. And this is sort of a question
that Google will also ask. Here's one. This is one a student of mine actually came up
with. How many left-handed people right now, this very moment, are enjoying a wild cherry
lifesaver candy? Okay. Now, no way we're going to get this right, because we couldn't ever
possibly know the answer. But what we'd like to do is be close. We'd like to be within
a factor of 10. So are there 10 people, 100 people, 1,000 people, a million people? How
do we know? How do we get some sort of idea? And I want to stop the video for a moment
and just take a stab at this yourself. Just take a wild guess. Okay, so let's do Fermi.
How do we do it? How do we do dimensional analysis? Again, we break the problem into
parts. So what do we have to do? What are the parts? Well, we're talking about left-handers
in the United States. So how many people in the United States? Well, there's 315 million.
And we might want to simplify this to 300 so we can multiply things together easily.
How many left-handers per person? Well, this is something we could look up on the web.
It turns out it's about 1 in 10. So maybe 1 tenth of all people are left-handers. Now,
what fraction of people, let's say some left-handers are just like any other people, what fraction
of people buy lifesavers? And we maybe say, well, you know, some people do, some people
don't. Let's again say maybe 1 in 10. So this is sort of how we get started. So now we know
there's 315 million people, a tenth of them are left-handed, and a tenth of them eat lifesavers.
But now we've got to figure out how many have a lifesaver in their mouth right now. Well,
that's going to be hard because right now we've done maybe 3 million people. What percentage
of those have lifesavers? So how do we figure this out? Well, first let's think about how
many lifesavers per day for people who buy lifesavers. Well, the pack contains about
a dozen. So suppose somebody who buys lifesavers buys 10 packs a year. So that's 120 lifesavers.
That's one lifesaver for every 3 days. That seems right about average. Then we need to
know the odds that someone's got a lifesaver at this exact moment. So to figure that out,
we have to know how long it takes to eat a lifesaver. If you chew them, like I used to
do as a kid, it takes about, I don't know, 20 seconds. But if you want, you can make
it last, I don't know, 7-8 minutes if you're careful. That sort of balances things out.
Say on average, 3 minutes. That seems fair. So assuming there are 10 hours in a day that
you'd eat a lifesaver, like maybe between noon and 10, nobody eats these things at 9
in the morning. So that's 600 minutes. That means the odds of eating a lifesaver at any
one moment in time, since it takes 3 minutes, are 1 and 200. All right. So for all those
people enjoying a lifesaver, we need to choose the fraction that is having wild cherry. Well,
there's a lot of flavors of lifesavers. How many, what percentage of lifesavers that
people are eating are wild cherry? Well, maybe 1 in 5. Why would I say 1 in 5 while they're
a top seller? And they're in the 5 flavor pack. So if it's in the 5 flavor pack, it's
going to be 1 out of 5. So now we're done. We can just multiply all this together. It's
fairly simple. Let me show you how. What do we do? Well, we start out by saying how many
people are in the United States? 300 million. Then we say what fraction are left-handers?
Remember, we said that's 1 out of 10. Then we say what's the fraction left-handers who
buy lifesavers? And again, we say 1 out of 10. Then we say what percentage of people
are eating a lifesaver on a given day? And we said 1 out of 3. Then we said lifesaver
eaters with 1 in their mouths at this exact moment was 1 and 200. Then we say what fraction
of those are wild cherry lifesavers? And we get 1 out of 5. So if we take 300 million,
multiply it by a tenth times a tenth times a third times 1 over 200 times 1 over 5, what
do we get? We get exactly 1,000. So we get that there's 1,000 people left-handed people
in the United States eating wild cherry lifesavers even as I speak. Now is this right? Probably
not. But I bet it's close. I bet it's within a factor of 10. In fact, I'm a really
positive for doing this calculation. It's between 100 and 10,000 people who are left-handed
that are enjoying a wild cherry lifesaver right now. So I don't know the exact answer
exactly, but I'm probably pretty close. The Fermi method won't always work this well.
But we can leverage some diversity to gauge how accurate it's going to be. So all we have
to do is ask some other people. And we don't have to ask them the big question, like number
of left-handers enjoying wild cherry lifesavers. We could ask them the smaller ones. Like what
percentage of people do you think buy lifesavers? How long does it take to eat a lifesaver?
What percentage of lifesavers are wild cherry? And if we do that, we're going to get a better
sense of the bounds on our predictions. And then we can get a good sense of how accurate
our prediction is. Because maybe people say only 1 out of 10 are wild cherry, or 1 out
of 2 is wild cherry. So that's Fermi's method. Let's go to our third method. This is called
linear decomposition. This relies on basically decomposing a whole into parts, and then adding
up those parts. So let's say I wanted to estimate the weight of a house. Another crazy question.
Well, how would I do it? Well, I can decompose the house into its parts. There's wood, there's
bricks, there's tile, there's roofing materials, there's appliances, furniture, people, all
sorts of stuff, right? So if you can estimate the weight of the house, I'd just add up the
estimates of all those parts. So this method seems like it's going to work great, and it
will, but we need two conditions to hold. First condition is the value of the whole
has to equal the value of the parts. That seems obvious, but we're going to talk in
a second why that's not true. Second, we have to know the value of the parts, at least be
able to make better guesses about the parts than we can about the whole. So why won't
this first condition always hold? Well, here's a classic example. The human body can be decomposed
into elements, into a distribution of elements. I'm 65% oxygen, 18% carbon, 10% hydrogen,
3% nitrogen, 1.5% calcium, 1% phosphorus. And then I've got traces of potassium, sulfur,
sodium, chlorine, magnesium, and so on. What's the total value of all those chemicals if
you want to buy them at some chemistry store? Well, less than a buck. So clearly, hopefully,
I'm worth more than my parts. So let me do an example, though, where this does work.
Suppose I walk into my favorite sandwich shop and order a sub, and I'm thinking, you know,
I don't want anything too fattening. How many calories are in this sub? Is there 100, 200,
1,000? How do I make an estimate? I'm looking at this big sub. How do I do it? Well, what
I can do is I can break the sub apart, and I can ask what's in there. I'm actually going
to tear it apart. I'm just going to look inside the sub, see what's in there, and then try
and figure out how many calories it has. Let's do this formally. So here's my sub. What do
I see? I see a bun. I see some mayonnaise. I see cheese. I see tomato. And I see lettuce.
So then I can write just a simple linear equation that the sub is equal to the calories in the
bun, the mayo, the cheese, the tomato, and the lettuce. So to get an estimate of the total
calories in the sub, all I have to do is make estimates of the parts. Well, this isn't that
hard. How many calories in a bun? I don't know, maybe like 150. That's, you know, probably
close to right. What about mayo? Well, you know, actually, mayo has a lot of calories,
so that's probably about 100. Maybe I shouldn't get mayo on my sandwich until I think about
it. Cheese, well, cheese also probably has about 100 calories. And what about the tomato?
Well, tomatoes have almost no calories at all, so that's maybe 10. And what about lettuce?
Well, five at most. So then I can just add all these things up, and I've got 150 plus
100 plus 100 plus 10 plus five. So that's 365. So what I've got is a pretty decent estimate
of the sub, because before I just saw this big sub, it would have been hard to make sense
of it. But by unpacking it, I get a much better estimate of the sub. Now, I can also use this
linear attribute model to predict the future. Instead of estimating, I can use it to predict.
So suppose I want to predict how much it's going to cost me to open a coffee shop. Suppose
I've had a dream of opening a coffee shop, and I think, how much can this cost? What
I can do, just like I did with the sub, I can break the coffee shop into parts. So what
does a coffee shop consist of? Well, I'm going to have to pay rent for the space. I'm going
to have to buy tables, chairs, an espresso machine, refrigerators, dishwashers, display
cabinets, a counter, and so on and so on and so on. When I make this long list, I can add
up the cost of each component, and I'm going to get a reasonable estimate of how much it
would cost to open up my shop. Again, I'm just decomposing it.
Alright, last, we're going to do trend predictions. The last method of predictions relies on
what statisticians call time series, or a sequence of data. So let's suppose you have
daily temperatures in some place like Barstow, California. These can be placed in a time series.
So can stock prices, consumer confidence, or even the price of cheese, as we're going
to see in a second. So when you have a time series, you can make predictions about the
future by asking sort of, is this trend continuing? Let me give you an example of maybe the most
famous trend prediction. This is called Moore's Law. So in 1965, Gordon Moore, who was one
of the founders of Intel, he noticed that the number of transistors that can be placed
on an integrated circuit, like a computer chip, were doubling every two years. Let me
give you a sense of how fast that is. If the number of bananas that I eat doubles every
week, and I begin by eating one banana per week in January 1st, by the 15th of March,
I'm eating 1,000 bananas a week. Before summer, I'm eating more than a million a week. And
by August, I'm putting away more than a billion bananas a week. That's a lot of bananas. That's
how fast they're increasing the number of chips, the number of transistors they can
put on a chip. So doubling implies a really fast ramp up. And since 1965, Moore's Law
has more or less held. Though this isn't called a law, it's not really a law like a physical
law. It's an empirical pattern, a trend. So if tomorrow somebody developed a super fast
biological computer, Moore's Law would cease to hold because scientists are using a different
technology and they leave those chips behind. Now Moore's Law is an example that we call
exponential trend. So the amount of money you have in the bank if you invest m dollars
at a rate r is also going to have an exponential trend. Because after t periods, you'll have
m times quantity 1 plus r raised to the t power. So that's also exponential growth.
Now there's lots of types of trends. Let me give you just a few. A linear trend. So let's
suppose your income goes up by $2,000 a year. That would give you a linear trend. A cyclical
trend. So let's take the weather in my home state of Michigan. It cycles. It's warm in
the summer and it's cold in the winter. Now there's also a trend called regression to
the mean. This is a random sequence of moves that goes up and down around a mean value.
So for example, my body temperature averages about 98.6%. But it randomly bounces around
quite a bit. Sometimes I get too warm and I start to cool off. And if I get too cool,
then I start to warm up. Now the control mechanism isn't perfect. So not always right at 98.6.
I'm bouncing around. So what we do when we use time series is we try to predict the future
by analyzing the trend. So we ask, is this a cyclical trend? Is there exponential growth?
Is it regression to the mean and so on? To see how our trend analysis works in practice,
let's go back in time and look at past it and try and predict the price of something
that at one point was in the future, but we now know the value of. So what we want to
do is we're not trying to predict the value of cheese per pound in October of 2010. And
we're going to try and make this prediction based on data from past cheese prices. When
you talk about cheese and prices, we can't just say any cheese. So we're going to talk
about 40 pound block cheddar. Now this is what economists call a commodity. It's something
that gets traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. And so the price is estimated by
the National Agricultural Statistics Service. So that's what this NASS stands for on the
top of this graph. Now what we see here is a chart of prices up through May of 2010.
We're trying to predict the price of cheese in October of 2010, which I'm assuming we
don't know. I'll tell you what it is in the future, but we'll assume we don't know.
So if we look at the graph of prices up to the spring, we see lots of possible trends.
So you could look at this and say, whoa, this looks sort of cyclical. So maybe it's going
to kind of go like this. You could also look at this and you could say, you know, it's
moved around a lot in the past, but I see this sort of linear increasing trend here.
So that's another thing. Or you could look at this and you could say, you know, the price
is just sort of hanging around. It's sort of just fluctuating around a mean of about
175 and it's flat. So what we see is you've got all these different sorts of predictions.
Now what are we going to predict? If we think it's a cycle, then we're going to do is maybe
assume that it's going to go down, maybe it'll end up like 160, 170, something like that.
If we assume it's linear, then we might get something like 180. And if we assume it's
regression to the mean, then we're going to assume maybe it's about $1.70, $1.75. So those
are the three models we have. Now our three estimates don't differ by much. So which one
should we choose? To answer that question, we've got to analyze the models. So let's
think of these models. Why would cheese prices have a two-year cycle? So why would they be
like the red line? Why would they be cyclic? I don't know. That doesn't make any sense to
me. So maybe we should dump that one. What about the linear trend? So we've got this
sort of linear trend in the purple line. Well, there could be an increased demand for cheese,
but again, at that point I haven't heard anything about it. There was no new uses of cheese developed
in 2010. So therefore, you know, the only thing that would be causing this would be inflation.
So if I look up inflation in 2010, I could see that it was very low. So that means maybe
the purple line doesn't work either. So that leaves the green line, which is a random walk
with regression to the mean. And you know, that makes sense because you can think that
the government gets involved in these markets a little bit and the price gets too high or
too low. They try to equilibrate it. So I should expect maybe they're going to stick
pretty close to a mean. And so maybe the green line makes the most sense. And so I'm going
to guess the green line and say $1.75. So what was the actual price? The actual price
of a 40-bound plot cheddar in October of 2010 was $1.75 and $0.6. So not bad. I have lots
of models. One made more sense and it turned out to be accurate. Now each of these methods
can work in different cases and they can improve your ability to estimate. But they really
work best in combination. Think back to the diversity prediction theorem or the Netflix
prize. We're going to predict better with multiple diverse models. Let's suppose I'm
going to sell my house. How do I make an estimate? Well, Fermi's probably not going to apply
and trend analysis probably isn't going to apply. That's okay. They're going to work
in other places. What about analogy? Well, I could look at other similar houses in my
neighborhood or similar neighborhoods and see what they sold for. In fact, this is how
banks do it. They look at comparables. I could also do linear decomposition. I could break
my house into components. I could say the value of my house is equal to the value of
the lot plus its size and square feet plus the quality of the kitchen, plus number of
bedrooms, plus number of baths. Now to do that, I need to know the value of each of these
parts. But all these are pretty much knowable. And by the way, that's the other way of how
banks appraise home values. They look at comparables and they correct by taking into account
linear terms. So if your house has, let's say, a sun porch and others don't, then they're
going to add in the value of the sun porch. But if your house has a little tiny kitchen
and has avocado appliances, they're going to subtract for the lameness of your kitchen.
So you combine these two models, the lender can make just a much more accurate of the
value estimate, believe your house's value, and so can you. Now before I conclude, I want
to return to a question that I posed earlier in this lecture. Why should I bother learning
to do these estimation stuff? Fermi's method seems kind of complicated when I can look
it up on the Internet. Well, one obvious reason is you can't look up the future on the Internet.
At least not yet. It's not there. So no web page is going to tell you what inflation's
going to be next year, or what the market's going to be like for segue scooters in Alaska,
or whether you should encourage your children to study neuroscience or biology. You've got
to make your own way. And making your own way requires forecasting and uncertain future.
Now another fact is this, that as much information is there that exists on the web, there's still
a lot that we can't find. For example, I was unable to find out how many lifesaver candies
are sold each year, and if left-handers like them more than right-handers. I couldn't do
it because it's private information, and the people who own lifesavers don't want me to
know. There's also a much deeper answer to the question of why I learned these models.
That deeper answer contains a reason for this course. Self-improvement. How do we get better
at what we do? We get better by building skills through practice. And not just any practice,
but practice with expert feedback. So if you want to be a good violinist, you can't just
run your bow across the strings three hours a day and expect to be great. You need coaching.
You need the ability to see and correct your form. The position of your bow in your hand,
the placement of your elbow, and so on. Same's true if you want to predict the future. You
need practice. What better way to practice than to estimate stuff that you can look up
on the web? How many bricks in the Great Wall of China? How many water molecules in
Lake Michigan? How many people took advantage of the 529 Education Investment Plan the government
introduced? How many Indian restaurants are there in Raleigh, North Carolina? These are
all things you can predict and all things you can look up. Because all of these answers
can be found with a few keystrokes. But it's going to be far better if you first try to
estimate them. Now your answers aren't going to be spot on, but they'll often be close.
And when you get this feedback by looking at the difference between the truth and your
prediction, you're going to learn new tricks, new ways for how to decompose, how to draw
better analogies, or how many steps to take in your Fermi process. So think of yourself
as a tightrope walker with a net beneath you. Eventually that net's not going to be there.
There's a lot of time before the circus opens, before you've got to make real predictions
that really matter. So do it. Practice. Have fun. Thanks for listening.
