Hi, welcome back. In this lecture, I continue our discussion of problem solving. And as
in several of the others, I'm going to try to do my best to speak math to metaphor. Remember
how in the last lecture I described how problem solving relies on perspectives and heuristics.
Well, in this lecture, we're going to focus on the former perspectives. Now, these are
just representations of what we're going to be called encodings of problems. I'm going
to build from an intuitive idea. In this case, it's the idea that diverse perspectives improve
problem solving. They're going to make that formal. And this formalization is going to
enable us to see the mechanisms through which perspectives operate. And there's going to
be two. The first mechanism is going to seem almost magical. Diverse perspectives are
going to take something really difficult and make it simple. The result will be transcendent.
So in these instances, new perspectives are, they're acts of genius, pure genius. Now, the
second mechanism is more workman-like. It's going to enlarge the set of points that people
consider. The innovation writer Stephen Johnson calls these other possible solutions the quote
adjacent possible. It's a wonderful characterization. I'm going to borrow for this lecture. In fact,
it's one I wish I'd have used in my own book on the topic, the adjacent possible. It's
a nice idea. Okay, now demonstrating these two benefits of perspectives, making the obtuse
transparent and enlarging the set of the possible, that's the focus of the lecture. Now, I expect
that some of these examples are going to just be like, wow, for some of you. So I'm going
to try and go through them fairly slowly. Now, lest I seem too polyannish, I'm going
to conclude by tossing a little bit of a wet blanket on the discussion by demonstrating
that for every useful perspective, every transcendent way of looking at something, there's going
to exist a whole bunch of perspectives that won't be useful. How many that aren't useful?
Well, while Whitman would say multitudes, Carl Sagan would say billions and billions.
They'd both be right. And that's why flashes of genius, these transcendent perspectives,
occur so infrequently because they're hard to come up with. Now, to start, I want to
issue a challenge. At the completion of this lecture, I want you to log on your computer
and type in the name of any company, university, organization you can think of. Just type it
into some internet search engine. It could be Bing, Yahoo, Google, doesn't matter. Along
with the words, diverse perspective. So for example, type in Ford, diverse perspectives.
If I did that today, here's what I found. I found a quote from their CEO and it said this,
the more we embrace our differences within Ford, diversity of thought, experience, perspective,
race, gender, faith and more, the better we can deliver what the customers want and the
more successful Ford will be. What about Google? Type Google, diverse perspective into Google
and what do you get? They're even more bullish on diverse perspectives. They say this, intellectual
curiosity and diverse perspectives drive our policies, our work environment, our perks
and our profits. Let's go to the academy. Here's the University of Vermont's law school
and diverse perspective. Vermont law school consistently attracts intellectually
curious and motivated students who bring, here comes, diverse perspectives, interest
and talents to the school. No matter where you look, Disney, Coke, U.S. Department of
Education, St. Thomas School on the shores of Lake Washington, they all claim to value
and encourage diverse perspectives. Why? Well, that's the point of this lecture to
understand why. We could dismiss this as a bunch of feel good symbolism, but it's not.
Diverse perspectives literally do provide the foundations for breakthrough and innovations.
That's why everybody speaks about them so much.
Okay, so diverse perspectives are getting all this buzz. Is it really deserved? Of course it
isn't. One big reason being that they can be transcended. It's as though they were handed
down by some mysterious, all-knowing higher authority. A new perspective can bring order
and simplicity to what once seemed just like a complex morass. How? Well, it's best
really shown through examples. So let me do some examples and then we'll get formal.
So let me start with Albert Einstein, right? A genius, by almost any measure. Now, unlike
some other great geniuses, Newton, Gauss, Feynman, Murray Gell-Mann, John von Neumann,
Einstein wasn't tagged early on as exceedingly special. Now, he was smart. He was a top-notch
student. He wasn't the apocryphal C student, we're sometimes told, and he was a pretty
darn good physicist, but he wasn't tagged as some amazing genius. But what Einstein had,
though, was a gift for seeing the physical world in different ways, through new perspectives.
Now, Einstein won his Nobel Prize for his work on the photoelectric effect. He was awarded
the 1921 prize in 1922 because the committee didn't give a prize in 1921. But here's what
Einstein's Nobel Prize was for. He saw light as consisting of little particles, or what
are called quanta, as opposed to thinking of light as some sort of continuous wave. So
he saw light as a bunch of little packets bumping around, not as some sort of smooth
flow. So this is an entirely new perspective on light, and it led to all sorts of breakthroughs,
including things like the laser. So in other words, when Einstein, quote-unquote, saw the
light, he saw it in a way different from how anyone else had ever seen the light. Or let's
take his more famous discovery, his theory of relativity, curved space-time and all that
stuff. Again, what is Einstein doing? He's seeing reality in a new way, and in doing
so, he's creating order where none had been before. So let's translate this into our
formal language. In each case, what was Einstein doing? He's introducing a new perspective,
a new way of representing the set of things we think about, and that gave us a new way
to think about a phenomenon. Okay, the photoelectric effect, relativity theory, that's pretty
heavy stuff. So let's take a little break, and I want to show you a much more light-hearted,
transcendent, diverse perspective. Now this one's due to another genius, Herbert Simon,
who is a Nobel Prize winner in economics. Now Simon developed a game that's called
Sum to 15. It's a two-player game. There's nine cards, and they're numbered from one
to nine, and they're laid in a row on a table. So you can play this with playing cards. Now
here's how it works. One player is randomly selected to go first, and then the players
take turns selecting cards. The first player who has in his or her hand exactly three cards
that sum up to 15 wins. Now if it turns out that all nine cards have been selected, and
no one has three cards that add up to 15, well it's a tie. Oh yeah, there's one more rule.
You only get five seconds to pick a card, so it's a really fast game. Let's play one
just to see how it works. Okay, so here's our nine cards in a row, and we're going to flip
a coin to see who goes first, and I'll flip, and let's suppose I win. So remember we want
three cards to sum up to 15, so I'm going to choose first, and I'm going to take the six.
I'm player one. Now this seems like a really odd choice, given that the five is right in
the center, and you want these three cards to sum up to 15. So here's what happens. You're
going to say, I think I'll choose the five. Now it's my turn. I've only got five seconds,
and I'm going to throw you for a loop here. I'm going to pick the four. Now at this point
you're probably thinking six plus five plus four equals 15. So what is Scott doing? It seems
like he's trying not to win. Well, time is ticking away. You've got five seconds. You're
in this terrible rush, so what do you do? You just grab something. You grab the eight. I'm
now handcuffed, right? Because think about it. Eight plus five is 13, so if I don't take the
two, I'm going to lose. So here's what I do. I take the two. So now it's your turn. You
look at the board, and here's what you think. You think, ooh, Scott has the six and the
two. That adds up to eight, so if he takes the seven, he's going to win. But Scott also
has the four and the two. That adds up to six, and if he takes the nine, he's going to win.
So that's not good, because either the seven or nine will make me win. So no matter what
you do, I'm going to end up winning. So you've lost the game, right? Because either the seven
or nine makes you win, so if you choose the seven, down here, I'll choose the nine and win.
And if you choose the nine, I'll choose the seven. All right, you lost. No big deal, right?
It's the first time you've played the game. So don't sweat it. You'll get better. In fact,
you're going to get a lot better, because in just a couple of minutes, I'm going to make
you the best player in the whole world at some to 15. I'm not kidding. And I'm going to do this
just by introducing a new perspective. Now, to give you that new perspective, I need to take you
all the way back to middle school, maybe even elementary school. So at some point in math class,
you probably learn something called this, the magic square. Well, here's how the magic square works.
It's got these same cards numbered from one to nine. And if you add up any row, like this row,
6 plus 1 plus 8, you see it adds up to 15. If you add up any column, 6 plus 7 plus 2,
that also adds up to 15. And if you add up the diagonals, 6, 5, 4, 2, 5, 8, you also get 15.
What I want to do is I want to use this magic square as an alternative perspective on the game,
sum to 15. And it's going to be a transcendent perspective. Watch. I'm going to replay our game.
Now, to make it simple, I'm going to do my work plays with O's and your plays with X's.
Now, most people when they play this game choose the 5 because it's in the center.
But I'm going to take the 6, which is a strange choice. You go next and you take the 5 because it's in the middle.
I then take the 4, which is down here, which is a strange move because now I can't win.
I get 3 things to sum to 15. So you're not sure what to do. So you take the 8 up here.
Well, I block your 8 with the 2. Well, now it's your move and if you take the 7, I'll win by taking the 9.
But if you block me with the 9, I'll win by taking the 7.
So do you notice anything about this game? I thought so. It's tic-tac-toe.
Sum to 15 is tic-tac-toe, but it's tic-tac-toe in a different perspective, the wrong perspective.
That's why sum to 15 is hard and tic-tac-toe is easy.
This possibility for transcendence, for creating tic-tac-toe, treating sum to 15, which is a hard game,
and turning it into tic-tac-toe, which is an easy game, is one big reason why we see for-profits,
nonprofits, universities, governments, high schools, even religious organizations sing the praises of diverse perspective,
because they can make something that's really difficult, really easy.
But sadly, finding these transcendent perspectives, it takes effort, devotion, luck, and well, genius.
I mean, if you find one, then it's Alexander Pope wrote of Newton.
Nature and nature's laws lay hidden night. God said, let Newton be and all was light.
So there's a sense in which Newton took what was very hard to understand and made it simple.
Now, ironically, Newton's own take on his greatness.
I mean, think about it. Newton came up with optics, the calculus, and gravity. That's not a bad resume.
He said that he owed his breakthroughs to, quote, standing on the shoulders of giants.
Well, that's great, because this is the second and equally important, though less sublime, value of diverse perspectives,
enlarging the adjacent possible.
Now, to introduce and formalize this idea of adjacent possible, I'm going to introduce a concept developed by an ecologist named Sewell Wright
that's called a fitness landscape.
So let's think of creating a living thing. Let's say a turtle.
So a turtle has DNA, and that DNA consists of genes, and then a whole bunch of stuff between those genes that we really don't fully understand yet.
Now, these genes, in turn, produce proteins and differentiated cells, and eventually a turtle.
And if we change a gene, then we change the resulting turtle.
Okay, here's where Wright comes in.
To compare this new turtle with other turtles, what he does is he assigns to each turtle a fitness.
Now, fitness can loosely be defined as the ability of a turtle to reproduce.
And if we define fitness in this way, it creates some difficulty. There's some logical loops here.
For this lecture, let's just assume that fitness makes sense, that it's how much you can reproduce.
Now, we can then create a landscape by putting the genetic type of the turtle on the x-axis and the fitness on the y-axis.
Now, ecologists tend to think that this landscape will generally be rugged.
That means it's not going to be a simple hill. There's going to be lots of places to get stuck.
So at this point, I need to add a little more detail to make clear how diverse perspectives change the adjacent possible.
The detail is going to concern DNA.
So what is DNA? It consists of what are called nucleotides.
And each nucleotide has one of four bases.
A for adenine, C for cytosine, G for guanine, and T for thymine.
Each strand of DNA can then just be thought of as a long string of A's, C's, T's, and G's.
Now, humans and turtles, it turns out, are what are called diploid.
So we have two strands of DNA.
Now, not everything does.
Trout, it turns out, have three strands of DNA.
And wheat, which is simpler than trout, has four strands.
Again, sort of complicated.
Let's simplify this.
Let's assume instead of four bases that there's only two.
So we'll just call them A and B.
And we're going to assume that the organism we're evolving just has a single strand.
So it's called haploid.
So it's not two, three, or four.
It's just got one strand.
So there are haploid organisms.
B's are haploid, ants are, and so are wasps.
So for the purposes of our thinking here,
DNA is just this long string of A's and B's.
Maybe let's just say a strand of length of 100.
So what is the adjacent possible?
Well, that depends.
It depends on what our heuristics are.
So let's suppose our only heuristic is to switch an A and a B.
Biologists call this one-bit mutation.
That means that we're switching one bit at a time.
So anyone A could get switched to a B,
and anyone B could get switched to an A.
So if I've got a string of length 100,
that means there's 100 little bits I can switch.
So there's 100 one-bit mutations.
Those 100 neighboring strings
are what we're calling the adjacent possible.
So what I want to show you now is that if I have a new perspective,
I can change the set of the adjacent possible.
So suppose we break the string of length 100 into 50 pairs of two,
and that we represent each pair using a new perspective.
So first what we do is we write down the first letter in the pair.
So A, B, and A, A will both get written down as A,
and B, A, and B, B will both start with a B.
But then for the second letter, I'm going to write down an S
if the second letter is the same as the first,
and a D if the second letter is different from the first.
So in this way, A, A becomes AS because that's A and then same,
and A, B becomes AD because that's A and then different,
and similarly B, A becomes BD because that's B and then different,
and B, B becomes BS because that's B and then same.
Okay, now you might say, whoa, Scott, so what, why are you doing this?
Well, let's watch.
I'm going to show you how the adjacent possible changes.
So let's assume our only heuristic is one-bit mutation.
So now, instead of just switching As and Bs,
we also might switch some Ds and some Ss.
So instead of having something of length 100, that's just too long,
let's just go to length 4.
So in the original perspective, this string might be AABA.
So what is the adjacent possible if I flip a bit?
If I flip the first, it's going to become BABA.
If I switch the second, it's going to become ABBA,
which is ABBA, a great band, by the way.
If I switch the third, it's going to be AAAA,
and if I switch the last, I'll get AABB.
So those are the adjacent possible for the original perspective.
But now let me write it in our new perspective.
So now AABA becomes ASBD.
How come?
Well, because A is the first letter,
S means the second letter is the same, B is the third letter,
and D means the fourth letter is different than B, so it's an A.
Well, now let's do one-bit mutations with this perspective.
We're also going to get four strings, and here they are.
So if I switch the A, I get BSBD.
But what is that in the original perspective?
It's BBBA.
If I switch the second, I'm going to get ADBD,
and that becomes ABBA again.
If I switch the third, I'm going to get ASAD,
and that becomes AAAB.
And then finally, if I switch the last one, I'm going to have ASBS,
which is just AABB.
Now, if we compare all of these, we'll notice that two of these
new adjacent possible are different.
AABB and ABBA were the same, but there's two new ones.
And so these are two new members of the adjacent possible
that came about just because we had a different perspective.
So here's the big insight.
If you and I encode the same problem differently,
if you and I use different perspectives,
then the solutions that are near or adjacent in my perspective
might be a long way away in your perspective.
So what seems obvious or adjacent to me
may seem like a novel idea to you.
And similarly, what seems like a pedestrian
sort of one-bit mutation to you
may look like a brilliant unexpected idea to me.
So this expansion of the adjacent possible
by bringing in new people is one way
until we think about the idea of thinking outside the box.
In point of fact, if we think of the box
as the set of possible solutions,
a new perspective doesn't so much generate thinking outside the box.
It's really more like rearranging the box.
So that rearrangement, that reorganization,
brings near some things that used to be far away,
and it sometimes can push things far away that used to be near.
Now, in the next lecture, we're going to talk about diverse heuristics,
and we'll see that in that context,
we actually get a more appropriate use of the phrase
outside the box.
So Newton said he's standing on the shoulders of giants.
What was he saying?
He was saying this, and by the way, he's absolutely correct.
He was saying that he started from solutions
that other people had found.
He then applied his own perspectives to these problems,
and by expanding the set of the adjacent possible,
he found new solutions.
Now, if people have different adjacent possibles,
then they're going to propose different ideas.
And one stylized fact from hundreds of studies of diverse groups
is that they do think of more new ideas,
and that's because they've got more adjacent possible.
Let me give one more example.
When I was in graduate student at Northwestern University in Chicago,
I used to ride the L train.
I used to take this to go downtown.
Now, for the purposes of this example,
there were two lines.
We're going to call one the red line,
and the red line went from Evanston down into the loop,
and then down to the south side.
And the loop here is just a circular track in the center of the city,
which sort of all the trains going on.
Now, there's a second line, which was called the blue line,
and this started out at O'Hare Airport.
It came down, it went around the loop,
and then it headed out to Oak Park.
So how many trains did you need to manage these two lines?
Well, the number of trains needed on a line
equals the maximum number of passengers on any segment
divided by the size of the train.
So let's look at it this way.
The Evanston south side line had a maximum ridership of 80,000 passengers,
and the O'Hare Oak Park line had 70,000.
Let's suppose, for the purpose of this example,
that each train can hold 200 people.
The Evanston south side line therefore needs 400 trains.
The O'Hare Oak Park line needs 350 trains,
so if I add this up in total,
we need 750 trains for these two lines.
Here's where it gets interesting.
One day, somebody offered up a new perspective,
and here's what they said.
They said, you know, we can break each line into two parts.
We can break the Evanston south side line
into the Evanston loop line and the loop south side line.
Let's call these red one and red two.
Let me show you how.
Here's what you do.
They basically said, instead of this being one line,
one red line that runs down like this,
they're going to think of it as two,
one that comes down to the loop,
and one that goes the other way.
This person did the same thing for the blue lines.
They said, instead of thinking of one blue line,
we'll think of one line going to the loop
and a second line going out.
Why does this matter? Here's why it matters.
Maximum ridership on red one was 80,000,
but on red two, it was only 35,000.
Maximum ridership on blue one was 30,000,
but on blue two, it was 70,000.
Once you look at it this way,
do you see a better solution?
That's right. Here's what you should do.
You should connect red one, this line that has 80,000,
to blue two.
This is going to give the first line a maximum of 80,000 riders
and the second, which is B1 plus R2,
is only going to have 35,000 riders.
So what that means is that you're going to need fewer trains.
You're going to need 400 trains on the one line
and only 175 trains on the second line.
That's a reduction of 175 trains.
This is amazing, right?
It's showing the genius again of a diverse perspective,
of a new perspective on a problem.
Okay, this may seem too good to be true.
Whenever we need a better solution,
we just bring someone in with a diverse perspective,
we expand the adjacent possible,
and we get a better solution. Perfect.
Unfortunately, it is too good to be true,
because if it were true,
then innovations in scientific breakthroughs
would be occurring constantly and they don't.
So why is that?
Well, to understand why, we just have to count.
We can just do some very simple counting.
And when we count, we're going to find that the number
of possible perspectives is enormous.
You could think that's okay, the more the merrier, right?
Well, not quite, because not only is the number of perspectives
enormous, just unwieldy, it's also the case that most of them
are worthless, well, almost worthless.
We'll come to that in a second.
So let's oppose, give you an idea of this.
Let's oppose your modern-day Willy Wonka,
and you're trying to come up with a new candy bar.
And your confectioners develop a machine
that can make anyone of 5,000 varieties.
And so your job as owner and official taster
is you want to find the best one among these 5,000.
Well, you need some perspective,
some way to represent all these different varieties.
How many perspectives are there?
Well, let's just take one-dimensional perspectives.
So if you're sort of arranging all these candy bars
in a single line, how many perspectives are there?
Like if you put anyone of the 5,000 candy bars first,
anyone of 4,999 second,
anyone of 4,998 third, and so on.
So therefore, the total number of just one-dimensional perspectives
is going to be 5,000 times 4,999 times 4,998 and so on.
Mathematicians call this 5,000 factorial.
How big is that number? How many one-dimensional perspectives?
4.3 times 10 to the 16,326.
So that's four, followed by over 16,000 zeros.
So not only is that number bigger
than the number of grains of sand in the world,
which is actually less than 10 to the 20th,
it's larger than the number of atoms in the observable universe,
which is 10 to the 80th.
We've got 10 to the 16,001-dimensional perspectives
on just a few candy bars.
So how do we make sense of that?
Let's go back to Sewell Wright's landscape.
Let's suppose that each candy bar,
if we had the time to taste them,
could get a score between 0 and 100,
so we could have like a fitness for each of these candy bars.
That would be a good perspective.
A good perspective would put order on those candy bars.
So here's a good perspective.
Give the worst candy bar number one,
the second worst number two and so on,
until the best gets value 5,000.
If I draw this landscape,
I'm going to get one big slope heading upward.
So on this landscape, if we search to the left and right,
we just find our way right up the hill to the best candy bar.
So this is a great perspective.
It's transcended, makes the problem simple.
Or we could put the best candy bar at one
and the worst at 5,000,
and that would be a simple hill.
It's also transcended.
In fact, there's a lot of transcendent landscapes.
We could put the best candy bar at any number,
say 1245, and then create a peak by arranging the bars
so that the other best bars are near the peak
and the worst bars are at the extreme.
These are all going to be single-peaked landscapes.
They're sometimes called Mount Fuji landscapes
because they look like Mount Fuji.
Well, here's a really cool point.
If I've got a Mount Fuji landscape and I'm not at the optimum,
then one of the two neighboring bars,
Mount Fuji is going to be an improvement.
One direction always goes up. That's great.
In fact, there's a lot of Mount Fuji landscapes.
In fact, billions of them.
However, there's 10 raised to the 16,000th power landscapes.
They're not all Mount Fuji's.
Most of them are random.
They create no structure, and that's the problem.
They're going to have lots and lots of peaks.
Biologists call these random landscapes,
which is another way of saying it's a bad perspective.
On a random landscape, the adjacent possible is just going to be random.
So if you've got a decent solution
and you look at two random other solutions,
they're probably not going to be better.
So the perspective isn't going to be useful.
So in the real world, how does this cash out?
It means if you've already got a good solution
and you're bringing a random perspective,
even though you're getting a new adjacent possible,
it's not going to be very useful.
So as some kid who spent his life playing video games
and riding his skateboard, how to design a particle collider,
he's probably not going to help.
He might say something like, hey, dude, put in some ball bearings.
That's not going to work.
His adjacent possible is going to be an adjacent not very good.
That said, I want to end on a few more positive notes.
As we gain experience, we develop a richer set of experiences,
and yes, as we learn more diverse ways of thinking,
we get better at coming up with new perspectives.
As Pasteur famously said, chance favors the prepared mind.
Second, as we talked about before, perspectives can travel
that can be used for other purposes.
Now biologists call this general idea,
acceptation.
Something evolved for one purpose,
and then it finds another purpose for what's its better suited.
So for example, the feathers on a bird are the classic example.
The best scientific evidence we have suggests
that feathers evolved to regulate temperature.
But a few mutations later, they led to flight.
It's incredible, right?
Imagine if the same had been true of the Airstream trailer,
that when they developed the drop-down sides on this trailer,
we suddenly got the 747.
Only it was so easy.
All right.
With diverse perspectives, sometimes it is that easy.
Once I was talking to a bunch of consultants about worthless perspectives,
and I said, okay, here's one.
Suppose we're talking about ice cream.
I could arrange the pints by chew time,
or what might be called masticity,
if I wanted to use fancy academic jargon.
And everybody had a good laugh.
Chew time.
It's a silly way to think about ice cream.
But then after the talk, someone comes up to me and says something like,
you know, hey, Scott, you know, it's funny you should mention masticity,
because that's a really important perspective for breakfast cereals.
In fact, companies had a difficult time developing wheat flakes,
because they wouldn't hold up in milk.
They lacked masticity.
They were kind of just, you know, mush.
Well, I thought, what do you know?
My worthless perspective on ice cream had value for cereal.
And perhaps as the great innovator Ben Franklin would have advised,
he just needed to get up a little bit earlier in the morning to have some value.
But this comment surprised me at a second level,
because the application of breakfast cereals struck a chord deep inside me,
because elementary through high school,
I went to a place called Middleville Thornapple Kellogg Schools.
Kellogg's had given money to pay for the public schools that I attended.
And so, not surprisingly, our school would take trips down to Battle Creek
to the Kellogg factory, where I learned things about cereal,
probably even about masticity.
The breakfast cereal was a part of my life, my experience,
and part of my identity,
so maybe it's not that surprising that I thought of masticity as a perspective.
Okay, to sum up, we want diverse perspectives.
We want to accumulate diverse perspectives, so that we become better thinkers.
Some new perspectives, those of Einstein, Newton, or Mendeleev, right,
thought of the periodic table,
they bring order and beauty to the world.
Others, more pedestrian ones, just enable us to expand the adjacent possible
and make those day-to-day little improvements that make a difference in all of our lives.
Okay, thank you.
