Hi, welcome back. In the previous two lectures, we talked about perspectives and heuristics.
First we learned how transcendent perspectives can make difficult problems simple, and then
we learned how by applying a diverse set of perspectives to a problem, we could enlarge
the set of the adjacent possible. Then we learned about heuristics, and we saw how diverse
heuristics could also lead to better solutions to problems. Now in this lecture, what I
want to do is I want to take on problem solving more broadly. I want to sort of paint a bigger
picture. What I'm going to do is I'm going to fold in both perspectives and heuristics.
Now my primary goal in this lecture is to present a big theorem, and this theorem is
going to show that often when we're putting together a team, collective diversity is going
to trump individual ability. That is, you'd rather have diverse members than homogeneous
smart members of that team. Now this isn't always going to be true. So what I'm going
to do is I'm going to describe conditions that must hold in order for diversity to trump
ability. Now this theorem is going to be important because it's going to allow us to understand
when and how cognitive diversity, that's differences in our perspectives and heuristics, enable
us to find better solutions to problems than just ability alone. It's going to help us
see why and how we should construct diverse teams and when we should look outside our
silos for help. Now along the way I'm going to do some more new terminology. So as usual
we've got a lot to do. First though, a little story. My first real job, not counting pumping
gas, dipping ice cream or working for a landscape company digging holes, was as a professor at
Caltech in Pasadena, California. This was a long time ago, it was in the 1990s. But it
was then that I really became aware of the economy changing from a production economy
to a problem solving economy. Yet it's true in the 1980s people talked about the decrease
in manufacturing jobs and in my graduate classes in economics this often came up as well. But
people typically said, look our standard models still work. They can handle problem solving
just like they handle production. So it was far more striking for me than reading this
literature was meeting the Caltech undergraduates. Now these are some of the brightest, most
interesting young scientific minds in the world. I mean who else would choose to go
to college that has four years of required physics? Now when I talk to these students
very few of them talked about getting jobs making things. They all wanted jobs solving
problems. So once they solve the problem, it might be something like fingerprint reading
technology, then they'd pay somebody else to make it. So to get my students interest
in economics, these are a lot of physics and engineering majors, I constructed a little
model of problem solvers. Now the model was really simple. It started with a hard problem
and then it had a population of problem solvers who tried to find solutions. Now these problem
solvers each had the same perspective. What they did is they encoded the possible solutions
on a large circle like you see here in this picture. It's just a big circle of points.
And each searched for new points using diverse heuristics. So what we'd do is we'd start
at some point, like maybe this one right here, and then they would look some number of steps
away. So someone might look two steps away, so this would be a step size of two, and someone
else might move four steps away. So this would be a step size of four. So what we had is
different people look different step sizes away. One might look six units away, another
eight units away. So in this way a problem solvers toolbox could be represented by just
a sequence of numbers representing the step sizes that you would take. Now the problem
that I encoded contained a structure so that some step sizes worked better than others.
So some heuristics would be better than others. So here's what I did. I did the following.
I allowed each problem solver to go with the problem alone and find her best solution.
Then I ranked the problem solvers from best to worst. Then I created two teams. One team
consisted of the 20 best problem solvers. The other consisted of 20 randomly chosen
problem solvers. Just when we got the picture here, what I've got is we had a high ability
group compared against a random group. And the idea here was to show the students that
you should hire high ability workers, that they're going to be better at producing solutions
just like they'd be better at producing washing machines. Well, much to my surprise, and to
the surprise of the students, the random group one, the diverse group one, and they won
handily, diversity trumped ability. Well this didn't make any sense to me. Let me walk through
the experiment again. So I create a whole bunch of problem solvers that are working
on this problem. I ranked the problem solvers from best to worst, smartest to least smart.
I create a team of the very best, the best and the smartest, and I compare them to a
random team. So one would think the team of the best would do better than the random team.
But that didn't happen. What went wrong? What was wrong was my logic. So I was thinking
of people in terms of ability. One team had high ability people. The other team didn't
have high ability people. It had some, but it had random people. But when I stopped thinking
about these problem solvers in terms of their ability, and thought of them as possessing
toolboxes, then the logic behind the result became clear. Because here is what was happening.
The best problem solvers all had similar tools. So if on the problem, maybe it turned out
that step sizes 4, 5, 7, and 8 were the best ones to have. Well then when I went and looked
at the very best problem solvers, those were the tools that they had, 4, 5, 7, and 8. But
guess what? All of the best problem solvers then had the same tools. Now in contrast,
if I take that random team, the diverse team, some of them had 4, 5, 7, and 8. But as a collection
they had diverse tools. Now sure, it might have only had one person or two that were
really, really good. They had the very best tools. But you only need one or two of those.
The rest would be redundant. So it became far better to add someone else who had different
step sizes, maybe 1, 3, 6, and 9. That made for a better group. Now once this logic became
apparent to me, I asked myself two questions. So the first I wondered, well, does this apply
in the real world? Is this something people should know? And if so, maybe they already
know it. And second, I wanted to know the conditions under which this would hold. Because
it doesn't seem like it could always hold. So what I had was very much what we social
scientists like to call a toy model. And what I wanted to do was push the science. Now to
do that, I needed a deeper understanding. And so what I did is I brought in someone who
thinks a little bit differently than I did, but is interested in similar problems. And
that was my good friend Lou Hong, who's a very good mathematician. So now what I wanted
to do is I want to add little formalism to improve the model. The model is going to have
two parts. It's going to have a problem, and then it's going to have problem solvers.
The problem will consist of a domain, a set of possible solutions, and an objective function.
That's going to be a function that assigns a value to each solution. To make our discussion
less abstract, let's suppose we're trying to improve the fuel efficiency of an automobile.
The solution space will consist of all possible car designs within some constraint set. So
if we're working on a minivan, we can't turn it into a subcontact, right? So there's constraints
on what we can do. So here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to call this the domain of
the problem. So think of this as a set of possible solutions. It's a large set. So we're
going to call this, there's s1 through sn, but there could be hundreds, thousands, tens
of thousands of possible solutions. So what I can do is I can just use set notation to
say, here's the set of all possible solutions to the problem. Then there's an objective
function, f. And what the objective function does is it assigns to each solution a value.
So for example, the value of 17, solution 17, might be 36 miles per gallon. So if someone
proposes some solution, I'm just going to assume we can plug it into our objective function
and we can get the value. So so far the model is pretty simple. I've got this set of solutions
and for each solution there's a value. Now before continuing, I want to highlight the
latter parts of the second assumption, namely that the function is the same for everyone
easily computed. This is a really strong set of assumptions and they're often going to
fail to hold in real world applications. Now for engineering problems, these will typically
hold. Most engineering problems can be well-defined and we can test the proposed solution. So
for example, if the problem is to find the lightest metal that will withstand a given
force, any candidate solution can be weighed and tested and we know right away where it
works. Now for other problems, coming up with an advertising campaign or a tax code, even
if we agree on what we're trying to do on our so-called objective to sell a product,
raise a given amount of revenue, we may not have any easy way to evaluate outcomes. Now
the astute follower of this course will say, wait a minute, why don't we just use a diverse
code to predict this? That's a great point and I'm going to come back to it in a later
lecture. For now though, I want to keep these strong assumptions because we can work through
the basic logic of problem solving and see the role that diversity plays. Okay, we can
now construct the problem solvers. Now here I'm going to leverage the previous lectures
on problem solving. So I'm going to assume that each person has a perspective on the
problem, that's some representation of the set of solutions. So when I think of these
perspectives, what I'm doing is I'm encoding this domain that I've got. So I've got this
domain of problems, s1 through sn, but right now it's just a list. And what I want to do
is I want to turn that into some representation. So one representation would just be a list.
I might line them up, s1, s2, s3, s4. But other people may be represented as a tree.
So if you look at this person down here, they've got these same solutions represented in some
sort of tree-like structure. Now each problem solver has a set of heuristics that they apply
to their perspective or their encoding. So given some solution, a problem solver represents
it inside her head using her perspectives and then applies her heuristic. Okay, so let's
suppose that we're sitting here at a current solution. Let's say we're sitting at s4. So
we're sitting at s4. And let's suppose that all values here are between 0 and 100. So
this problem solver on the top might look and say, well, I'm at s4. I'm going to look
to the left at s3 and to the right at s5. So she's going to check these two models.
Either of these were better than she would move there and she'd propose it and this would
become the new status quo solution. And we move to that point. Well, let's look at the
problem solver on the bottom. The problem solver on the bottom, when he's at s4, no
longer s3 and s5 the neighbors, but the neighbors for this person, their heuristic is to look
on this network and he may look at s1, s2, and s5. Now we could have a third problem solver
and the third problem solver might use the same perspective as the first person, but
instead of looking one to the left and one to the right, he might look two to the left
and two to the right and so he would look at s2 and s6. So what we see is these problem
solvers have different perspectives, different heuristics, and so as a result, they've got,
remember, different sets of the adjacent possible. And that's what's going to drive
the result. Okay, this may seem like a bit of a review, but I now want to take it one
level deeper. Let's take a card as number four and we've got a problem solver and they
think about this problem. They encode it in their perspective, they apply the heuristic.
There's two possible outcomes. Outcome one, the problem solver applies their perspective
in heuristics and finds something better. Outcome two, she doesn't. Okay, pretty straightforward.
Now if she doesn't find anything better, she's stuck. Now this is going to be a key insight
because we're going to say that in this question of design that the point at which she gets
stuck is called a local optimum. That means it's like a peak for her. Now several comments
are in order. Know first this, the very best solution, so we'll call this the global optimum,
the best point, that has to be a local optimum for every person because no one could possibly
apply perspectives and heuristics and find something better than the best possible solution.
So the global optimum is a local optimum for everybody. Second, this notion of a local
optimum aligns with our rugged landscape representation from the perspective lecture. So if people
use local or greedy heuristics, then peaks on their landscapes are going to be the local
optimum. Now if you use a more sophisticated heuristic, you might be able to escape some
of those peaks. Remember we talked about simulated annealing to get off those peaks. So sometimes
you can get off peaks with more sophisticated heuristics. Now third, and this is the important
point, people with better perspectives, that's going to mean landscapes with fewer peaks
or more heuristics, more ways to get off peaks, are going to have fewer local optima. And
as a result, if you've got fewer local optima, you're going to tend to locate better solutions
to the problem because you get stuck at fewer places. And that's a good thing. Plus you're
more likely to find the global optimum. Now notice I just introduced a third way to think
about problem solving. So first, we thought of people as having abilities. How are you
doing the problem? And that's how I was taught to think of people when I was in economic
scratch when I think that's how most people think about people in terms of abilities.
Then we said, no wait, let's think of people as having tools, perspectives and heuristics.
And that was really useful. It helped us understand a whole bunch of things. Now I'm saying we
can also think of people as sets of local optima. Now this is really neat because notice
how ability, tools and local optima all relate to one another. Higher ability problem solvers
tend to have more and better tools. And as a result, they have fewer and higher valued
local optima. Now wait a minute, aren't these just three perspectives on problem solving?
That's right. That's exactly right. And these three perspectives are going to in some sense
collectively prove to be transcendent. In particular, the third perspective is really
going to help us understand this diversity Trump's ability result. Now to see why, consider
a team of people assigned to a problem. Now we want to know how well is the team going
to perform. So we need to think about where is the team going to get stuck. We'll think
about this for a second. The team can get stuck if every member of the team gets stuck.
So therefore the only points that the entire team can get stuck on belong to the intersection
of the local optima. So take two teams. What we can do is you can write down the local
optima by their number and their value. So every member of each team is going to have
the global optima as one of their local optima. So let's call this design A. In the case of
the car, let's suppose design A gets 49 miles per gallon. So this is the most miles per
gallon we can push out of our car. Now suppose one team consists of five people. They all
have to have a local optima design A because that's the best one. But let's assume that
all five also have local optima at design B which gets 45 miles per gallon and C gets
43 miles per gallon. Now if we want we can add in a few more idiosyncratic local optima
for these problem solvers. They're not going to matter so long as not everybody gets stuck
at those points because somebody else can get them off those points. And so what we're
going to see is that using our logic the team can only get stuck at designs that are local
optima for everyone and those are going to be A, B, and C. Well now let's consider a
second team that's more diverse. Now each of them also has to have A as a local optima
again because that's the global optima. But let's suppose that each has entirely different
local optima otherwise. So one person gets stuck at A, C, D, and E, another gets stuck
at A, B, E, F, G, and maybe J, and the third gets stuck at A, B, C, H, and so on. Right?
So long as the only local optima they all have in common is A which is the global optima
the diverse team is always going to find A because it's the only point that lies in the
intersection of their local optima. So here's the logic. If one of them gets stuck at C
that's not a local optima from someone else and so they can get off that peak. And so
as a result diversity is going to trump ability. So for example again suppose the first problem
solver gets stuck at E, the second is also stuck but the third isn't stuck at E so that
person locates C. Now the second problem solver C isn't a local optima for them so they can
move it to B. And then finally the first problem solver who doesn't have B as a local optima
can move it to A which is the global optima. So the diverse team finds the solution.
So we now have a much more complete understanding of how diversity can trump ability because
diverse teams have different local optima. It's going to do so because of the fact of
a less overlap for diverse teams than for high ability teams. So this is what Lou and
I proved. Now of course this won't always be true. So what we wanted to do in our work
was trace out some of the conditions that have to hold for the diverse group to trump
the high ability to. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to take up these conditions
in much greater detail in the next lecture. But here what I do is I want to get them on
the table. So here's the first condition. The problem has to be difficult. So notice
for a result to hold the group of high ability problem solvers have to have overlap in their
local optima. This isn't going to be true if the problem isn't hard because in an easy
problem smart people will just solve it. So in general the harder the problem the more
local optima for everyone and the worse the high ability group is going to do. What's
the next condition? Well the next condition is that the problem solvers all have to be
smart. Now Lou and I called this the calculus condition. Now why don't we call this the
calculus condition? We called it that because it amounts to saying that the members of the
diverse group have perspectives and heuristics that put enough structure on the problem that
they're able to find their local peaks. So they do this through local or greedy search
algorithms. Now again we call this the calculus condition because if you know calculus what
can you do? You can take derivatives. Now what are derivatives? Derivatives are slopes.
So if you take your calculus class what you do is you take the derivative and this is
written usually as f prime equals zero and this tells you when the slope is zero. Well
the slope is only zero at peaks. So if I'm on the side of a hill like right here this
slope is going up but at the peaks this slope is zero. So what we assumed in the calculus
condition is people had perspectives so they had these rugged landscapes and then they could
take derivatives. Third condition you've got to be drawing from a large pool. So these
people who knew calculus I'm drawing a big from a big set of them. Now this is a subtle
condition because it has two parts. First we need a large pool because the larger the
pool gets the less diverse the very best problem solvers are going to be. So think of it this
way. If I go to a small town and want some advice on how to landscape my yard I might
find that the most able people are a landscaper, an architect, a doctor, and a third grade
art teacher. They're going to be diverse. Now if I go to New York City the three most
able people are all going to be professional landscaped architects. So the bigger the pool
the more similar those people at the top are going to be. Now in addition the pool has
to be diverse. So if I'm choosing from a huge set of people all of whom have been educated
in the same limited set of tools I'm actually better off choosing the best because they're
going to have more of those tools than the other people. So their local optima are going
to be a subset of the local optima and the others. They're not going to be smarter because
they know everything the other people know. Fourth condition this is the last one. The
group can't be too big and it can't be too small. This is one of these technical goldy
locks in the three bearish conditions. It can't be too hot, it can't be too cold. The
poor just got to be just right. What does it mean? Well think of it this way. What would
it too small be? Well one. If I have one problem solvers the best person is going to be better
than a random person. What's too big? Well if I take almost the entire group then the
random group and the group of the best are about the same. So the diverse group can't
possibly be better. So the diverse group is going to do better when the groups are big
enough that the diversity outweighs the ability of the best person but not so big that the
group of the best is also as diverse as the diverse group. Let me sum this up. We should
expect diversity to trump ability when the following holds. The problem's hard. It's
condition one. The diverse people have germane tools. They're smart. That's condition two.
We're drawing from a large diverse pool. That's condition three. And then finally we
actually have a team. Not one person, not the entire society. We've got a moderately
sized group. If these things happen then diversity can trump ability. Now it's not always going
to but it can. And that possibility alone should cause us to rethink some of what we
currently believe. Now let's see how this logic might work in reality. A while back
I was invited to talk about these ideas at the International Monetary Fund. And here's
what I said to them. I said let's suppose you're picking one person, just one person
to manage the world's money supply. What sort of tools would you want that person to have?
Well, you'd want someone that has the perspectives and heuristics gained by getting a PhD in
economics or finance. Because those are going to be very germane. You also want someone
to have accumulated the perspective one gains from years of studying the financial services
industries and studying financial markets. You'd also want someone who's developed core
heuristics for interpreting large sets of data, for looking at lots of data from different
areas of the economy and understanding them. And finally you'd want someone with some
understanding of political economy, of the roles that political institutions play in
determining economic outcomes. That's a pretty talented person. And you know what, if you
look around the IMF, you see a lot of those people. And on the one hand, that is incredibly
comforted. Now on the other hand, in light of the problems that the IMF faces, it seems
narrow minded a little bit. Here's why. The IMF doesn't just use one person to make decisions
and solve problems. They rely on teams of people. And those teams should be diverse.
They shouldn't have all attended the same four schools, earned the same degree and learned
the same tools. They should be diverse. Why? Well, let's go back to the theorem. They face
hard problems. They can draw from a large diverse pool. And that diverse pool has lots
of germane talent. So they should use diversity. On point of fact, the IMF has been becoming
more diverse over the past decade. Following the global financial collapse, they turned
to network theorists and other people to help make sense of the stability of global financial
markets. So they did draw more diverse people. Now that move is precisely what our model
says they should do. Think about it. Would you want a network theorist, someone trained
in mathematics who may not know a credit default swap from a leveraged buyout making financial
decisions that affect monetary values worldwide? No, you wouldn't. Of course not, right? But
would you want to replace one of, you know, 600 working trained macroeconomists with the
same tools all working at the IMF with one person who spent a lot of time studying the
properties of networks, how robust they are, how adaptive they are? Absolutely. And that's
the power of diversity. By bringing a network theorist into the IMF, that person's going
to have different local optima and it's going to help the IMF find better solutions to a
problem. Just like our operations researcher was able to help find a better route through
Rome. So clearly diversity is going to be beneficial. The question becomes, where do
you draw the line? How much diversity do you need? These are tough questions. The amount
of diversity needed depends on the problem. One last point. Some people on hearing this
result jump to the conclusion that we should always have a diverse team. Now that's not
necessarily true. Because remember, the theorem has conditions. It does tell us when we should
expect diversity to triumph and that also implicitly tells us when it probably won't.
Let's think about some of the implicit assumptions in our model. We assume there were no communications
problems. That was true because we had some method for evaluating solutions. We had that
function f, what in later lectures I'm going to call an oracle. If we don't have that,
then the diverse group could have difficulty sharing their novel ideas. Also, we assume
there was no cost to trying a new solution. That might not also be the case always as
well. In fact, communication costs and errors partly explain why some people like to say
instead of two heads are better than one, that too many cooks spoiled a broth. Let's
think about why that makes sense. Cooking broth is irreversible. Actually, a couple
of weeks ago my wife was making some vegetable broth to make vegetarian minestrone's for
some friends coming over to dinner who don't eat meat. I walked into the kitchen, tasted
the broth, and thought it tasted a little bit weak, so I added some chicken stock. This
communication led to an error, and that error was irreversible. There was no way of straining
the chicken from the stock. I'd ruin dinner. Too many cooks spoiled broth. I love that
saying, by the way, because it's true. Too many cooks really do spoil the broth sometimes,
and it's not just cooks and broth. Lots of stuff is sequential and largely irreversible,
so it's important to stick with a plan. It's the same reason why military strategists
say you must have a single leader in battle. Too many generals ruin the battle. Of course,
none of this applies that too many cooks spoiled a menu. They don't. Chefs collaborate on
dishes, and often they put their own spin, i.e. they apply their own unique perspectives
and heuristics on the dishes of others. So great recipes actually come from diverse problem
solving. By the way, I looked on the internet and found no hits, zero, for too many engineers
ruin the bridge, or too many architects spoil the building. That's because while I can't
strain the chicken out of the soup, you can always unpound a nail or break a weld.
So we've covered an awful lot in this lecture. Abilities, tools, local optima, intersections
of local optima, global optima, and how diversity trumps ability. So I chose to end it with
some warm, calming broth. Now with all these ideas swirling around, keep in mind that most
of what we've done sort of hangs on this toolbox model, on the idea that we each have perspectives
and heuristics that we apply to problems. It's these tools that we use when we face
difficult challenges, and we have no shortages of those. Energy, poverty, education, health
care, the environment. And if we amass diverse tools, if we learn diverse things, we've
got a better chance of finding good solutions. Till next time. Thank you.
