Hi, welcome back. In this lecture we're going to continue our analysis of the concepts of
ability and diversity. I want to start by dismissing the idea that there's necessarily
a trade-off between the two. A lot of people have that impression that increasing diversity
necessarily implies a reduction in ability. That's just not true, and in this lecture we're
going to see why. In fact, that's going to be the main point of this lecture, that we should
seek to create groups and teams of diverse and able people and how we do it. So first though,
what we've got is we've got to tackle the question of what we mean by ability or intelligence.
What do we mean when we say that one person is smarter than another person? In other words,
what do we mean by intelligence or ability? Once we have that in hand, then we can talk about
whether there really exists a trade-off between diversity and ability. So let's talk about
intelligence. What do we mean when we say someone is smart? Well, what we might mean is that they
have a high IQ. Well, what's IQ? IQ test assign a numerical score to individuals. Now there exist
a lot of different types of IQ tests. Some rely on visual spatial reasoning, some rely on verbal
reasoning, and others ask primarily numerical questions. Some test crystallized intelligence,
what you know, and others test fluid intelligence, what you're able to sort of learn on the fly.
Now there's a whole group of people called psychometricians. These are people who measure
intelligence, and they believe that there's something like general intelligence and that it exists.
And the reason they believe this is because there's substantial correlation across these tests.
What do I mean by that? I mean that if you take one test, say Raven's progressive matrices test,
you're probably going to do well on another test. Now these scores aren't going to be perfectly
correlated, but the correlation is pretty strong, and that suggests that there's something there.
There is something called general intelligence. Now here's the thing. This should surprise you.
It should really surprise you. It should be sort of surprising that people who do well at
spatial reasoning tend to do well on verbal reasoning, and that people who do well on verbal
reasoning tend to do well on mathematical tests. So empirically there's this thing called intelligence.
Well why is that surprising when there should be smart people and not so smart people?
Well think about it. Think about a track meet. Who does well at the shot put? Big people. Who
does well at the 5,000 meters? Thin people. Who does well at the high jump? People with quite
distinct physical attributes. So shot putting skills have almost no overlap with long distance
running skills. So then it should be surprising that intelligence works this way. There is something
called general intelligence. Instead our brain might be broken up into little things. So what
causes it? What drives general intelligence? But one thing is good health. Another is size.
Some brains tend to be a little larger than others. And then brain chemistry matters. So some brains
just appear to be a little bit quicker and a little bit better at general recall. And the brains
that are quicker and recall faster tend to score better on these tests. Now correlation across
the handful of tests doesn't imply in any way that there's an ordering of people by intelligence.
So we shouldn't say things like Amy is smarter than Phil. Unfortunately human language embraces
rankings. It enables them because all these words like tall or fast or richer, poor or smarter.
And what those do is they invite us to order things from best to worst. And then we have the
creation of things like grade point averages, SAT scores, ACT scores and all these IQ tests.
And those reinforce this notion that we can order people by intelligence. And they sort of give the
imprimatur of science. Now before I go even a step further with this argument, let's stop for a second.
Have a bit of a reality check. Do you really think that you could summarize something as complex,
fluid, high dimensional and sophisticated as a human being, as human intelligence with a single
number? You can send a number like 115, 97, 216 to a person? No way. Of course not, right?
So psychometricians don't believe that either. So when they claim IQ measures intelligence,
what they're saying is there's some general factor, a general intelligence that applies
across a variety of means. So if Bobby has a higher IQ than Camilla, then basically we would
expect him to do better on a randomly selected test. So IQ is sort of a predictor. It's a loose
correlate with intelligence. But the same psychometricians would say, look, he may not. The test
might better fit her set of tools, and she might do better. So what they call G, or general
intelligence, is a factor that pops out of the analysis. Now most of us probably don't spend
our days doing statistics and studying factors. So let's take a moment to flesh out what's meant
by a factor in general terms, and then what's meant by G, or general intelligence specifically.
Let's suppose we start with 100 students, and each one of these students takes 20
intelligence tests, and each one of these tests has 40 questions. That's a lot of tests.
Now we're going to have each student a plus five on each question she gets correct,
and a minus five on question she gets incorrect. So let's suppose just for convenience that the
average score on each test is about 100, and that means on average students get 30 questions right,
and 10 questions wrong. So one way to measure the intelligence of each person would be to take
her average score on each exam. So Felicia scores an average of 120, then her IQ would be higher
than Beatrice, who scores an average of 100. So that's the basic idea. You can think of averaging
these tests. Now Charles Spearman, who is really the inventor of intelligence tests, or one of
the inventors, he thought you could do better. He developed something called factor analysis,
and what that allows us to do is measure intelligence even more accurately. So at factor
analysis not only takes into account a person's score, it also takes into account the relationship
between the test and the intelligence that we're trying to measure. So here's a rough idea of how
factor analysis works. Suppose that I've coded the test scores for 18 tests for Alicia and Beatrice,
and I have two left. Now here's the scores on these final two tests. Alicia scored 140 and 100,
Beatrice scored 90 and 110. So Alicia's average is 120, and Beatrice's average is 100. So their scores
on these tests is the same as they had overall. So you can think these two tests maybe don't look
that different from the other ones. However, let's suppose when you look at test one here,
and we look across all the students, we see that their scores on test one correlate really
strongly with their scores on the other tests. So in the world of IQ tests, this would be something
like Raven's Progressive Matrices test. That's a really good test. How you do on that seems to
correlate really well with how you do another test. So this would mean I might want to put more weight
on test one. I might look at this test one and say, boy, this is an important test. Now let's
suppose that test two doesn't correlate at all with the scores on the other tests. In fact,
let's just for fun, suppose this isn't test data at all, but there was a column on the sheets where
people were asked to put their weight, and suppose that this accidentally got coded as a test,
and that Alicia weighs 100 pounds and Beatrice weighs 110 pounds. So that means we shouldn't give
these tests any weight at all. So what factor analysis does, instead of saying there's 20 tests
and each test gets 5%, it looks across all the test scores and asks how correlated is this test
with all the other tests. And what you realize is that test one correlates really,
really strongly. It's a great test. So instead of giving it 5%, we may give that a weight of
12%. Now test two, we might not have realized that this was weight that, you know, but all
we know is we look at how well that correlates with the other test and realize it doesn't correlate
at all. And so what we do is instead of giving this 5%, we give this 0%. Now the weight of these tests,
the 12% and the 0% are called factor loadings. So a person's IQ is not their average score on an IQ
test, but a weighting of those scores using factor loadings. Now let me take this same idea of such
a factor loadings and apply it not to tests, but to the questions that go on a test. So now
I've got IQ measures for a population of people and I've got this question I'm going to put on an IQ
test and I want to find out is it a good question or not. So suppose it's the case that 20% of the
people in my population who take the test get the question correct. Consider two different cases.
In the first case, the 20% of the people who get the question correct all come from the top 25%
in IQ as measured by all those other tests. Now the second case, the 20% who get the question
correct, I just sort of have random IQs. There's no correlation between IQ and getting the question
correct. So people who construct IQ tests are going to say, boy, this first question is really
useful because it identifies high IQ people. It captures intelligence. This is a question we
should put on our test. Now they're going to discard the second question to make sure to say, look,
that doesn't correlate at all with IQ. That's a bad question. Now wait a minute, you might be
thinking, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Couldn't the second question have an identifying some other
type of intelligence? I mean, 20% of people got it right. Maybe it's capturing something else.
In fact, it could. And that's one criticism of IQ tests that they're actually self-referential.
Now this critique would be damning and no one would take IQ seriously at all.
Were it not also true that if you were to send me the question and we were to find that 20% of
people get it correct, we're way, way more likely to be in case one, where it's high IQ
people to get it right than case two, where the random people get it right. So in other words,
and here I'm quoting Gertrude Stein, there's a there there. Something like general intelligence
does seem to exist. And so what I've described considers this sort of one-dimensional factor,
general intelligence. But we can also do factor analysis to find multiple dimensions,
like quantitative intelligence and verbal intelligence, or even perceptual intelligence.
Now as we add dimensions, each test and each question can be evaluated for how it loads on
each factor. So for example, one test may turn out to capture mostly verbal ability,
another may capture mathematical ability, and a third may capture some combination of the two.
And again, these abilities are all sort of correlated in a positive sense across a lot of tests.
Okay, so how do we think about IQ in light of our toolbox model? Okay, this is a great question.
So we've got, again, two different perspectives on what is intelligence. So let's start
with some minimal assumptions. And I'm going to construct what I call the deck of cards toolbox
model. Let's suppose there's 52 tools that someone could learn. These are things like
perspectives and heuristics, or they could be entire fields of tools like unidimensional calculus,
or even factor analysis could be a tool. So I'm going to assume when you take an IQ test,
in order to get a question right, you need to have an appropriate tool. There might be
multiple tools that work, but you need an appropriate tool. Now this is what people
call knowledge or crystallized intelligence. You know some way of solving the problem.
But I'm also going to assume that you have to apply the tool correctly. That's called fluid
intelligence. So let's go back to Alicia in Beatrice. Let's assume that Alicia knows 15 tools
and Beatrice only knows 12. Now the only way we could say that Alicia is smarter than Beatrice,
if we want to say Alicia literally is larger, smarter than Beatrice, would be if she knows
every single tool that Beatrice knows. And we can ask, well, how likely is that? Well, here's the
thing. We can compute it. We can do it in three steps. All we have to do is compute the number of
ways that Alicia could pick her 15 tools. Then we'll compute the number of toolboxes of hers
that could contain Beatrice's 12 tools. And then we just divide the second number by the first,
and that's going to give us the probability that Alicia knows every tool that Beatrice does.
So here we go. It's going to be fun. So I've got us this deck of cards, right? And there's 52 tools.
So we want to ask, how many different ways can Alicia pick her tools? Well, there's 52
that she could pick first. After she's picked her first tool, that leaves 51 she could pick second,
and then 50 left over she could pick third, and so on, all the way down, right, times 38. There'd
be 38 ways she could pick her last tool. Now, we could ask, how big is this number? Well,
it's huge. 52 to 51 times 58 times 49 is massive. Too huge, in fact, because it over counts. Here's
why. Suppose Alicia learns calculus first, and then French. Well, that's the same thing as learning
French, and then calculus. So we've got to take this number, and we've got to divide it by the
number of possible permutations of her 15 tools, right? There's 15 of these tools she could pick
first, times 14 she could pick second, times 13 she could pick third, and so on, down to times one.
So therefore, the total number of tools she can pick is going to be 52 times 51 times 50 times 38
divided by 15 times 14 times 13 times 12. So this 15 times 14 is sometimes called 15 factorial.
Well, how many do we get? This ends up being 4.5 trillion tools. That's a lot. Now, let me make
a quick observation. There's way more than 52 tools a person could learn, and people learn more than
15. So the simple mathematical argument should give you pause. How often have you heard someone say
every person is different? And then you had somewhat cynical response, like, yeah, yeah, yeah,
right, whatever. Every person's different. Everybody has something to share. Well, guess what?
Don't be cynical. Those people are absolutely right. Every person is different. They're 4.5
trillion waves of picking 15 tools from a set of 52. So there's way more than 4.5 trillion
ways for people to accumulate toolboxes. So everyone really is different. So let's go back to our
question of figuring out the probability that a lecious toolbox contains every tool in Beatrice.
So here's how we do it. Now we want to take any set of 12 tools, just some random set of 12 tools,
and we're going to call that Beatrice's toolbox. Then we want to ask how many toolboxes of size 15,
how many of these 4.5 trillion toolboxes contain those 12? Well, that's actually going to be pretty
easy. So given Beatrice's 12 tools, there exist 40 other tools from which Alicia can pick her other
tools. So Alicia's, you know, there's 12 tools that Beatrice has picked. And now Alicia can pick
three other, but there's 40 from which she can choose from. So how do we figure that out? Well,
to determine that number, all we do is take the first three terms from 40. So there's 40 tools
she could pick first, 39 Alicia could pick second, and 38 she could pick third. So these are all the
different ways she could pick her three other tools. But again, we've over counted, right? Because if
she picks calculus and then fraction and factor analysis, that's the same as using factor analysis
and then fraction and calculus. So we've got to divide that by three times two times one. Well,
this is also a big number. It's 9,880. So it's approximately 10,000. That means there are 10,000
toolboxes of size 15 that contain all 12 Beatrice's tools. But remember back, there were 4.5 trillion
toolboxes of size 15. So 10,000 is a small percentage of 4.5 trillion. In fact, it's one in
450 million. So what does this mean? It means there's a one in 450 million chance that Alicia
has all of Beatrice's tools. So this is minuscule. It's tiny. There's almost no way that Alicia knows
every tool that Beatrice does. One in 450 million. So what does the deck of cards model tell us?
It helps us hold two somewhat contradictory ideas in our heads. So first, there is something like
general intelligence. Alicia has more tools. She has 15. So she's going to score better on a variety
of tests. But also it's true that it's not possible to say Alicia is better than Beatrice in all cases.
That Beatrice has nothing to add. Because it's almost certainly true that Beatrice knows some tools
and has some skills, brings things to the table that Alicia doesn't.
So let's think a little bit more about this deck of cards model. Something seems wrong.
I assume people could learn any tool from the deck. I can't wake up tomorrow morning and say,
I want to learn string theory. Because string theory requires knowledge of physics and mathematics.
So to learn string theory, I've got to learn those other tools first. Nor can I start making
really cool blown glass birds or writing dance routines or oratorios. If I'm going to do those
things, I'm also going to have to acquire sequences of tools. So what I've got to do is I've got to
amend the toolbox model to account for the fact that people learn some tools in orders. So what
I can do is I can think about placing tools on a ladder. So instead of there being 52 cards in a deck
and assuming that a person picks a random set of tools, I can place these tools on the rungs of a
ladder and assume that to learn tool number nine, a person must first learn tools one through eight.
So think about math, for example. You first learn to add, then to multiply. You can't multiply without
knowing how to add. Think about it. When you multiply two digit numbers, you do adding when
you multiply. Then you learn geometry, algebra, trigonometry, calculus, differential equations,
real analysis, up up up the ladder. So now let's go back and compare Alicia and Beatrice.
Now let's suppose Alicia knows the first 15 rungs on the ladder and Beatrice knows the first 12.
Well, now instead of there being only a one in 450 million chance that Alicia knows everything
Beatrice does, now there's a one in one chance because she's just gone three steps higher on the
ladder. It's just a done deal. Alicia's smarter. Well, this doesn't seem right either. So in the
one case, there's no way Alicia's smarter. In the other case, she's definitely smarter. Let's go back
and think about mathematics. Is it really a ladder model? Does that really make sense?
Well, the beginning it does. We go from adding to multiplying. But as we move up the ladder,
we see that it branches. And when a person hits calculus, then they can branch off and learn
probability. They can learn group theory, logic, topology. So it's not really one big ladder.
It's more like a tree. And the world isn't all mathematics, right? We can make a tree for every
subject, chemistry tree, a physics tree, biology tree, computer science tree, even a cooking tree,
drawing tree, a piano playing tree. So metaphorically, we think of a whole bunch of trees of various
heights with various branching probabilities. Some of these trees, like mathematics, might be more
like a bunch of ladders emanating from a few boughs. What might a field like literature look like,
though? That's a good question. So like mathematics, there'd be some basic skills relating to reading
texts, characterizing plots, and so on. But for a literature professor, a tool might be
the ability to compare work to that of Beckett or Shakespeare. Now, that may seem a rather abstract,
loose way to define a tool, but I assure you it's not. A while back, a book came out called Cold
Mountain. This book was a bestseller and even made into a movie. Remember talking to a literate
friend of mine who said, oh yeah, Cold Mountain. Homer's Odyssey goes to the Civil War sort of thing.
I said, what? And he said, look, it's just like the Odyssey. Now, you can call that the Odyssey tool.
Knowing the Odyssey so well that you can connect the Odyssey to other bits of literature to history
and current events. Now, you might say, how does the Odyssey tool help me make predictions
or to solve problems? Well, the Odyssey contains lots of useful ideas. To get past the sirens,
Odysseus commands his crew to time to the mast. This behavior pre-commits him to keeping the
ship on a straight course. So this pre-commitment idea is a heuristic that can be useful in other
settings. Now, the tools in literature aren't going to be as ordered as say the tools in mathematics.
So true, it's easier to understand something like T.S. Eliot's poem, The Wasteland,
if you've read a lot of other texts in some detail. And to understand the work of a given author may
require first recruiting some previous or even later books by that same author. But all in all,
the Tree of Knowledge for Literature will be less ladder-like than something like physics or
mathematics and chemistry. It'll be more like our deck of cards. Well, why does this matter?
Well, let's go back to our calculation about whether Alicia knows everything that Beatrice knows,
where we assumed one ladder. In that case, Alicia, who has more tools, knows everything
that Beatrice knows. What I want to do now is I want to add a ladder. When I think about it,
there are being two ladders instead of just one. So now Beatrice has 12 tools. And let's assume that
she goes up one, two, three, four, five, six on this ladder and also goes up six on the other ladder.
Now, she could do something else. She could do seven and five. But let's just assume she does six
and six. So now think about Alicia. Alicia has 15 tools. So she can go up a total of 15 rungs.
Well, Alicia could go up two on this one and go up, let's say, 13 on this one. Well,
then she's not going to know everything Beatrice does. So if we think to all the possibilities,
we can say, what's the chance that Alicia knows every tool that Beatrice does? And there's only
four possibilities. The first is that Alicia learns six on this one and nine on this. Or she
could learn seven on this and eight on this. Or she could do eight on this ladder and seven on this
or nine on this ladder and six on this. So there's only four ways. So a moment's thought shows that
this is true regardless of how Beatrice allocates her tools. It wouldn't have have to have been six,
six. There's only four possibilities for Alicia to know everything she does. And it turns out
there's 16 ways for Alicia to allocate her tools. So that means there's only a 25% chance
that Alicia knows everything that Beatrice does. So with one ladder, Alicia knows everything Beatrice
knows. With two ladders, that probably would be false to 25%. What if there were three ladders?
I could draw a third ladder over here and then ask what happens? Well, we're not going to do the math,
but the odds fall to less than 8%. Four ladders. If I do another one, the percentage is going to be
less than 2.5%. We can use this to explain a stylized fact. We can use this fun little model of ladders
to make an important observation. Suppose you went around and you asked people,
hey, do you believe in IQ? Do you really think we can rank people by intelligence?
Now, we're not just asking are some people smarter than others. We're asking,
do you take 10, 20, 100 people? Can you rank them? It's possible to rank people by how smart they are.
Well, some people are going to say, look, that's impossible. Others are going to say,
well, you can probably do a pretty accurate job. Now, based on my experience, the people in the
former group are going to be more literary or artistic. And the latter group is going to be
tended to be more logical, more scientific. They'll think that, yes, in fact, you can rank people.
So for example, I often, your mathematician and economist, use rankings. So a mathematician
might refer to a job candidate as, say, she's the fourth best apologist in her cohort.
But I've never heard a poet refer to as the sixth best contemporary poet. That person might be
called one of the brightest young poets, but a ranking would be considered ridiculous,
even demeaning in some respects. Well, this accords with our ladders model. It feels like
mathematics and physics have fewer ladders, or if you prefer less branching. So these rankings
may make some sense. If you contrast physics with comparative literature contemporary art,
those are fields that look more like our deck of cards models. So a tool is going to be an
understanding of some writer or genre or form. And it's a deck of cards with a huge number of cards.
So think about the life experience of a mathematician versus that of an English professor.
The mathematician's experience is going to be one in which people who have more tools
are sort of deeper along branches, higher up the ladders. It's not a one ladder world, but
she's going to feel as though she can rank people. That's not true for the person in
comparative literature. She sees different people constantly making interesting, insightful comments.
So this is one of the themes of the class. We think what we experience.
That's why in third grade, we tend to think some kids are smarter than others, because we're all
those kids are climbing the same few ladders. Once we grow up, once we become more high-dimensional
and more interesting, we no longer believe this. We don't believe in rankings as much,
because we recognize the multi-dimensionality of each person.
So each of us then is a tree. We're a tree in which we have all sorts of knowledge and tools,
perspectives, heuristics, models. That's pretty cool. And each of us is different. That's also cool.
But it's not some feel-good statement, because our tree is a choice. We build it up over our lives,
and we should use it wisely. We should choose wisely which tools we accumulate.
Now this toolbox tree way of thinking about skills offers a productive way to think about
capabilities and to see the relationship between ability and diversity. Because each person with
their toolbox, putting those tools on a tree, means that someone's ability is loosely going to
be part of the number of tools that they possess. Ability can also be thought of as the size of
the tree, how many splits and how many branches. But some of the same ability can have very different
structure of their knowledge. You can have two people that score the same on IQ tests,
but have very, very different trees of skills. So think of someone who's characterized as a
dilettante. This is going to be someone who has a spray of branches. They're all over the place.
Think of someone who's a specialist. They may look more like a ladder. Think of someone who
spans two disciplines. This may be someone who does bioinformatics. So they have two ladders,
a biology ladder and an informatics ladder. And occasionally these connect. Now I realize
I'm being very metaphorical here. Toolboxes, ladders, trees, hang in there, and tie this
together more formally. Suppose they have a huge bunch of applicants trying to join some group
or to work on a project. Suppose I can measure their abilities here. I can weigh their toolboxes.
Let's assume that I can weigh what I think to be the relative parts of their toolboxes as well.
So for designing office buildings, someone's ability to speak pig latin at incredible speed
might be cool, but it's irrelevant. If we're putting another comedy troupe, that's a different story.
But if that's all I know, toolbox size, and if I've no reason to believe that people with
lots of similar tools, then I should pick people with high ability. Here's why. Because all else
equal, more ability means more potential for diversity. If you have more tools, you're likely
to have more different tools. This is the point we've talked about before. So in other words,
if I knew nothing about diversity, I should pick the people with high stability, partly because
they're the most able, and partly because they're going to be the most diverse. So we know that IQ
not only correlates with scores and intelligent tests, it also correlates with success on the job,
with incomes, promotions, and so on. However, their success on the job should be seen as do as much
to their diversity as their ability, because high IQ people have more tools, and those extra
different tools may be where they're adding value. Now in many cases, though, I might know something
about the tools people have. And if I'm smart, I'm judicious, I can use this information to put
together better teams. So what I'm doing here is formalizing an idea that I brought up in an earlier
lecture about not necessarily hiring the people who score highest on an exam. There as well as here,
it's not about a trade-off between ability and diversity. It's about building the best team,
a team that's going to perform well as a group. And for that team to perform well, as we've learned
in the earlier lectures on diversity in prediction and diversity in problem solving, it's going to be
beneficial if they bring diverse sets of tools. In fact, Tom Malone, who's at MIT, has begun to
explore this. He and his co-researchers have said, is there something like team IQ? Is there a general
level intelligence for a group? So is it the case that a group that does well on one problem will
tend to do well on another? So is there a G in groups? Well, there is. But is there a general
intelligence of groups? Well, there is. Some groups are better than others. Now as you'd expect,
the best groups don't necessarily contain the best individuals. They tend to be more diverse.
More importantly, their members are open to the contributions of everyone in the group.
They're open to using the tools from everyone's tree. So successful teams have lots of tools.
Their members share, they listen, and they treat one another with respect. They leverage their
diversity. Thank you.
