Hi, welcome back. So far we've been talking about the role of diversity in prediction
and problem solving. And in the last lecture we talked about how new technology allows
crowds of people to perform both tasks, creating just some remarkable results. What I want
to do now is switch gears a little bit. I want to take up a completely different question
and I'll talk about the relationship between diversity and robustness. Now what do I mean
by robustness? What I mean here is the ability of a system to maintain functionality to keep
doing what it's doing. So when I think about designing or engineering systems, whether
they're human systems or systems of mechanical electronic parts, we strive for both efficiency
and getting good outcomes, but also robustness. Robustness means maintaining those outcomes
in the face of external shocks or internal dynamics. So in this lecture and in the next
one we're going to talk about the relationship between diversity and robustness. And I'm also
going to make the case that robustness is an incredibly important thing to think about.
Now in the next lecture what we're going to do is we're going to talk about how possessing
a diverse set of tools or investments enhances robustness. So we're going to talk about something
called portfolio theory and they're going to extend that core logic into other domains
using something called the law of requisite variety. Now in this lecture we're going to
focus on the roles that variation plays in robustness. So let me step back for just a
second because I need to distinguish between diversity which we're talking about next and
variation which we're going to talk about now. Now this is often going to be the case,
there's really no bright line here, but essentially here's the distinction. Diversity means differences
in types. So I talk about a diverse portfolio, I'm talking about different types of investments.
If I talk about a diverse ecosystem like the African savanna, I'm talking about different
types of animals, wildebeest, zebras, lions, giraffes, elephants, that sort of stuff. Variation
means something different. It means differences within a type, such as a variation in the
size and color within the population of African elephants or variation in the shape and size
of a pack of gala apples. So if I go pick a bunch of apples, there's going to be variation.
Now variation can also though refer to subtle differences in how people perform a task.
So watch how people swing a golf club, make pancakes, drink coffee, or even sit. And all
you're going to see is you're going to see lots of variation. So what of it? Is this
variation a good thing? Is it a bad thing? What does it do? What we're going to see is
variation cuts at least two ways. So one thing we can do is we can see variation is error.
And if we see it as error, we want to reduce it. Let's suppose we're making medical instruments.
We don't want any medical variation. We want precision. But let's suppose we're in a sort
of fluid competitive environment, such as politics, software engineering, or in an ecosystem
even. Well here, variation, we can think of it as explorations, trying out new things.
And so in that case, it's going to be desirable. So what we've got is we've got sort of a pull
against variation in terms of reducing errors and a push for it in terms of exploration.
And it's those two things that we want to talk about in this lecture. So to get started,
I want to do some basic mathematics. Scientists describe variation using distributions. Now
distributions are different than functions. What a distribution does is it gives the probability
of various values. So let's suppose I'm looking at the heights of adult male giraffes. It
could be that they're distributed in what we call a normal distribution, a bell curve.
And there may be a mean of about, let's say, 16 feet. So that mean or the average is going
to lie at the center of the curve. And because this curve is symmetric, it means that the
mean is also the same thing as the median, and we're just as likely to be above it as
below. Okay, so here's a bell curve. Here's what they look like. And it's called a bell
curve because it sort of looks like a bell. And this occurs very frequently in nature
and in science and just in social data. So the heights and weights of almost any species,
including humans, will be normally distributed to look like this. So the number of Cheerios
you find in a box, if you bought 100 boxes of Cheerios and dumped them all out and counted,
you'd get something like this. If you get the number of points scored by a basketball
team, you're also going to see that it's probably going to be normally distributed.
Well, why does this happen? Well, one can show this, that if the variation results from
the sum of a whole bunch of minor disturbances, then you're going to get a normal distribution.
So let's look at male height, like a man's height. A man's height is the sum of a bunch
of things, the lengths of my lower legs, upper legs, right? If your bow leg initially subtract
a little bit, length of my torso, my neck, my head, you add all this stuff down, right?
And you're getting up a bunch of things and they're being combined. What turns out that
even if each of these variables isn't normally distributed, the sum is going to be normally
distributed. So if you've got enough variables and they have finite variants, we're going
to get a normal distribution that looks just like this, with the mean in the center and
it looks the same both to the left and the right. So this idea, this is called the central
limit theorem. And there's going to be a variety of processes, particularly those in which
we have different parts add up, where when we do it, when we sort of create up a look
at the full distribution, we're going to see that variation is normally distributed.
And so it's the central limit theorem that we're going to leverage throughout this lecture.
So let's think of a car. A car consists of a whole bunch of parts. So if I were to take
every new Ford Mustang that came off the assembly line and weigh it, I would find variation.
And that variation would be normally distributed. How come? Because it's caused by differences
in the weights of a whole bunch of different things, doors, engines, tires, seats, dashboards,
and those all get added up. And when I add up a bunch of disturbances, I get a normal
distribution. That's the central limit theorem. Now, not everything is going to be normally
distributed. So I actually did another course for the teaching company called understanding
complexity. And in that course, I described the length, why complex systems often produce
non-normal distributions. And that's because the feedbacks build on one another. There's
all sorts of positive feedbacks. But here, we're going to be talking about additive effects.
And so I can focus on normal distributions. Because that's mostly what we see. And if
we're looking at variation in attributes within a population, it's almost always what we see.
Okay. So we can characterize a normal distribution with just two parameters. This is what's so
great. The mean, or the average value, and the standard deviation. That sort of thing
is how wide the curve is. So the mean, again, just the average. And because the bell is
symmetric, as I mentioned, it's also the median, which is the value in the middle. Now, the
standard deviation tells us the spread. It tells us sort of how far apart that curve
is. Let's go back and look at another bell curve. So again, here's my bell curve. And
what's fascinating is that we only need two parameters to describe this entire distribution.
So what that means is this. Any two normal distributions are identical up to relabeling.
What does that mean? So let's take the distribution of heights of men. That has a mean of about
5 feet 10 inches. So here's the mean right here. And that's about 5 feet 10 inches. It's
not 11. I'm making men taller here. 5 feet 10 inches. And it's got a standard deviation
of about 2.8 inches. So let's say 3. So what that means is that these lines right here are
the first standard deviations. So that means this is plus 3 inches. So that's going to
be 6 feet 1. And this is minus 3 inches. So that's going to be 5 feet 7. Well, suppose
I took chickadees. Chickadees, let's say the weights of chickadees. That's also normally
distributed. But what I can do is I can get rid of these heights here. And I can say, well,
chickadees have a mean weight of 11 grams and a standard deviation of 1 gram. So now I can
just put plus 1 here for 12 and minus 1 here for 10. It's the exact same picture. Now in
both cases, whether it's heights of men or weights of chickadees, what we know is this.
We know that 68% of the values are within one standard deviation. So that means in this
region right here, between here and here, there's 68% of the values. So what that means
is 68% of all men are between 5 feet 7 and 6 feet 1. And 68% of all chickadees are between
10 and 12 grams. But we can do better. We could go out two standard deviations, which
is going to look right about here. And if we go out two standard deviations within this
region, there's going to be 95% of all values. So that means that 95% of all men are going
to be between 6 feet 4 and 5 feet 4. And that's true. And 95% of all chickadees are
going to be between 13 ounces and 9 ounces. That's also true. Now if we go out three standard
deviations, right, then we're down to 5 feet 1 and 6 feet 7, and then we're 99%. So what
this means is you're not likely to see a chickadee at 14 grams. And you're not likely
to see a person 7 feet tall. So when statisticians look at this, these standard deviations, they
introduce a new term. And this term is called sigma, which stands for standard deviation.
And this sigma is going to play a big role in what we're going to talk about next. In
fact, this very same thing, sigma, has become a really big idea in management. In fact,
six of them have. What do I mean? Well, there's something called the six sigma movement. Now
this began at Motorola, and it's an anti-variation movement. Remember earlier I mentioned that
in production processes, variation is bad. Let me explain why that's true.
So here's how six sigma works. Six sigma means six standard deviations. That means six standard
deviations from that mean. That means 99.996% of all outcomes should be within that range.
So a man, six standard deviations above the mean, would be 18 inches above the mean,
or 7 feet 4. That means I'm only going to find about 3.4 men per million that are that
tall, and that seems about right. So what is six sigma thinking? Well, here's how it
works. Suppose I want a company that make bunk beds. So I design these beds so that
the top and bottom bunks are connected by dowels. So the top bunk sits on top of the
bottom bunk. There's a little dowel that connects the two. Now the dowels fit into holes that
are drilled into the top of the bottom bunk post, and holes drilled into the top of the
post so the legs can just sort of be set on top of one another. Now these dowels, I'm
having somebody make them, they should be one inch in diameter. But these are made on
some sort of lathe, and some are going to be a little bit bigger than an inch and some
are a little bit smaller. So what I'm going to get is a distribution of the set of dowel
diameters. And the mean will probably be one, but there's going to be some standard deviation.
Let's say it's .03. So I can put it just on that same bell curve I just drew. Now if the
dowel is too wide, it's not going to fit in the hole. Well, that's opposed to hole is
drilled to be 1.06 inches in diameter. So it's 1.06. If the dowel is too narrow, the bed's
going to wobble. And suppose we do some testing and we find if the diameter is less than 0.94
inches, the bed's going to wobble too much and consumers are going to complain because
they're going to be worried about their kid's safety. So as long as it's between .94 and
1.06, we're fine. But less than .94, it wobbles. More than 1.06, it doesn't fit, which is
going to be really frustrating. So let's look at our distribution. What we see is, since
the standard deviation was .03, that the dowel's going to work as long as it's within two standard
deviations. Otherwise, it's not going to function. Well, this means that 95% of the time, the
dowel's going to fit, but 5% of the time it won't. So basically our production process
works within two standard deviations. Well, there's four dowels per bed. So if we do the
math on this, this means about 20% of the time, the bed is going to have one dowel that
doesn't fit. That is not going to work. So my company might even fold that customers
are going to be really upset, because 20% of customers are going to have dowels that
don't function. So that's what I'm going to do is I'm going to bring in a six sigma consultant.
They're going to say, look, you have to adopt six sigma thinking. You've got to reduce the
variation in the size of your dowels so that failure only occurs if the variation is six
standard deviations. Six sigma is from the mean. Well, the math here is incredibly easy.
Watch, here's how it works. The dowels are going to work if they're between .94 and 1.06.
The mean here is 1. So that means we want six standard deviations to be 1.06. So that
means we want to set a standard deviation equal to 0.01. That means that any variation
within six sigmas is going to function. So variation in the six sigma framework is a
bad thing. It hurts performance. We want to make the dowels with such little error that
even within six standard deviations are going to be okay, because variation in this case
is slippage. We want to reduce it. And that's because we need a solution that worked, and
we need a solution that's connected to other solutions, and we want to minimize variation.
So how do you do it? It's one thing to just say, okay, do this six sigma thing. How do
you reduce variation? Well, one technique that's gained traction for reducing variation
is the checklist. So pilots have long use checklist, right? Before they take off on
a flight, they have a checklist of things they do. And the reason they do this is because
safety is an enormous concern on airplanes. Like, do we have fuel? Are all the gauges
working? Are all the lights working? That sort of stuff. Well, recently doctors have
started using checklists as well. So here's an example of a medical checklist. It lists
the tasks and the order in which they're to be carried out. This reduces variation and
it saves lives. In fact, there's a wonderful book by a tool in the Wanda at Harvard that
describes the growing use of checklists in hospitals and how they've saved so many lives.
Now, everybody wants to save lives. But we don't always want to reduce variation. Let's
think back to our rugged landscape lecture to see why. What does variation do? Variation
can enable us to climb rugged peaks to find better solutions. So if we go full six sigma,
that means that we're stopping trying new things. And that's only going to be a good
idea if we're stuck at a peak. Let me show you what I mean.
Okay, so here's a picture of a rugged landscape. And I want to lighten our load a little bit
and talk about stuff that's a little less heady than saving lives. Let's think about
food. Like many people, I enjoy cooking. And when I try to do a new recipe, I usually adhere
pretty closely to the direction. So if it calls for a tablespoon of cumin, I add a tablespoon
of cumin. But the next time I try the recipe, maybe I'd introduce a little variation, maybe
you know, less cumin and a little more coriander. By trying these variations, I move around
in the rugged landscape with the hope being that I find a point of higher variation, higher
elevation. So how does this work? Works as follows. This could be my taste. This could
be how much I'm going to like the recipe. So the higher up it goes, the more I like
it. And this could be how much cumin I put in. And so this is a landscape that has two
peaks. So maybe there's one recipe that's good that has a little bit of cumin, which
is over here, and one that has a lot of cumin that's also, that's over here. Well, the original
recipe might call for only this much cumin. So by experimenting, I can sort of climb up
the hill to find a peak. This is why variation is so useful. Okay, but how much variation?
Well, this is a really good question, right? Let's think back to our lecture on heuristics.
Before I describe simulated annealing, remember this annealing was this process that they used
to make glass and crystals. So initially, you heat the glass a lot. So there's lots
of variation, and then you cool it. So you allow very little variation. Well, the same
logic is going to hold in a lot of settings, right? So early on, it probably makes sense
to experiment a lot, to introduce a lot of variation, because this lets you sort of jump
over the jagged peaks in the landscape. Eventually, though, once I think I'm at the peak, then
I want to slow down or anneal my experimentation. And eventually, I want it to be zero. And
I really want to, in some sense, enter the land of Six Sigma again. I want no variation.
I just want to stand on top of that peak. Now, if you read accounts of how products
were developed, whether it's fat, tire, ale, cliff bars, or those wonderful de Gaubach
chocolate bars, read those histories. You'll actually find they all relied on something
like an annealing process. Initially, there was lots of variation. You know, they tried
all sorts of different recipes and combinations. But once they found a really good solution,
you know, they sort of stopped tweaking. And now, if you look at those companies, their
goal is to reduce variation as much as possible, so that when I buy one fat, tire, ale, it
tastes exactly the same as the previous ale. So beer, cookies, chocolate, it sounds great,
right? Experimentation sounds like a lot of fun. But keep in mind, the same logic applies
in other more serious cases, including, let's go back to the medical profession, surgery.
Let's take heart transplants. Initially, it was the case that rates of success were
pretty low. But people kept experimenting, switching orders, trying new variations, just
subtle changes in the procedures. Now, sometimes those experiments cost lives. But over time,
the rate of experimentation fell because we got better and better at doing what we were
doing, performing these transplants. In effect, we climbed the hill. In fact, there's someone
named Atul Gawande, the same exact guy who wrote the book on the checklist, who wrote
an article about this in The New Yorker. And he showed how learning curves existed in medicine
and how it was important to have variation to make mistakes to get better.
So remember Phil Tetlock, by this categorization of foxes and hedgehogs? Gawande's a fox, right?
He's not contradicting himself at all. He's a thinker who's capable of holding multiple
models in his head that appear to be in conflict, right? So on the one hand, he's saying checklist.
On the other hand, he's saying variation. So what seems clear in his writings that he's
very aware of the conditionality of the checklist logic. You know, sometimes big rocks, sometimes
little rocks. And so that's where we want to be as well. You want to understand when
do we sort of embrace Six Sigma, and when do we endorse more variation? So, so far, we've
been talking about a fixed problem, making a dowel, producing a good recipe. Now, on
a fixed problem, you only need variation during the learning phase. At some point, when you're
pretty sure you're at the highest peak, you know, you're pretty sure this is the best
I'm going to do, you want to reduce and go full Six Sigma. But the world doesn't stay
fixed. It changes. In an exchanging world, variation becomes even more important. How
come? Well, because it allows for variation. It allows you to adapt. And in fact, the more
variation, the faster the rate of adaptation.
I'm going to go back to our dowels. But in a bit of Hollywood magic, instead of thinking
of them as dowels, think of them as finctious beaks. And rather than fitting into holes
drilled into bunk beds, think of the beak having to fit into holes in bark to pull out
insects that have little nests inside the bark. If all of our finctious had beaks of
the same diameter, there'd be no variation. And these beaks might even be the ideal size
to stick into the holes in trees produced by a particular type of ant that this is the
food that the finctious live on. So just like the dowel that fits perfectly into the holes
in the bed, the finct has a beak that fits perfectly into the ant hole, which is great.
But now let's suppose that there's an ant colony that mutates and becomes slightly smaller.
And now the finctious beaks don't fit in the ant hole. Well, these ants are going to do
great. They're going to produce colonies like crazy because the finctious can't eat them.
So these ants are going to take over. And what's going to happen is the finctious are
going to die off because they don't have any ants they can reach. But now let's suppose
that some of the finctious have slightly narrower beaks. Well, those finctious are going to get
in these new ant holes, and they're going to survive. Not only are we going to survive,
they're going to thrive. So what we see here is variability allows adaptation. In fact,
the more variation you have, the faster you can adapt. In biology, there's something
called Fisher's Fundamental Theorem. And this states that the rate of adaptation is proportional
to the amount of variation. Loosely speaking, if your sigma gets twice as big, you can adapt
twice as fast.
So let me show you just a quick picture that will help explain some of how Fisher's Theorem
works. So let's start with just a very simple fitness landscape. And to make this logic
as transparent as possible, this is what we call a Mount Fuji landscape. It looks just
like a single peak. So let's suppose we've got a population. These could be people doing
a repetitive task like welding. But here, let's just make it the length of a finctious
beak to make it simple. Well, if the finctious have been in this environment for a long time,
evolution is going to place pressure on them, and they should find this peak. And if they
found this peak, then over time, this population of finctious may have very little variation
here, right around the peak. And that's what we want to think of. We want to think, remember,
there is no cardinal in some sense. There's a lot of variation in their population. So
we want to think of there being variation in these finctious all around this peak. So
I want to consider now two cases. In the first case, I'm going to assume that the beaks are
uniformly distributed between 2.3 centimeters and 2.5 centimeters. So it's a pretty tight
distribution. Then in the second case, I'm going to increase the variance and make the
beaks between 2.2 and 2.6 centimeters. So they're spread more widely. Now let's suppose
this landscape stays fixed. If I look at these two populations side by side, the lower variance
population is going to be crowded closer on the peak. So on average, they're going to
do better. And that simple picture explains why, because they're more closely arranged
on the peak. So the finctious are using six sigma thinking. But now let's suppose something
happens to the environment, like the ants changing. So now we need either bigger or
smaller peaks. So we can represent this graphically by sliding our landscape. So now the peak
is no longer at 2.3 centimeters. Maybe it's at 3 centimeters. Well, what's going to happen?
Well, what we can do is we can think of, as we think of that landscape switching, we could
put down an equation if we wanted. Now for beak sizes less than 3 centimeters, the fitness,
you know, maybe approximately the same as beak size. For beak sizes larger than 3 centimeters,
maybe fitness gets subtracted off a little bit. So here all of our finctures right now
have less than 3 centimeters. So they're sort of climbing up that hill. So we only need
to think about the left side of the landscape, the uphill slope. So let's look at our first
population, the low variance population. Well, the average fitness here, since it's just
beak size, is going to be 2.4. The minimum fitness will be 2.3, and the maximum fitness
will be 2.5. Now let's suppose, due to evolutionary pressure, that only the best half of the population
will survive. So this means that only those with beaks of 2.4 and higher are going to survive.
So our new average fitness will be the average between 2.4 and 2.5, which is 2.45. We'll
also get our high variance population. Again, the upper half is going to survive. So it's
going to be those with beaks between 2.4 and 2.6, and the average fitness in that population
will be 2.5. Well, let's look at what happened. The second population had twice the variation
of the first, and so it could climb the hill faster. And in fact, it climbed twice as fast.
And in this example, the speed of adaptation correlates perfectly with variation. And in
fact, that's Fisher's theorem. The more variation, the faster that a species can adapt.
So what have we learned so far? Earlier we learned that when you're learning that you
want to anneal the levels of variation. So when you're learning something, you want to
start out with a lot of variation and then slowly experiment. Once you've got a good
solution, then you maybe want to go 6 sigma. But all of that thinking assumed that the
world was fixed. But we've just been talking about evolutionary environments where the
world changes. And there we learned with Fisher's theorem that you want variation to be able
to adapt because your rate of variation determines your rate of adaptation. Now in most fluctuations,
it's going to be the case that both logics apply. We do want to reduce errors. So Starbucks,
the coffee company, once shut down all of its stores for an entire day to retrain every
single employee in the art of making coffee. Why did they do this? To reduce variation.
They wanted to exploit what works best. They wanted to make their sigma as low as possible.
But it's also the case that you want to explore to see if there's something better. You want
to be able to adapt. And if we reduce all variation and the environment changes, then
we could be stuck on the side of a hill doing something that's not optimal. But we could
take this too far. We could make sigma huge. And then we'd rarely be doing anything that's
very good. So what we wanted is we wanted to choose a level of variation that balances
off the desire to not make too many errors against not having the flexibility to adapt.
So how much do we choose? Well, by all I guess to have a saying, evolution is smarter than
you are. This is sometimes called Orgel's law after the British biologist Leslie Orgel. And in
fact, it's often true. So evolution has found solutions to problems like vision, cognition
that are just breathtaking in their sophistication. But evolution's had a long time to work on
this question of how to choose a level of variation. So it's worth thinking about how
nature solves this problem. Well, in nature, the level of variation depends on how species
reproduce. If reproduction is asexual, then mutation is the primary driver of variation.
In sexual reproduction, genetic crossover amplifies variation by taking parts of the
mother and parts of the father and combining those building blocks. Remember we called
these building blocks. Well, if you look at things like viruses, variation occurs through
a bunch of mechanisms, including something called horizontal transfer, in which snippets
of DNA get passed back and forth between the different members of this virus. So viruses
can literally look at one another and say, hey, dude, I love your nose. Can you pass
over me the DNA for that? So horizontal transfer enables incredible rates of variation within
a virus, which is why so many of us get colds. It's because the virus can just adapt so
quickly, but not too quickly, because if the virus were to produce too much variation,
it wouldn't exploit any of the good solutions it finds. So therefore, the virus moves at
exactly the rate it needs to in order to survive. It's fast, but not too fast. So we've covered
a lot in here in this lecture. Let's close up with some solid takeaways.
There are times when you want sigma low. And those are the cases where you know you've
got the best answers. Solve the problem. You want to reduce variation. You need consistency.
So chain stores like Starbucks want a low sigma because people expect the same coffee
every day, every shot. Now, if you're a rock star, that doesn't apply to you. Bono doesn't
want consistency, nor did Sinatra. When people go to a concert, they want a little variation.
They want to hear something real. So you also want less variation when the solution is
going to connect to other solutions, like the Dow and our bunk bed. So that's a core
lesson of six sigma. If you've solved it or if it's connected, you don't want variation.
If you want novelty, you do. Often, though, in most cases, I think you should think of
the amount of variation as a strategic choice. Early on, you should experiment more, later
or less. But if the world you're in is changing, then you need to have a regular rate of experimentation.
Otherwise, you're going to find yourself in low points on the landscape, what Shakespeare
called the shallows and miseries. And finally, if you're in a really fluid, competitive world
where you know the landscape is always dancing, in a world in which people say you sort of
innovate or die, well, then then you've just got to maintain a fairly healthy level of
variation. It's just necessary in order to survive. I want to end on an interesting
thought, one that's way a lot of fun, and that's this. When we look out in the world,
the amount of variation that we see tells us something about the landscape. Let me explain.
So in evolution, selection reduces variation. If the finctures' beaks get too wide, it won't
fit in the hole. So selection controls the amount of variation. When there's a shift
in the landscape, see it becomes less steep, selection has less force, and we see more
variation. Thus, amazingly, again, evolution is smarter than we are. Because once a peak
becomes flat, once it flattens out, we're going to see more variation. That means the
population can adapt faster. Well, here's an interesting thing. If the peak is becoming
flatter, that's a time when you'd want to explore more. So it's almost as if evolution
knows it needs to search by magic. Well, the same is often to an economic, social, and
political context. When something is really working, there's a lot of selective pressure
to keep it right where it is, to go six sigma, and we don't see a lot of variance. So, for
example, the fork evolved from the knife. It went to two prongs, and then three, and
then four, and in some cases five and six, but it actually went back to pretty much four.
Because, hey, we've solved the fork. It's working, so we can just kind of let it go.
But when the world's about to change, and when people sort of know this, that peak is
no longer as steep, and we start to see a lot of variation, people are trying to jump
ahead of the wave. That's certainly true in fashion, and it's also true in the world
of ideas. So there are times when these trends and paradigms are about to shift, and at these
moments, variation may well increase, because no one's really quite sure what to do. Nothing's
working best anymore. And because of that, because we get this variation, we get better
solutions. So variety, as they say, is the spice of life. Variation makes life interesting,
and as the Chinese say, may you live in interesting times. Thank you.
