Hi, welcome back. In the previous lecture we talked about how to best balance exploration
and exploitation. We saw how variation enabled systems to be more robust. It did so by making
the system more likely to respond to change and able to respond faster. We also saw how
reducing variation could keep us on a peak. Now in this lecture we're going to discuss
the relationship between diversity and robustness. And we're going to see three ways in which
diversity can improve robustness. A portfolio effect, the effect of variety, and the effect
of redundancy. Now before we get started I want to give a definition and a reminder.
Just a definition, I want to go back to robustness. By robustness, again, I mean the ability
to maintain functioning. So a political system is robust if it can withstand economic fluctuations,
social movements, and natural disasters. A relationship is robust if it can withstand
better or worse, richer or poorer, and ridiculous purchases on eBay. An ecosystem is said to
be robust if it can withstand invasions of new species, extinctions of existing species,
and things like climatic variation. Now a robust system won't necessarily be the same
after it's withstood the trauma. It probably won't be. What's important though is that
it keeps functioning in some way. Somehow it figures out a way to keep doing what it has
to do. Okay, now the reminder. Keep in mind that diversity is not the same thing as variation.
Diversity refers to differences in types. Bears differ from tigers which in turn differ
from seals. And engineers differ from chemists who in turn differed from ceramicists. Now
variation, that refers to differences within a type. So not all black bears are the same.
There's variation within the species black bear. And not all ceramicists are the same
either. Okay, one more time just so we have it down. Diversity means different types.
Variation means minor differences within a type. So in this class I've been talking
about cognitive diversity. And I mean differences in the types of tools people have. Because
tools are discrete things. So it makes sense to say that we're talking about cognitively
diverse people. Because people have different tool sets. Now in this lecture and in the
next one, we're going to explore the relationship between diversity and system level robustness.
And we're going to do this because the reasons, the mechanisms through which diversity helps
maintain functionality. I can't cover in just 30 minutes. So it's going to take us
two lectures. Now the relationship between diversity and robustness is complex. There's
a lot going on. Now at first it seems sort of obvious to say that more diversity should
imply more robustness. But unfortunately that's not true. So we're going to have to do some
serious thinking to understand exactly what and how diversity in the parts contributes
to robustness of the whole. So I'm going to begin with probably the most widely known
and understood mechanism through which diversity operates. These are called portfolio effects.
Now portfolio theory originated in finance and was developed to show how diversification
spreads risk. So ideally an investor would select investments that regardless of what
happens out there in the world, she's going to make money. Well how does she do that?
Well the short answer is pretty simple right? She does it by choosing a diverse set of investments.
That seems simple enough. Buy diverse stocks and then you'll do well no matter what happens.
Now it's actually more complicated than that. You can't just pick a diverse set of investments
and hope you've got a portfolio that's going to perform robustly. That's going to keep
functioning regardless of what happens in the economy. To see exactly what type of diversity
is implied by portfolio theory, we need to introduce a concept from mathematics and finance
that's called the state of the world. Now the state of the world literally means all
of the relevant information about what's happening relative to my investments.
So let me show you an example. Let's suppose we're thinking about you know going away for
the weekend camping or something and there's four possible states of the world. These would be
rain, hot, cold and then just right. Now these would be the four relevant states of the world.
Now what are my possible investments? Well I could get a tent, I could get a slip and slide,
those are kind of awesome, get a fire pit or a frisbee. Now what we want to do is we want to
make an investment that's going to pay off regardless of what happens with the weather.
So regardless of what the state of the world is, which one of these things it is,
the investment's going to pay off. And what we want to do is maintain functionality.
Well let's think about it. If we've got these things, the tent, the slip and slide,
the fire pit and the frisbee, we're going to be okay. And here's why. Suppose it rains. Well if
it rains then what we can do is we can pull out the tent. Let's suppose it's really hot. Well if
it's hot then we're just going to ride the slip and slide. What if it turns out that it's sort of
cold? Well if it's cold what we'll do is we'll sort of you know start up the fire pit and everything
will be fine. And finally what if it turns out that it's just perfect, that we've just got absolutely
perfect weather? Well you know then we can play frisbee. So what we see here is we've got a diversity
of possible investments and no matter what happens we're going to be okay. So it's not the
diversity of the things we bought though. This is the important thing. It's the fact that they pay
off in different states of the world. Let me say that again. So sure we've got four distinct
investments but what's relevant is regardless of what happens rain, hot, cold, or just right
I have an investment that will pay off in that state of the world. Let me explain this in another
way. Let's suppose I bought a frisbee, a croquet set, a badminton set, and a bunch of softball
gloves. That's also a diverse set of investment. Look they're all very different things. But once
again I've got these four states of the world. Rain, hot, cold, and just right. And I've got now
again this diverse set of investments. But notice this. These things all pay off in the same state
of the world. They all pay off only in the just right state. So even though these things are diverse
none of these things is going to work if it rains and none of them are going to work if it's especially
hot. So what we need is not diverse investments but we need investments that pay off in diverse
states of the world. That's why it's not just any diversity. It's relevant diversity in relationship
to the states of the world. The things that can happen. Now financial analysts have a measure
for this type of diversity and it's called beta. What is beta? It's a Greek letter so that sounds
technical but it's not. It's actually not complicated at all. Those have all our money in one asset.
Say a house. Well that house is going to have variation in its pay off depending on the states
of the world. Because in some states of the world like if the local economy is really really good
the value of the house is going to go up. Now in other states of the world let's suppose like some
big manufacturer moves out of our town then the value of the house is going to fall. So depending
on the state of the world the value of the house could go up or it could go down. So that's variation
right. We've already talked about that. Well now we need to introduce a different concept. This is
called covariation or covariance. The covariance between two investments captures how similar
their payoffs are in the various states of the world. So for example the Frisbee and the Croquet
set they pay off about the same. They pay off really well if the weather is good. They pay off
badly if it's super hot. Whereas the tent and the fire pit pay off in different states of the world.
Well we want to turn this into a mathematical formulation so here's how we calculate covariance.
Let's look at two investments. Call them A and B. We can denote the average payoff
in for A across all states is M sub A and the average payoff for B is M sub B.
Now for each state of the world and we can index these by I we can write down the value of A and
the value of B. And what we want to do is we want to ask sort of how does the variation in A
correspond to the variation in B. So what we're going to do is we're going to take the value of A
minus the mean and multiply it by the value of B minus it's me. Let me do this formally.
So here's the equation for the covariance of A and B. What we're doing here is we're summing up
over all the states of the world. So this I term here is indexing the different states of the world.
So this is the value of A in state I and this is the value of B in state I and we just subtract
off the mean. So covariance can be either zero positive or negative. If two events are unrelated
what otherwise is independent the covariance is going to be zero. If they move in the same
direction they're going to be positively correlated and if they move in opposite directions
they'll be negatively correlated. Let me explain how this works really quickly. So if A is above
the mean this will be positive and if B is above the mean this will be positive so the
covariance will be positive. If A is when A is above the mean B is below the mean then when I take
this number times this number I get something negative. So covariance is capturing whether
things move in the same direction or in opposite directions. Let's think through this example.
So it's like that two investments and they're good in the same states of the world and bad in
the same states of the world. Again like the Frisbee and the badminton set. So this means
whenever A is above its mean B is also its above its mean. So again in that equation I get a positive
number. When A is below its mean B is also below its mean so I get a negative number times a negative
number which is also positive. So if I add up all the different states in the world I'm going to get
a bunch of positives times positives and negatives times negatives and I'm going to get a positive
covariance. Here's an example that should make this even clearer. Suppose you want a coffee
shop in the Midwest and you keep sales data on all your different beverages. So when it's cold
people tend to drink more coffee and more hot chocolate. So your sales of hot chocolate and
coffee are going to be positively correlated. In the winter you sell more hot chocolate than
average and you also sell more coffee than average. So you get a positive times a positive.
In the summer you sell less coffee again than average and you also sell less hot chocolate
than average. So you're getting a negative times a negative that's also positive so hence positive
covariance. So how do you get negative covariance? Well negative covariance is going to be the case
that when one stock is high the other stock is low. So let's go back to our coffee shop.
Let's look at sales of Italian sodas. So those are going to be negatively correlated with sales
of hot chocolate and they certainly are for me. So in the winter time there's going to be more
hot chocolate than average right because I go in there and I buy hot chocolate. But there's going
to be a less than average amount of Italian soda because it's 10 degrees out I'm not buying an ice
cold Italian soda. So I've got a positive number for the hot chocolate it's above its mean and a
negative number for the Italian soda because it's below its mean. But in the summertime that reverses
hot chocolate sales are less than average right because I don't buy hot chocolate in the summer
and Italian soda sales are above average because I do buy it so I'm getting a negative times a
positive but that's also a negative. So again thinking of stocks with like these labels A and B
negative correlation means that when A is high B is low and vice versa. So that's you know the
value minus the mean is positive for A and the value minus the mean for B is negative. So the
covariance is negative. Okay we've talked about positive covariance negative covariance what about
independence? Well if two events are independent then the covariance is sometimes positive and
sometimes negative. So when A is above the mean B might be above the mean it might be below the
mean and on average it's neither so that means we're getting positive times positives and positive
times negatives and those things sort of cancel out. Okay so for example suppose A is the amount of
peach jam that someone eats in a year and B is the number of movies that they go see. If someone
eats more than an average amount of peach jam that doesn't tell us anything about how many movies
they see they'd be just as likely to see more than an average number as they would be to see
fewer. So what we're going to get is peach jam consumption right and number of movies watched
are probably completely independent. Okay now remember we've been talking about covariance because
I was introduced this thing called beta. What is beta? Well the beta between stock A and stock B
is just the ratio of the covariance of A and B to the variance of A.
So let's go back I've got this equation for the covariance of A and B so let's suppose that I have
one investment A and then I buy B and I want to know how related are those stocks. Well so what I
want to think about is I want to take this covariance of A and B and I just want to divide it by the
and I just want to divide it by the variance of A. Now why do I do that? I do that because
A is telling me sort of how noisy A is in general this variance of A term is and I'm just sort of
normalizing this term so I'm going to get something a number between zero and one.
So let's suppose I buy a B that has a really high beta so I already owe A and I buy a B that has
a really high beta so this is what beta equals little beta here. Well if beta is big that means
that when A goes up B goes up they're positively correlated. Now if I buy one with a low beta
and ideally with a negative beta then when A goes up B goes down and when A goes down B goes up so
I'm exposed to less risk. In fact if I could buy two investments that were expected that were
perfectly negatively correlated at a beta of negative one then I'd always make money because
this would mean anytime that B would go up A would go down anytime that A went down A went up B would
go down so no matter what happens I'm going to make money. Now if you find two stocks that have
this beta negative one just send me an email okay. All right so when stock managers talk about
creating a diverse portfolio what they're talking about doing is putting together stocks
that have low betas relative to one another. So what do we learn from this model that what a
diverse investment is relative to other investments is captured by this beta with having low betas
with respect to one another so what we can do is reduce risk by having diverse stocks
if we measure diversity using this beta variable and diversity is going to make us robust diversity
in our portfolios to changes in the economy. Now the next benefit of diversity to robustness is
going to be similar and it's going to be correspond to something called responsiveness the benefits
of variety. Now before we talk about variety I want to take it just a sidebar here. I spend a lot
of time talking with people about the contributions and costs of diversity specifically cognitive
diversity in fact doing a video course on that very topic. I can't tell you how many times I've
heard people say to me look cognitive diversity is important because it's a portfolio effect you
don't want all your stocks in the same you know all your portfolio being in one stock you want all
the same type of thinkers. Okay that's actually it's a really nice idea but let's think about it
a moment and let's try and translate the portfolio logic to our toolbox idea and we'll see that
it kind of works it has sort of limited truth and let's see why. Okay we just saw that an ideal
portfolio consists of investments that pay off in different states of the world and it's true that
that logic does apply to people so if we ran a consulting company or law firm the state of the
world could represent the type of problem you think of employees as investments and to be able
to serve our clients we need employees that can solve different problems and we can draw a pretty
tight analogy okay but it's not quite satisfying for a couple reasons so first let me think about
the diversity prediction theorem there we're not we're averaging so that's very different than
portfolio and if we think about diversity and problem solving that's actually sort of a different
thing because it's not like we're spreading risk there what's happening is we're solving different
types of problems so something slightly different is going on we need a different insight and maybe
here's a better way to think of it so we can think of a problem that arises like a disturbance
and then we can think of as a person tools somebody's having a you know tool set is being
capable to respond to that disturbance or not and this leaves us away from portfolio theory to
something called Ashby's law of requisite variety well Ashby's law originated in the field of systems
dynamics the law of requisite variety applies to situations in which you've got have responses
to external disturbances so imagine sitting around just waiting for some opportunity or a crisis and
then having the response would be responding in some way you can't react proactively so what
happens is you've just got to wait for things to happen and then react to these stimuli what the law
of requisite variety states is that for every type of perturbation you must have an action
that counters it so it's totally intuitive consider the task of keeping a bathtub in working order
one thing that could go wrong with the bathtub is that the washers on the spigot could wear out
you can think of this as a disturbance so if the washer wears out you fix it this is a response
or on another day like a drain could spring a leak this is a second type of disturbance
if you don't do anything you're going to get a wet floor but suppose you take your action that you
one action you know which is replace the washer well that's not going to help you with the drain
changing the washer won't fix the problem you need a different type of response you need more
variety so you need to have some sort of tool that says patch the hole in the drain so the
second disturbance needs a second response this is the essence of the law of requisite variety
which is formally stated as follows the number of responses should equal the number of types of
disturbances so it's very straightforward but it provides an insight into well functioning systems
the diversity of potential responses must be sufficient to handle the diversity of disturbances
so if disturbances become more diverse then so must the possible responses and if not the system
won't hold together now these responses aren't just sitting on the shelf right they've got to be
generating and you know in some way and generating potential responses is costly
and over time the number of responses generated is probably going to equal the number of disturbances
because those disturbances that don't get evoked right so if you get a disturbance that never
happens the response that you need to to have you know ready to go to deal with that is just
going to atrophy or you're not going to hire people that have that skill okay let's consider
something like raising a child young children produce approximately four types of disturbances
hungry wet tired and sick now there's four responses they're hungry you feed them
they're wet you change them they're tired you put them in the car seat and you drive them around town
and if they're sick you take them to the doctor as children get older the number of disturbances
grows and the number of responses must grow accordingly so if you've got a teenager who's
having you know issues with a relationship it's not going to work with you know change
feed drive around in the car food could help driving around the car probably won't so a lot
of records of variety states that the parent has to develop new responses to counteract the new
types of disturbances so now we can refine that sort of we want diverse teams because we want
a portfolio logic to instead say we want teams of people that have diverse sets of tools so we
have requisite variety to respond to the types of responses that we have so that's actually
a better fit it's not a perfect fit the sort of diverse teams have requisite variety again this
gives sort of one reason for cognitive diversity and there are many others this is only one so as
an analogy right there's lots of reasons to buy a new Cadillac that'd be true like if I said hey it's
a really worthwhile to get a new Cadillac because it's a great place to sit and listen to music
because they have excellent stereo systems they've got these comfortable heated leather seats
it's great it's nothing better than sitting in a nice car listening to the radio but the car can
do a lot more if you turn the keys step on the gas you can actually drive the car and you can do
way more than just sort of listening to Bob Dylan and driving the car you can actually go you know
visit highway 61 yourself if you want to so let me reflect for a minute portfolio thinking says
that cognitive diversity spreads risk requisite variety thinking says diversity allows us to
respond to multiple disturbances what I'm saying here is like the Cadillac cognitive diversity can
do more we've seen how diverse models lead to better predictions that's not a portfolio effect
that's not one person paying off to some in one state of the world it's not responding to
disturbance we've seen how different people have different local optima they get stuck in different
places that's not a portfolio effect either that's also not requisite variety and we've seen how
diverse ideas recombine to drive growth also not a portfolio effect so yes portfolio effects and
yes the law of records variety do hold and both are reasons for diverse teams but they're not the
only reason so let's let's sort of keep stepping on the gas a bit I want to return to the idea of
the economy as being a complex system organizations within that economy must satisfy something like
the law of records of variety they also must think in terms of portfolio so if you look at the strategy
literature you'll see that the tasks that an organization executes well these tend to be
referred to as their core competencies so there's this idea that the firm has certain things they
know how to do certain tools they know how to work with so these core competencies you can think of
those as responses and if these responses are well suited to the disturbances they're going to see
the organization should work no matter what the world offers up the firm can handle it because
it's in their crosshairs now if the firm lacks sufficient core competencies well then it might
be headed for disaster example suppose you only have a hammer you're going to have a tough time
fixing a leaky drain now does this mean that firms should necessarily then be more diversified
that they should be incredibly diverse have every possible tool let's think about it so when a firm
buys another firm or enters a new industry they're not only taking in that market they're also taking
on all of the disturbances that that new enterprise is going to have as well and they need to have
the requisite variety of tools to handle those disturbances and they may not in fact two of the
most famous management consultants of the past 50 years ck prahalad and rickshard betas argues that
the limits of firm diversification so how diverse should a firm be should depend on exactly this
on whether the management team can respond to strategic issues across the different subunits
the management team must have sufficient diversity in tools so they can handle respond to the types
of strategic issues that arise within the new firm as well as the old firm example general motors
went into automotive financing now this expansion would seem to make a lot of sense given that
so many people finance their cars so gm is selling cars and people need money to buy cars so why
not enter that market but when you do that you have to be sure that you possess the skill sets to
be able to function in the world of finance gm knows how to make cars that doesn't mean they
know how to handle financial markets as long as the new venture has disturbances that are similar
enough to those of the old firm right the original firm you're probably going to be fine because for
every disturbance management probably already has a response so requisite variety will work fine
if though the new disturbances differ from the acquiring firm's existing set of disturbances
the takeover can be a disaster because the acquiring firm may lack the requisite response
variety their toolbox may not have the right tool so the lesson here seems fairly obvious so
don't acquire businesses that require different skill sets so for example harley davinson shouldn't
buy a grocery store chain harley davinson's core competencies don't return you know don't include
responses that pertain to food spoilage right they work in metal now the case of general motors in
gmac their financing arm show prahalad and betas's logic in stark relief for over 80 years gmac finance
cars and turned a profit for gm that's great because that's something they knew but then gmac
moved into mortgage in fact my mortgage is a gmac mortgage and then they moved into some prime mortgages
and this led to disaster because subprime mortgages are a long way away from rolling out
Chevrolets and rolling out Cadillacs what happened gmac had to be sort of rescued by the federal
government in 2008 and firms are often chastised for following this advice this is sort of a funny
thing right so this makes total sense harley davinson shouldn't open grocery stores and yet
when you read the popular literature you often see firms sort of get you know almost get embarrassed
by stories about how they didn't develop a technology in-house and let someone else take it
what's the most famous of these examples well i think the most famous example involves apple
and xerox there's a man named bill english who was working at xerox park and he was developing
this little thing attached to a cord it was became the computer mouse and what has become folklore
as sort of an epically behead business decision xerox allowed steve jobs to come in and look at
what they were doing and they allowed apple to take that mouse technology and make literally
billions of dollars okay look this seems stupid and you gotta you know and people say something oh
my gosh xerox was stupid they let jobs just take this thing to make billions of dollars i'm gonna
argue it wasn't stupid xerox didn't have the core competencies to develop and sell an edgy computer
product like the mac they weren't gonna go into popular music either right this doesn't make any
sense it wasn't in their core competency set so it's far better to let the mouse go right think
of it this way suppose xerox owned land and for a future parking lot up in the hills off sand hill
road and let's suppose that this land turned out to be perfect for growing cabernet grapes just
amazing and let's suppose that the vintner lewis martini calls him up and says hey i'll give you two
million dollars for your parking lot and they're thinking you're kidding absolutely we'll sell this
you know land up in the hill for two million dollars for sure and then martini starts making
these fabulous cabs and does this for decades it makes hundreds of millions of dollars but would
we say oh my gosh xerox was stupid they could be making great cabernets why do they let somebody
else do it no we wouldn't be saying that of course we wouldn't i mean who would buy xerox cabernet
instead we'd say well look how lucky they were they sold their parking lot for two million dollars
that's awesome we should say the same thing about the mouse like yeah look they got the mouse to
apple and apple did really cool things so cognitive diversity is good diversity of tasks need not
be unless you've got enough tools to handle all of those tasks so what we've seen so far is that
there's sort of one side of ashby's law namely that we need to have as many responses as there are
disturbances hence we want diversity but ashby's law also says something else it says that we don't
need any more tools so let's return to the disturbances that could happen in our bathroom
we're not washer leaky drain none of these calls for a chainsaw none of these calls for knowledge
of chaos theory those are both tools but they're superfluous in that context so if we've got a
supply of washers a patch kit we can handle anything we have requisite variety the chainsaw
would be well irrequisite variety we just don't need it it's too much okay so we've covered portfolio
effects requisite variety we now consider a third way in which diversity promotes robustness redundancy
and overlap to see the logic of redundancy and overlap i'm going to foreshadow a future lecture
in which i discuss why entire nations succeed and fail namely that they don't allow an elite to amass
too much power and start extracting all the resources for itself to put this idea in the language of
our fathering fathers government needs checks and balances we can think of those checks and balances
as diverse tools so in the case of a federal government how do we stop a president from
becoming too powerful well we have checks we have congress we have political parties we have the courts
and we have people so here's an important piece of logic each of those checks can fail and each
works somewhat differently so here's what jenna bednar a political scientist the university of
michigan describes in her book the robust federation she says look you need a diverse set of redundant
imperfect institutions because if one fails for example the president is captured captures the
courts then we can rely on another institution perhaps the people to write the ship so if we've
got imperfect tools it's important that we have redundancy that we get some coverage well we've
been talking about people and people often fail so do the institutions that we construct
so therefore we may need more than requisite variety we may need a little bit of redundancy
and overlapping variety that way if at first we don't succeed we can try try again but it's important
not just to try try again in the same way we need to try again differently and in doing so in trying
differently we're going to be more likely to succeed thank you
