Hi, welcome back. In this course, we've been talking about the role that cognitive diversity plays, how it can make groups better at making predictions, how it can improve a team's ability to solve problems, and most recently, how diversity can enhance systemic robustness.
It seems that wherever we look, diversity has the potential to create advantages. Now, these benefits of diversity are all theoretically grounded and empirically valid.
Now, just to make sure we've been paying attention, suppose I ask you the following questions. Which is more productive? A diverse city or a homogeneous city? Which is more robust? A diverse ecosystem or a homogeneous ecosystem?
Which is more productive? A diverse group or a homogeneous group? Well, the answer to each of these questions is it depends. It depends on how much diversity you have and which types of diversity.
But let's suppose we have modest amounts of diversity so that the systems we're discussing can sort of hold together and that we have the relevant types of diversity.
Well, if those two conditions hold, then the most likely answer in each of the cases I just discussed would be that the diverse group would probably do better. Diversity is going to win out.
Now, I've already seen some pretty compelling logic as to why that's true throughout the course. We've worked through some theorems and how much of examples.
Now, in this lecture, what I want to do is I want to get a little bit more abstract. I'm going to make a very broad claim about the benefits of diversity.
Here's what's really interesting, though. This claim is not going to depend in any way on synergies between the diverse parts, which is the usual argument for diversity.
Instead, it's going to depend on diminishing returns to types. What does that mean? Diminishing returns to type means that as you have more of something, the less useful it is.
And with only that assumption, that's it. Just that assumption, we're going to see that diversity has enormous benefits.
So I want to start with an experiment that's been run by a collegeist many times. So imagine you want to test the following. You want to test the claim that diverse ecosystems are more robust.
So this is something that a collegeist puzzle over, which we think a lot about preserving species. And so we'd like to believe, or some people believe, that diverse ecosystems are more robust.
Well, how do we test that? Well, here's a test that people have done.
You want to buy a bunch of plastic kiddie pools, right? And then you go to some nursery and you get a whole bunch of different plants, water plants that you can put in your kiddie pools.
Now, in some of the pools, what you do is you put just maybe one or two species. And then other pools, maybe you put two, three, four. You put more species. You make it more diverse.
And then finally, in a few pools, you put a whole bunch. Maybe you put every species in.
The other thing you do is you classify these types of pools. You have homogeneous pools, moderately diverse pools, and highly diverse pools. And then you just let them sit.
And then you come back at the end of the summer, around the month, and you sort of say, OK, which ones have still survived? Which ecosystems are still living?
Now, these same experiments have been run in fields, in prairies, where you plant one type of prairie grass, or maybe a moderate number of types of prairie grasses, or a very diverse set of prairie grasses.
Then you come back at the end of the summer, or several summers, and you ask, which prairie is still surviving?
Now, in these experiments, which have been done many times, the diverse ecosystems are almost always more likely to survive.
And we're going to see in this lecture one big reason why. And that is, if on average, each species' contribution to the system's survivability exhibits what I call diminishing returns, then the diverse samples will be more likely to survive.
They'll do better. Now, this is going to be true, even if there's no direct benefit from diversity, no real synergies.
Now, what follows, I'm going to use a variant of the kiddie pool experiment to show how this logic works.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to talk about orchards. And I'm going to create ecosystems with different levels of diversity as a framework.
And within that framework, we'll see how the logic of diminishing returns applies.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to construct four examples. In the first three, diversity is going to play no direct role.
So the contribution of any one species to the ecosystem's survivability doesn't depend at all on the other species.
It's going to depend only on the number of its own species in the system, so there's no synergies.
Now, in the last example, I'm going to make sort of the opposite assumption that you might want to make.
I'm going to assume that diversity actually lowers survivability of the system.
In other words, I'm going to assume a negative interaction between diverse types.
And yet, even in this case, we're going to see that diversity appears to have a positive empirical effect,
which is going to explain those kiddie pool experiments and those prairie experiments.
And then in a state, what I call the diminishing returns to diversity theorem,
which is going to put all these results within one standard framework.
And at the end of the lecture, I'm going to comment on how it can be the case that even when diversity doesn't produce direct benefits,
it can still be beneficial, just like in all these examples.
Okay, so let's head out to our orchards.
What we're going to do is we're going to look at a bunch of examples.
In the first example, the effective diversity is going to appear similar to sort of an averaging effect.
But in the other examples, it's going to be clear that the diminishing returns effect is what's really driving the results.
Now, in these examples, the orchards are going to contain diverse types of fruit trees.
So I'm going to have apple, which I denote by A, banana, which I denote by B, cherry, C, and date D.
Now, in fact, dates and bananas officially grow on palms, right?
Though in common usage, we say banana tree and we say date palm.
Here, I'm just going to say both of them are trees.
So I'm going to refer to an orchard with three trees as an ecosystem.
So I'm going to create a whole bunch of ecosystems, each of which has three trees.
Now, a little math is going to show that there's 20 possible ecosystems of this sort.
And I can classify these as diverse, moderate, and homogeneous.
So let me show you what the diverse ecosystems look like.
They're going to have three trees, and each of the three trees will differ.
So the first one has A, B, C, and apple, banana, and a cherry.
The second has an apple, banana, and a date, and so on.
So these are the diverse ecosystems.
There's three trees, and each one is of a different type.
These are the moderate ecosystems.
Each one, again, has three trees.
So this one has an A and two Bs.
But notice here that two of them are the same.
So there's two Bs and one A.
If I look at any one of these ecosystems, I'm going to see two trees that are the same type.
So here's B, C, C. I've got two cherry trees and one banana tree.
And then finally, what I can do is I can look at the homogeneous ecosystems.
And these ecosystems have three trees, but they're all the same type.
So these are Bs, and these are all these.
Now, in each of the examples that follow,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to compare these three types of ecosystems.
I'm going to ask, on average, how well do they do?
How likely are they to survive?
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to compare the diverse to the moderate to the homogeneous.
So in this first example, here's what I will assume.
I'm going to assume that any ecosystem that has an apple tree survives with certainty.
And any ecosystem that doesn't have an apple tree is going to die with certainty.
Then what I want to do is calculate the average robustness level for each class.
That's going to be the likelihood that it survives.
Now, what I need to do is only calculate the percentage of ecosystems that have an apple tree,
because those are the only ones that do survive.
So let's think through it.
Of the four diverse ecosystems, three of them contain an apple tree.
So that means the average probability of survival, the average robustness level, is going to be 75%.
Well, now let's look at the moderate ecosystems.
Six of those contain apple trees, because each has only two types of trees.
So that means on average, they're going to have a survival probability of only 50%.
So the diverse are more likely to survive than the moderate.
Now last, let's look at the homogeneous ecosystems.
There's only one of those four that has an apple tree, and it has three of them.
So therefore, the average probability that those survive is only 25%.
Okay, so let's wrap this up then.
What we get is the diverse ecosystems have 75% chance of surviving,
the moderate have a 50% chance, and the homogeneous have a 25% chance.
So as the table shows, the diverse ecosystems have the highest average probability of survival.
Yet notice diversity per se doesn't do anything.
It's not driving the survivability.
Having an apple tree does.
So why does diversity prove beneficial here?
Diversity proves beneficial because the more diverse ecosystems are more likely to contain an apple tree.
That's the single species that makes the ecosystem robust.
So it's not diversity that does it, it's having apple trees that does it.
Let's do a second example.
So in the second example, survivability is again only going to depend on apple trees.
But now I'm going to add two more assumptions.
First, I'm going to assume that if you have more apple trees in an ecosystem,
then the ecosystem is more likely to survive.
Second, I'm going to assume that the benefits of adding additional apple trees
is decreasing in the number of apple trees.
So this is going to be that idea of diminishing returns.
So the first apple tree is going to increase survivability more than the second,
and the second apple tree is going to increase survivability more than the third.
So for the purposes of this example, here's what I'm going to assume.
I'm going to let the probability of survival for an ecosystem with one apple tree be 60%,
with two apple trees be 90%, and with three apple trees be 100%.
So these numerical values are going to capture the core assumptions.
First, only apple trees matter.
Second, more apple trees are better.
And finally, the added benefit of that last apple tree decreases in the number of apple trees that you've got.
So let's look at this as follows.
What we've got is we've got some diverse ecosystems, right?
ABC, ABD, ACD, and BCD.
Now if we look at these, what we notice is that three of them have one apple tree.
And that means if you have one apple tree, you've got a 60% chance of surviving.
So three of the four have a 60% chance.
Now if we look at the moderate ecosystems, what we've got is we notice that some of them have one apple tree.
So here we have three of them with one apple tree.
So they're also going to have a 60% chance of surviving.
But then there's three of them that have two apple trees, and those are going to have a 90% chance of surviving.
But the rest of them, CDD, CCD, they have no apple trees, so they're not going to survive at all.
And then finally, if I look at the homogeneous cases, three of them, BBB, CCC, and DDD, have no apple trees.
So none of them are going to survive, right?
But this last one has three apple trees, and so it has a survivability of 100%.
So if we look at this, what we're going to see is that the diverse ecosystems should have a much higher probability of surviving, right?
Because of the fact that they are more likely to contain a single apple tree.
Okay, so therefore, if we think about it, the average probability of survival of the diverse ecosystems is going to be 45%.
Now how do I get that? Well, because there's three of them that have a 60% chance of surviving, and one of them has no chance.
So if I divide that by four, I get 45%.
Now if I look at the 12 moderate ecosystems, exactly half contain apple trees.
Three contain two, and three contain one.
So if we just do some straightforward math, we're going to get an average probability of survival of 37.5%.
And then last, if we look at the homogeneous ecosystems, one of them contains an apple tree, and it has three, so it's going to survive for sure.
But it's the only one of the four that has any, so the average survivability is only going to be 25%.
So if we put this all together, what do we see?
The diverse ecosystems have a 45% chance, the moderate have a 37.5% chance, and the homogeneous have only a 25% chance.
So once again, on average, the diverse ecosystems perform best.
Now notice this result obtains even though the diverse ecosystems do not have, on average, more apple trees, right?
And as before, the diverse ecosystems are more likely to contain just one apple tree.
So what's going on here is because the ecosystems are diverse, they're more likely to have a single apple tree.
And because the first apple tree contributes more to performance than the second or the third, it's not the averaging that's driving the result.
It's the diminishing returns that drive the result.
So up to this point to keep things simple, I've assumed that only apple trees contribute to survivability.
In the third example, I'm going to make two assumptions.
First, I'm going to assume that all four types of trees contribute to survivability.
And then second, just like I did in example two, I'm going to assume the contribution of an additional tree of the same type decreases the amount of survivability it contributes.
So for example, for each type of tree, what I'm going to assume is a different contribution to survivability for each additional tree, and those amounts are going to fall off.
Now I can write those in something I'm going to call a survivability contribution table.
Let me show you how I'm going to do that.
So what I've got now is I've got listed in these rows here the four types of trees, apple, banana, cherry, and date.
And then in the columns across here, I've got tree number one, tree number two, and tree number three.
What this is telling us is it's telling us the contributions of the first tree, the second tree, and the third tree to survivability.
So for example, when I look at this 50 here for the apple tree, this is the first apple tree contributes 50.
And when I see this 20 here, that says the second apple tree contributes 20.
Similarly for bananas, the first banana tree contributes 30 and the second banana tree contributes 20.
So let's do some examples.
Let's suppose first I'm looking at this ecosystem, ABC.
Well, it has one apple tree, which is going to contribute 50.
It has one banana tree, which is therefore the first banana tree, so that's going to contribute 30, and one cherry tree, which is going to contribute 20.
So if I add all those up, I'm going to get there's 100% chance of survivability for the ecosystem ABC.
Let's look next at BBB.
Well, the first banana tree contributes 30.
The second banana tree contributes less, which is 20.
And then the third banana tree contributes even less, which is 10.
So when I add those up, I get 60.
So what we see is that ABC is more likely to survive than BBB.
And notice also when I did ABC, I was looking down the column, but when I did BBB, I was looking across the row.
All right, last, let's look at BBC.
So I've got a banana, a banana, and a cherry.
So the first banana contributes 30.
The second banana contributes 20.
And then I have my first cherry tree which contributes 20.
So what I get here is a total of 70.
So what I see in this case is I saw before is that the diverse ecosystem has the highest survivability, the moderate has the next highest survivability,
and the homogeneous system has the least survivability.
Now, the thing to notice here is that what's going on is that when I create a diverse ecosystem, I'm drawing only tree ones.
But when I take a homogeneous ecosystem, what I'm doing is I'm drawing tree ones, tree twos, and tree threes,
because of this diminishing returns as I move across the columns, I'm getting less contribution to survivability.
That's what's driving the result.
Okay, so a moment's reflection reveals this.
The moderate ecosystems must be less likely to survive than the diverse ones.
And the reason why is this, because those diverse ecosystems are only taking numbers from the first column, right?
And so therefore they're much more likely to survive than the homogeneous ecosystems, which are taking numbers from all three columns.
And remember that last tree, that last column, tree number three, because of diminishing returns, has lower numbers.
Okay, now remember, to explicitly figure all this out, we've got to go through and add up all possible situations.
So if we do those explicit calculations, we're going to get the following average survivability values.
Now, more important than the actual numbers here is understanding that the diverse ecosystems are drawing from the first columns
and the homogeneous are drawing from the other columns as well, right?
And that those other columns have lower values.
But here's what the numbers are.
So if I take the four diverse ecosystems, what I'm going to see is their average survivability is 90%.
If I then take those 12 moderate ecosystems, so what I'm going to do is I'm going to be taking two entries in column one, tree one,
and one from column two, I'll get an average of 77.5%.
And then finally, if I take the homogeneous ecosystems, I'm going to take a tree one, a tree two, a tree three.
It's going to fall to 57.5%.
So what we see here is that as the ecosystems become more diverse, they have a higher survivability.
Now, these three examples that I've done all fit within a general class of performance functions.
And it can be shown that if I take any example within that class, diversity is going to improve performance.
Now, by that I mean this.
It's not that diversity is actually driving performance.
But what I mean is if I compare the diverse ecosystems to the moderate, to the homogeneous, the diverse will do better.
Now, the performance here doesn't have to be survivability of an ecosystem.
It could be productivity of the economy.
It could be the number of patents introduced by a research laboratory.
It could be the number of problems solved.
It could be anything.
As long as I'm putting these parts, and they satisfy this assumption.
Now, to state the theorem, I have to make those assumptions formal.
I have to make formal what I meant by diminishing returns.
So here's what I mean by diminishing returns.
The contribution to performance, and performance here could be survivability, problem-solving, anything like that.
The contribution to performance of an additional entity of a type strictly decreases in the number of at least one type
and does not increase for any of the other types.
So what this means is for one of the types, I've got sort of this diminishing returns.
The second assumption, this, and this is the surprising one.
Absence of interactions.
This is the assumption.
Absence of interactions.
It says total performance equals the sum of the contributions across the types.
So there's no synergies.
Nothing's, you know, amazing is happening.
It's just sort of additive like we talked about before.
So the first assumption, the diminishing returns assumption, what does that mean?
Well, that implies that those values in that marginal contribution table that I make don't increase along any row.
So remember, we saw things fall off from like 50 to 30 to 20.
Those things have to decrease.
So that clearly hold in our last example, right, because we saw that table.
But if we think about our first two examples, it does as well, right?
Because in those examples, for all but the apple trees, every single entry in that table would have been zero.
So the contribution to performance doesn't increase for those, it just stays flat.
So the only case that matters is the apple trees.
Well, let's think about the first example.
The first apple tree gave you a contribution of 100, and the next one gave you zero, and the next one gave you zero.
In example one.
So that clearly is falling off.
In the second example, the first apple tree gave you 60.
The next apple tree gave you 30, except a total of 90.
And the third one gave you 10 for a total of 100.
So again, we have that falling off.
So in all three of our examples, diminishing returns holds.
Now, when you make any assumption, so if you're a theorist like I, and you make any assumption, it's natural to ask,
okay, does this hold in the real world?
So let's focus first on this diminishing returns.
And let's take groups of people solving a problem.
Now, what would type be here?
So I got people solving a problem.
What would type be?
Well, maybe type could represent field of training.
So, you know, whether you're trained as an engineer, whether you're trained in marketing, communications, whatever.
The standard assumption from economics is that the first engineer is more valuable than the second,
and the second is more valuable than the third, and so on.
So economists have not only looked at this, but they've measured it,
and they've found that this is something that is true.
You have diminishing returns of any type of labor.
Now, the same would probably be true for adding mathematicians,
trying to solve some sort of mathematical problem.
The first mathematician might be quite helpful, but the tenth less so.
What about ecosystems?
Now, ecosystems are extremely different than people working on problems.
When an ecosystem, you have to believe each additional member of a species,
might contribute sort of less to ecosystem efficiency than the one before it.
Now, how do you measure ecosystem efficiency?
Well, sometimes you do something called energy transfer.
That's how efficiently is the energy from the sun being converted into sort of plant and animal energy.
Now, at some point that when you think about these sort of diminishing returns in an ecosystem,
the contribution could become negative.
But you know what? That's okay.
Just think of our assumption. It just said it falls off.
It didn't preclude negative contributions.
Last thing I want to think about, diminishing returns in terms of utility.
So think about our happiness.
Diminishing returns is actually the standard assumption we think about human happiness.
So here's an example I'd like to give.
The first scoop of ice cream is great.
And we typically assume the first scoop is really much more important to us
than sort of the second scoop.
And the second is more important than the third, and the third more important than the fourth.
In fact, ice cream provides sort of an extreme example,
because by the time we get to like six or seven scoops, we're just saying enough.
But we typically assume the same holds for buying automobiles, shirts, suits, you know,
skis, skateboards.
More is better, but increasingly less so.
Once you own seven skateboards, the eighth just isn't worth as much.
Okay. So the assumption that system level performance equals the sum of types of performances,
this sort of idea that things are insulated from one another, right?
This absence of interactions.
That's probably less realistic.
In almost all the interesting cases that we've been considering in this classes,
there's interactions between these diverse types, and they influence performance.
And that's especially true, right, in what we call complex systems,
where there's interdependencies between the entities.
Nevertheless, the reason we assume the absence of interactions is it's a nice benchmark.
Because, look, what could happen?
In some cases, the interactions could improve performance.
In other cases, they could hinder performance.
So what the theorem tells us is, if we ignore those,
we're going to see that there's a general bias toward diversity appearing beneficial
without synergies.
Now, if there were synergies, it's even going to be better.
Diversity is even going to do better.
Now, if there's not synergies, then it could still be the case.
If there's negative interactions, the diversity makes you better off.
Okay. So now that we've got all that in place,
I'm going to state something I call the diminishing returns to diversity theorem.
So let's assume two things.
Let's assume diminishing returns and absence of interactions.
Well, then the following is true.
Collections with more distinct types will have, on average, higher performance.
Let me say that again.
So I'm just going to assume diminishing returns, absence of interactions.
Now, I'm going to take two collections of the same size.
This one has more types than this one, more distinct types.
It's more diverse.
Well, then, on average, this one will do better than this one.
So more diversity, higher performance without synergies.
So that's sort of amazing.
Okay. This theorem says, so long as the types satisfy diminishing returns
and there's no interactions between the types,
then more diversity implies better performance.
Stop for a second.
Let's go back to the kiddie pool experiment, the prairie experiment.
Now, we might think, oh, boy, we need these diverse ecosystems.
There's all these synergies between the plants.
That could be true.
But even if there aren't any synergies,
as long as sort of the first, you know, water plant has more value than the second
and has more value than the third,
then as there's diminishing returns,
we're going to see the diverse ones do better.
Or alternatively, it could be that there's one particular plant
that fixes maybe the amount of nitrogen or something else in the water
that allows the entire ecosystem to perform well.
That, too, would satisfy this diminishing returns
and we'd see the diverse ones do better,
not because diversity does anything,
just because the diverse ones are more likely to have the important plant.
Now, if we think about complex systems,
like ecosystems or economies or political systems,
there's all sorts of interactions between diverse types.
And as I mentioned, some of those improve outcomes and some of them don't.
I want to be clear here.
Interactions aren't the same thing as nonlinearities,
because if I've got diminishing returns or decreasing returns,
that's nonlinear, right?
It falls off.
But that doesn't mean there's interactions.
Interaction means that one type interacts in some way with another type.
Now, if those interactions are positive,
then the diverse collections are going to do even better.
So we don't have to consider that case.
So if there are synergies, look, diverse ecosystems, economies, groups,
they're just going to do better.
So let's consider the case where they're not beneficial.
And this is sometimes the case in social systems,
because they can create conflict.
It can also be the case in ecosystems with two species competing.
Now, in the last example, what I want to do is
I want to include some cost to diversity
and show that even if I've got cost to diversity,
it can still be the case that the diverse groups do better.
So here's this last example.
What I'm going to assume is that each pair of types
produces a negative interaction that hinders performance.
So if I have an A and a B,
that's going to give me a negative interaction.
Yet I can show you that as long as that isn't too large,
it's still going to be beneficial.
Now, to keep this simple,
I'm just going to basically copy example three.
So I'm going to make the same assumptions I made in example three.
Except for now, I'm going to assume that for each pair of distinct types,
in this ecosystem, the survivability drops by X percent.
So diversity is harmful.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to assume
that everything is the same as example three,
but now if there's three types in an ecosystem,
that's going to create three pair-wise negative interactions,
which will hurt the survivability of the system.
So let's look at first the diverse ecosystems.
I've got A, B, and C.
So given this assumption of negative interaction between pairs of types,
if I've got diverse ecosystems,
let's think of how many diverse pairs I've got.
I've got an A and a B, I've got an A and a C,
and I've got a B and a C.
So that means there's three of them.
So that means these ecosystems are going to be decreased by three times X.
Now, if I take a moderate ecosystem,
I've only got two types, A and a C.
So that means there's only one pair-wise negative interaction.
So that means these are going to fall by X.
But if I look at the homogeneous ecosystems,
everything's the same type, A, A, A, B, B, C, C, C, and so on.
So there's going to be no effect there.
So what I can do is I can now take this three X, X, and zero,
and add that to the probabilities of survival from my previous example.
So remember before, what I had was the diverse ecosystems
had a 90% chance of surviving.
Well, now what I want to do is I just want to subtract off three X
because this is from the negative interaction.
For the moderate, I'm going to subtract off X,
and for the homogeneous, I don't do anything.
That stays the same.
Now, what I could do is I could do a quick calculation and say,
well, when would it be the case that the diverse are still better than the moderate?
Well, that would just require 90 minus three X to be bigger than 77.5 minus X.
Now, if we do the math on that, we'll see as long as X is less than 6.25%,
the diverse ecosystems will be more robust.
And a similar calculation shows that X could be 11%
and the diverse would still be better than the homogeneous.
So this example drives some of the general point.
Even with substantial negative interaction effects,
diminishing returns will imply that diverse collections perform better.
So a quick review is probably helpful at this point.
We've seen decreasing contributions from types
implying diverse collections perform best on average.
And this occurred without any explicit benefits to diversity, any synergies.
We've also seen that diverse collections can perform best on average
even when diversity creates harmful interactions.
Hence, the benefits to diversity are almost inescapable.
Let me say that again.
If there's no negative interactions at all, the diverse ones will do better
as long as there's diminishing returns.
Even if there are negative interactions, the diverse ones can still do better.
So these results that I've described don't imply that when we're confronted
with a novel situation, we should always choose diverse collections
because we could have enough information to know what drives performance.
And if we know what drives performance, then we should choose the collection
on the basis of that information.
So think back to our second example.
The best orchard was homogeneous. It only contained apple trees.
If we knew that, then we should choose the homogeneous apple trees.
However, we may not know our priority, which one is going to work best.
And if we don't know, if we are completely uncertain about what's going to happen
and we only get one try, then we should choose a diverse collection.
Note this doesn't mean diversity is always better,
only that if we're not sure what we're doing, we should err towards greater diversity
because on average, diversity will be better.
Now, before interpreting these results any further, a caveat is in order.
In this lecture, I was calculating average values.
That's an unsophisticated statistical test that confounds the benefits
from diversity and returns to scale.
So if I did these experiments, it would look like the diverse ones are doing better
even though there's no synergy.
Now, if I had more data, I could construct a really sophisticated statistical test.
And I could see that, in fact, what's driving this is diminishing returns to scale
and not necessarily explicit benefits or cost to diversity.
So if I used proper statistics, right, then I could, if I did it the right way,
find in fact that there were no benefits to diversity
and that's because there were no synergies.
But if I did that, would that imply that diversity doesn't improve performance?
No, it wouldn't, right, quite the opposite.
Diversity does improve performance even without the synergies
and that's the main point of the lecture.
Averaging and diminishing returns to type generate a benefit to diversity
even without synergies.
And that's without any of the synergies that we saw in problem solving
even though we know those exist.
Now, the reason I put this lecture in is to make a more general point.
In order for diversity to not be beneficial,
we need negative interactions like we saw in the last example
and those have to be big.
So these two simple cases, right, that we considered, right,
this averaging idea and then this diminishing return
go a long way toward explaining why diversity produces so much value.
They show that so long as the interactions between diverse type
don't create these huge negative interactive effects,
then diverse collections should perform better
than either moderate or homogeneous collections.
Now, one last point.
Given that systems tend to self-assemble through selection, right,
this is to have ecosystems, it's to have firms,
we might expect a tendency toward more synergistic interactions
than antagonistic ones.
So therefore, we might expect diversity to actually create these synergies.
In fact, that's the thesis put forth by Robert Wright
in his book Non-Zero, The Logic of Human Destiny.
Wright distinguishes between zero-sum games
in which there's a winner and a loser
and positive-sum games in which there's synergies.
Now, what Wright argues, which is really fascinating,
is that the course of human history has been to select for non-zero interactions.
Now, a lot of jargon on here, but the logic's really simple.
Imagine two populations.
One plays a zero-sum game, so people are just dividing stuff up,
and the other one's playing a positive-sum game,
which produces these synergies.
Well, which one's going to do better?
Clearly, the latter one, with the synergies.
Hence, the logic of human destiny
will be to accumulate more and more positive-sum games, right,
what Wright calls non-zero interactions.
Well, what are examples?
Well, everything from arms negotiation to trade,
remember our comparative advantage to creating family units,
to creating cultural identities, even our genes.
In each of these cases, the interactions are positive-sum.
So let's combine Wright's insight with what we learned in this lecture.
In this lecture, we've learned that there are some pretty mild assumptions
diversa collection should do better.
Wright says over time, we should seek out these synergies.
When we add synergies to our model that gives benefits to diversity anyway,
then what we're going to see is sort of selection bias
in favor of even more and more diversity.
So here's how to sum it all up.
On average, diverse populations should be better, more robust,
more productive, and so on, right, on average.
However, we're not going to get the average.
And the logic of human destiny introduces a bias
towards non-zero interactions, towards synergies.
So that's going to mean that the best groups will tend to be diverse.
So therefore, not only are there benefits to diversity there,
they're sort of inescapable.
And the march of history is going to take us directly toward them.
Unless, of course, we choose not to be diverse.
And what can happen then can be rather dire.
We can collapse.
And that's a possibility that we're going to consider in the next lecture.
Thank you.
