Hi. Welcome back. In this lecture I want to stop the train for a second. I want to take
some time to reflect. We've been building up a deep logical understanding of the importance
of thinking differently. We see how this logic applies at the individual level, how you benefit
individually from being able to solve problems by looking through multiple perspectives and
from building your own sort of diverse toolkit. We've also seen how it applies at the level
of teams and groups. Teams of cognitive diverse people can produce more ideas, find better
solutions, make fewer mistakes, and make better forecasts for the future than individuals or
homogeneous groups. And it also applies at the societal level. The most productive, innovative,
and interesting societies are diverse. And we saw this especially in the last lecture,
where we saw that some rather mild assumptions that on average, diverse communities are going
to do better than more homogeneous ones. So the reason I want to stop the narrative for a
moment is to reflect on how important these insights are. If we lack diversity, then we're
going to lack the capacity to innovate and we're not going to grow. We're not going to have the
ability to recognize the need for change and we're not going to be able to adapt to see what
change is necessary. So these are two other lessons that without diversity we're going to become
stagnant and become vulnerable to collapse. Those also follow from the logic and the models
that we've covered in these lectures. So I've been focusing primarily on how diversity gives
us good outcomes. The reason I'm stopping, I want to get the flip side, that if we don't
have diversity, then we might likely get bad outcomes. And that's what I want to cover
in this lecture. The happy topics of stagnation and collapse and how diversity contributes
to each one. So this lesson that we need diversity echoes throughout human history. Because if
we look at societies that collapse, whether we consider the Romans, the Mayans, the Easter
Islanders, or the member states of the former Soviet Union, one of the lessons we learn
from each of those cases is that societies that lack sufficient diversity fail. Now once
I was visiting the University of Rochester, visiting a friend, and to the left of the
West entrance at the University Library, which is called the Rush Rees Library, there's
a quote from John Rothwell Slater, who is a much beloved English professor who taught
at Rochester over 100 years ago. And what Slater writes on this left entrance is, here
is the history of human ignorance, error, superstition, folly, war and waste recorded
by human intelligence for the admonition of wiser ages still to come. So in this lecture,
what we're going to do is we're going to revisit some of that folly and we'll see
how much of it can be chalked up to, well, a lack of diverse thinking.
So we're talking about failure, collapse. So let's begin with Jared Diamond's book
that has that very title, Collapse, how societies choose, how they choose to fail or succeed.
And in this book, which sold millions of copies, Diamond tells the stories of four
collapsed civilizations, the Easter Islanders, who left nearly 1,000 carved stone heads.
These are called Moai, and they ranged in size from four feet all the way up to 72 feet.
He next looks at the Anasazi, who lived in the American Southwest, and then the Mayans
from Central America, and then finally a settlement in Greenland that he calls Vinland, and he
calls the people who lives there the Vinlanders. Now what Diamond does in this sort of rich,
this rich descriptive account, a historical account of these failed civilizations, he
puts them all within a general theoretical framework. And within this framework, what
he does is he highlights five reasons that these societies failed. So let's go through
the first reason, over-harvesting of renewable resources. So the Vinlanders grazed cattle
on what was marginal land, and the Eastern Islanders cut down their entire forest. So
what we learned, for example, in the books, is that the Vinlanders, there was very thick
sod, and they carved it up and they put it on the roofs for their houses, and they grazed
their cattle there. What they didn't realize is that it had taken hundreds of years for
that sod to build up, and as they ate it away, so went that resource, and they collapsed.
Second, climate change. Now I've got to make a distinction between weather, which means
like a wet April or a dry August, and climate. What Diamond means is climate, changes in
climate. So the Vinlanders suffered through, it was really a mini ice age, and the Mayans
and the Anasazi, well they actually, if you look at tree ring data, they suffered three
years of drought. So it wasn't just like a bad wet summer or something, it was actually
climactic changes. Third, fewer friends. So what Diamond here means is just trading partners.
Earlier in this course we saw how by trade, everyone could be made better off. Well, because
they lacked friends, they had fewer friends over time, they couldn't tap into this diverse
expertise, and they couldn't sort of improve their lot. So what happened with the Vinlanders,
for instance, is demand for ivory fell. So they were shivering ivory out and getting
a whole bunch of stuff in. And once the Vinlanders had nothing to trade with people from Scandinavia,
their standard of living fell through the floor. So in addition to having fewer friends, another
thing that's not good to have is more enemies, because wars take resources. So if you got
a society that's struggling to make do on marginal land, any demand on labor, such as
putting men out to fight a war, is going to contribute to collapse. So that's the flip
side of the fewer friends. And finally, I want to focus on this, what Diamond calls cultural
and institutional failures. So here, among all the stories in the book, the most compelling
example is that of the Norse, they had living in Vinland. They continued to eat these meat-heavy
diets, even as the topsoil was shrinking away. And when you look at the remains of the Vinlanders,
what it suggests is in the final winter, they were slaughtering just baby calves for food.
Well, here's what's on, and here's where the cultural failure comes in. All the while,
they're surrounded by an ocean, that if it wasn't teeming with fish, it certainly had
enough fish for them to eat. So what Diamond argues is that the Norse were culturally blind.
They were stuck in their ways. So they continued their old way of life, even though it wasn't
supportable. So they weren't diverse. Now, there's a phrase that business people like
to toss about, and that's adapt or die, or innovate or die. If you're a society living
on marginal land, that's really good advice. Innovate or die.
Let's think back to our lecture on Fisher's fundamental theorem. Remember, the rate of
adaptation scales with the amount of variation. Well, adaptation requires two mechanisms.
What were those? One, you have to promote diversity of variation. Second, you've got
to select the better performance among those variants, right? So you've got to try a whole
bunch of stuff and select the one that works best. Well, if you have a society like the
Norse of Vinland or the Mayans who have a very strong culture, it's not going to allow
for much variation. Without variation, you don't have any experiments from which you
can select the best one, and the society can't adapt. And remember, if you can't adapt,
you die. Now, there are other societies that Diamond
covers in his book that do adapt and do survive. One of them is the Tacopians. Now, the Tacopians
live on a small island in the southwestern Pacific Ocean. Around 500 years ago, they
realized that they were sort of using up all their land. And so what they did is they slaughtered
all of their pigs. Now, they did this to preserve their ecosystem. Now, they also decided to
enact some strict reproductive laws that basically put a cap on the total population of their
island to around 1200 people. If they get more than a number, literally they ship people
off the island. These two actions enabled them to survive while the Easter Islanders
did not. Again, adapt, don't die. That's what they learned.
So as we learn from Fisher's theorem, more variation allows for greater adaptation. But
behavioral variation, in this case, is what we're talking about. And that's what's going
to enable adaptation to allow whole societies to survive. So even more important, maybe
than the variation, is lack of a predictive model. Because if I don't have any predictive
model diversity, you can actually have the illusion that the behavioral diversity isn't
necessary. Let's think back to our diversity prediction theorem. If everybody thinks the
same way, there's only two possibilities. Either they're all correct or they're all
wrong. So in these societies that Diamond looks at, while all the resources are being
depleted, while the climate was changing, nobody stood up on Easter Island and to borrow a
phrase from the Lorax, the Dr. Seuss character, spoke for the trees. No one noticed that
the forest was slowly and slowly getting eaten away. Now, had the society been more diverse
than the ideas the members carried around in their heads, they'd have had a much better
chance of survival. So it's homogeneity of thought that led them to collapse.
Now, Diamond's collapse has all involved populations living on marginal land. And cultural blinders
led to overextraction, which produced failure. So his first reason, overextraction, and his
second reason, his last reason, the sort of cultural institutional failure, sort of combined
to create problems. But overextraction isn't the sole cause. The question of how and why
nations fail, which is a broader question, has received a lot of attention from historians,
economists, political scientists, and anthropologists. So what I want to do for a second is take
an economic perspective and ask, why is it the case that nations fail economically? Why
does some succeed and why does some fail? So here's what I want to start. I want to start
with Joseph Schumpeter. Schumpeter was an Austrian economist, and he described this
process that he called creative destruction. And what he went here is that economies that
are thriving are constantly churning. So new technologies are replacing the old. Oxen
replaced people. Tractors replaced oxen. And then GIS guided combines replaced tractors.
So this idea that innovation drives growth makes a lot of sense. And societies that don't
enable and permit new technologies to enter. Societies that don't encourage this creative
destruction aren't going to keep paced. That's sort of the crude version of Schumpeter's
story. Now I want to add here that creative destruction described by Schumpeter works
in spurts. So when a new technology emerges, whether it's mechanical production, the train,
the car, the computer, the internet, it creates a playground for the mind. And new inventions
and new technologies, almost by definition, are unfinished and unrefined. So when you
think of things like early cars or trains and computers, they're pretty primitive.
But once they're there, large numbers of people that have diverse ways of thinking, diverse
perspective, diverse heuristics, they can tinker, they can experiment in all the ways
we've talked about in this course. Now the economist Brian Arthur details a lot of this
in his wonderful book that's called The Nature of Technology. Arthur asked us to think of
specific technologies, almost like species, and think of them as evolving or adapting
over time. And then we can think back of a body of technology in a particular area,
say the computer industry or kinesiology, as a local ecosystem with lots and lots of
interacting species. And so you can think of all the technical knowledge we've got almost
as like the biosphere in a way. So Arthur's talking in terms of analogy, but it's going
to delight people who like the details. Because what he does is he provides elaborate accounts
of how new innovations within an industry consist of recombination of existing parts,
just like we saw in Weitzman's Model of Growth, and how, like an ecosystem creating new species,
ecosystems of ideas also create new products. So for example, global positioning systems
that we use to navigate our cars and to sometimes find ourselves when walking around a strange
city, what are those consist of? Well, they're satellites, atomic clocks, radio transmitters,
receivers, and so on. All stuff that already existed. So Arthur's big idea is that when
someone sees a problem, right, you see a problem out there. We talked about this, the problem
of problems. Sometimes a solution already exists. So if I'm hungry, my kitchen's full of solutions.
Other times, though, a solution won't exist. So someone goes about trying to find one and
the way they do that is often through recombination. Now, once we have Arthur's ecosystem metaphor
in mind, we realize that progress entails replacing old technologies with new ones.
And we also realize, just like we did from Weitzman's Model, as we have more and more
parts on the table, then we have more things to recombine, which implies that the rate
at which new technologies supply old ones should probably increase over time. And that's true.
So thus, at the core of creative destruction lies this idea of diverse recombinations,
which we already studied. Okay, so now we've got this understanding of how technological
progress unfolds. And what Schumpeter did is he supported his theory with empirical examples.
And that's really how we did economics 100 years ago. But economics has changed. So economists
don't rely on just anecdotes anymore and sort of broad theories. When possible, what we
do is we construct formal models. And within these formal models, we sort of play out our
theoretical arguments. And then we do our level best to test those models with empirical
data. Now, these formal models have a lot of advantages. And what they most importantly
what they do is help us chase through the logic to see what follows from what, and to
see what conditions must hold for a result to hold. So remember with our diversity-traumasability
theorem, we had to make certain assumptions for that to be true. So for example, it's
relatively easy to claim that lowering taxes will increase government revenues. But to demonstrate
that logic with a formal model requires making some rather strong assumptions. Now that doesn't
mean it is impossible that a tax cut could raise revenues, only that some rather strong
assumptions would have to be satisfied. Okay, so let's get back to our story. One of the
more important economic models of the past half century was developed by a man named
Robert Solow, who won a Nobel Prize. Now for those who know the Solow growth model,
it may seem sort of far afield for what we're doing, talking about diversity and innovation.
But just, you know, withhold judgment for a minute. First of all, I wanted to present
the model. It's pretty simple. So suppose that each combination of physical capital and
human labor produces outputs. So you've got people and machines. So physical capital,
right, is the machines and that sort of things. And it, with people, is going to produce outputs.
Now these outputs can be consumed, that's one option, or they can be reinvested as more
physical capital. So people can make machines to make bread, or they can make bread making
machines. That's literally the complete model, almost. The economy has outputs, these outputs
can be consumed, or they can be used to make more machines. Now this gives two more assumptions.
First assumption is, is that physical capital depreciates. Machines break down, they rust,
they need repairs. Second assumption is what we only talked about in the last lecture,
is the returns to more physical capital are increasing at a diminishing rate. So we've
got diminishing returns, decreasing returns, just like last lecture. Now both of these
assumptions, they hold up to empirical checks, right. Machines do wear out, and in addition,
though machines do allow people to be more productive, doubling the spending on machines
typically doesn't double out, but it sort of falls off. So here's an important implication
of the solo model. If we don't have population growth, or technological change, so that would
be Shumpeter's creative destruction, new technologies, economic growth is going to stop. Early on
when physical capital is low, if we don't have any machines, the economy is going to
grow, and it's going to grow pretty fast. However at some point, as the amount of physical
capital grows larger, two factors combine to limit growth. First, diminishing returns
to more capital means the increase in output is going to fall off. Second, the more capital,
the more capital depreciates. And if capital depreciates at a linear rate, this means that
eventually that's going to swamp the increase in output. What it implies specifically is
that enormous amounts of output are going to be dedicated to just maintaining the status
quo level of capital. Let me show you how. So let's suppose on this axis I have capital.
And what I want to think about is how does output, which I'll put on this axis, vary
with capital? Well we're going to assume that there's diminishing returns. So it starts
out, but then it slowly falls off. So you get less and less return output for more capital.
But then what I'm going to do is I'm going to say, what about depreciation? Well depreciation
is linear. Now why is it linear? Because what we're assuming is that like some fixed
percentage, 5% or 10% of our capital wears out. So if I look at depreciation, which I'll
put in green, that's going to be a straight line. Well at some point, when our capital
level gets high, like this level right here, depreciation is going to lie above output.
And so eventually when you get to that point, the economy is going to stagnate because what
happened is all of our excess production is going into paying off the machines that are
wearing out. So we can think of this as a technological bliss point. If we've got an
existing set of technologies, we can't sustain perpetual growth because at some point all
the money we're saving, all the stuff we're not consuming that we're saving to put into
new machines is just going into replacing old machines. And so we're going to be stuck
at this bliss point forever. So in other words, what the solo model tells us is that in broad
strokes, Schumpeter had it right. Continued growth requires innovation. We can't just
keep pumping money into existing technologies and expect continued growth. Some very simple
graphs in mathematics shown by solo show that that's impossible. And so this very simple
model does a nice job of explaining things like the rise and fall of the former Soviet
Union. So from 1920 to 1980, the Soviet Union exhibited pretty good growth. And by some
accounts, its growth actually exceeded that of the United States. And then suddenly, or
so it seems, the Soviet Union dissolved. We can play this out in the solo growth model.
Early on, the Soviet Union had lots of labor, but very little physical capital. So using
a central planning approach, they could funnel all their output into physical capital. So
this is going to give you fantastic growth because you're just pouring output into capital.
Eventually, and that's going to take a long time, you're going to reach that technological
bliss point. And at that point, continued growth is going to require innovation. But
centrally planned systems tend not to create incentives for creative destruction, and they're
also less likely to accept novel technologies that disrupt the status quo. And as a result,
they're just going to get to that bliss point, and then growth is going to stop. Now if we
add to this the fact that centrally planned systems have a lot of corruption, or historically
they have, as you mix in more and more of that corruption and distorted incentives, then
the technological bliss point no longer becomes attainable, and production even falls off
from that. So there's an amazing new book out called Why Nations Fail by Dronas Emo
and Economist, and James Robinson, a political scientist. And they talk in detail about the
collapse of the Soviet Union. They also tell the stories of the Mayans, like Diamond, and
the Romans. And these three histories that talked about by Asimov and Robinson share
similar features. So let's look at the Romans. Now we think of the Romans as great engineers,
and in fact they were. So I've walked down streets and through tunnels built by Roman
engineers nearly 2,000 years ago. That's great, right? I mean some of my roads in Michigan
where I live seem like they get rebuilt every five years. Now once the republic fell, the
empire ceased to be inclusive. So think about the history of Rome, we have this republic,
and that falls. Now Rome becomes less inclusive. And the masses are given things like food
and entertainment, but they weren't given opportunity to apply new diverse ideas. Sort
of cut off this inflow of diversity. And they didn't have much incentive to spend much time
thinking up new stuff anyway, either, right? So as evidence of this, Asimov and Robinson
point to the relatively stagnant rates of innovation following the fall of the republic.
For example, the Romans didn't develop things like rudders for ships, they still steered
with ores. Now you could say, look, it's unfair to criticize people for particular innovations
they didn't come up with. But how do you account for the fact that the Romans, who were, you
know, geniuses in plumbing, didn't exploit the water wheel. They had the water wheel,
but they didn't actually use it for power. Now Asimov and Robinson argue that it's because
not everyone is allowed to play in the Roman economy that Rome fell. Instead, a powerful
ruling elite devoted its time to extracting resources with existing technologies. And
if you just extract resources from existing technologies, as we know from the solo model,
the economy is going to stop growing. It's going to stagnate.
So what enables, then, an economy to grow? Well, we've talked about this. Schumpeter
said it's creative destruction. Asimov and Robinson say it's inclusive institutions because
inclusive political institutions have two features. They've got strong central power,
so they create laws, property rights, and taxation authority that are consistent. And
second, they're pluralistic. Here's where they align with Schumpeter. Everybody gets
to play. Everybody gets to contribute ideas. And it's the second of assumptions that's
so important. If it doesn't hold, then what happens? New ideas don't get into the marketplace.
And there's no creative destruction. Creative destruction, the Schumpeter term, comes from
people having the opportunity, inclusiveness, in the language of Asimov and Robinson. So
if we look at periods of innovation, the Industrial Revolution, or even the rise of Silicon Valley,
we see massive creative destruction. Think of the automobile. It wiped out horses, the
whole horse industry, as well as subsidiary industries, ferriers, veterinarians, and so
on. Suppose the horse industry lobby had been more powerful. After all, most of our early
presidents were great horsemen. They might have stopped the car industry from getting
going, right, just through political power. And that wouldn't have been good. Let me summarize
the economics part of this. So Schumpeter, who looked at this historical, he showed basically
that periods of growth exhibited creative destruction. And he was right. They did, and
they continued to do so. What Solo does with a formal model is says that absent some sort
of creative destruction, absent innovation, growth is going to stop. We reach a technological
bliss point. And after that point, because of the depreciation effect, there's no more
growth. Now, if you add in things like creeping corruption, what's going to happen? You end
up with something worse than stagnation. You get failure, even failure of the sort that
Diamond mentioned. And finally, Asimov and Robinson, if you're taking a very Schumpeter-like
sweeping view of history and analyzing it with the tools like Solo, they sort of say,
yeah, you know, we need creative destruction for growth. But we also need the sort of inclusive
political institutions as the bedrock for creative destruction. Everybody has to be
able to play. If not, none of the ideas, you know, sort of rise up that produce the creative
destruction. So they show that the reason that so many countries in Africa, in the Middle
East, have lagged behind other countries, isn't cultural. It's not based on geography.
The data don't support either of those arguments. It's because their political institutions
haven't created incentives for what diverse and deep ways of thinking about problems.
So countries that are captured by an elite are going to tend not to allow this creative
destruction process that's necessary for growth. Let me give an example of how hard this is
to do, though. So during the first decade of the 21st century, the newspaper industry
in the United States lost more than a quarter million jobs. Now, the growth of the Internet
contributed mightily to this, as has just a general demise that people have for looking
at newspapers. Now, what hurt the newspaper industry? Well, what hurt them the most may
have been a website called Craigslist, because Craigslist allowed people to place classified
ads for free. So prior to Craigslist, when I moved to L.A., I'm looking for an apartment,
I bought a whole bunch of newspapers and looked through a bunch of classified ads. The same
was true if I wanted to sell some furniture, get a puppy, get a bike. I would either take
out or look in the classified ads. And it was revenue from these classified ads that
kept newspapers afloat. Was Internet use increased? Classified ads revenues tumbled because people
just went to Craigslist because Craigslist looked at unlimited space, color pictures,
and again, as I mentioned, it was free. It was totally free. Now, if you think of this
as sort of like general satisfaction standpoint, Craigslist is an enormous improvement over
the classified ad. A little, tiny, you know, 50-character message as opposed to like color
pictures. But it was a creative destroyer. It created a new product that destroyed a
lot of jobs in the newspaper industry. Now, you could say, yeah, sure, Craigslist wiped
out some jobs, but it must have created jobs as well. That's true. So in 2010, guess how
many people worked at Craigslist after the newspaper industry had lost basically a quarter
of a million jobs? 50. Actually, not even 50. 31. So 31 people at Craigslist, a quarter
of a million jobs lost in the newspaper industry. Now, wasn't Craigslist alone that caused these
massive job losses? But Craigslist was probably the main reason. So here's the point. Craigslist
was creative and it was very destructive. But the creative part allowed more people to
sell more things. It allowed people to look at pictures of apartments and dressers and
even labradoodles rather than driving all over LA trying to figure out which dog you
wanted. It also made the world a better place, even though the newspaper industry lost a
lot of jobs. But let's suppose for a second that we didn't have such an open society and
that it was ruled by an elite. And let's suppose that elite owned the newspapers. When owning
those newspapers, it would have had every incentive to prevent Craigslist from coming
into being. Well, how would it do it? Well, here's how. It might have said classified
have to be in newspapers because the government needs an informed citizenry that helps us
to maintain our healthy democracy. So you could say, democracy depends on newspapers,
so therefore all classified ads have to be in newspapers. Now, that sort of logic, along
with a few fistfuls of dollars, could basically stall innovation and eventually lead a country
to sort of fail if not collapse. Now, in laying this out, is this the only theory why countries
collapse? Right? Is it sort of lack of innovation? Well, no, there's other ones. So Joseph Tainter
wrote a book called The Collapse of Complex Societies, and he tells another version there.
He argues that over time, societies become too complex. This is also true of the Romans.
And then as they become more complex, they have to devote an increasing number of resources
to cope with that complexity. So for example, think of all the resources that we spend on
legal cost and administrative cost. Eventually, societies lack the ability to respond to all
their challenges. And Tainter argues that as we invest in ever more social complexity,
we suffer from ever greater decreasing returns. We get spread way too thin and we collapse.
So Tainter's showing us a place where diversity can be harmful. We don't want our set of problems
to be too diverse, because if they are, then we get what? That's right, Ashby's Law of
Requisite Variety. We've got to be incredibly diverse to handle them all. Now, that would
be fine if sort of solving all these problems was productive, if solving these problems
increased productivity, but it doesn't. Many of the administration problems are just sucking
energy from the system and that's what's leading to collapse. Okay, so what have we learned?
So from Diamond, we learn that societies that collapse often do so because of cultural and
institutional blinders that preclude innovation. So lack of diversity because culture hems
us in. From Solo, we learn that without innovation, growth is going to cease. So you have to
innovate. From Asimoglu and Robinson, we learn that political and economic institutions have
to be open, they have to be pluralistic, so the society can tap into the diverse skills
of all its people. Now, at their core, all of these arguments, Diamond, Solo, Schumpeter,
Asimoglu and Robinson, attribute societal success to diversity, but it's diversity of
tools opening up society so that diverse people can come up with new solutions. Now, from
Tainter, we also learn that there's this increasing diversity of problems and that can be not a
good thing and that can offer an alternative route to collapse unless we've got sufficient
diversity of tools to handle it. Now, by the way, remember I mentioned Rochester's library?
Well, after you walk past Slater's inscription about folly and get to the right-most door
to enter the library, you find another quote by this same esteemed and much beloved professor.
It begins as follows, the doors of the future open to those who wonder what life may become
when men are free in body and soul. Well, that's a happy thought on which to end this lecture.
Individual freedom provides the foundation for all the wonderfully diverse ways of thinking
and seeing that improve our well-being and make our lives so very interesting. Thank you.
