Hi, welcome back. In this course, we've been discussing the power of diverse ways of thinking.
How it leads to better, more innovative solutions and more robust systems.
And if diversity of thought is beneficial, then the opposite of diversity,
what some people call group think, may be not so good.
That's certainly what we saw in the last lecture.
We saw how entire societies can collapse partly because they all think the same way.
They don't promote different ways of thinking.
They're not inclusive enough to allow the processes of creative destruction that maintain progress.
So in this lecture, what I want to do is I want to go back and think a little bit more
about this idea of group think, or a diamond called cultural blinders.
The idea that everybody thinks about things in the same way.
Now, I'm going to define group think formally in a few minutes,
but quickly I want to remind you of why it's so bad.
Well, you just get, you don't get good outcomes, that's the first reason.
And second, there's a lack of adaptability.
What I want to do in this lecture primarily is define four processes that explain how group think comes about.
Because if group think's bad, why do we get it?
So it is sort of a puzzle, right?
We don't want group think, yet it emerges.
So why do we see it?
So these are the four processes we're going to talk about.
First one's conformity.
It's just choosing to do the same thing or think the same way as other people.
That's not very surprising.
Second is surprising, random drift.
We're going to see how people get sort of randomly changed what they're doing.
Systems will tend to drift towards conformity.
And then third, homophily.
This is the fancy word, it means the desire to hang out with people who are like you.
And then the fourth reason, which is also sort of surprising, is common incentives.
If we're given incentives to sort of perform well,
then we may end up choosing to do the same thing.
So after we talk about the four causes,
I'm going to discuss how we can sort of avoid group think.
Both as an individual who wants to stand out from the crowd
and as an organization that wants to be innovative.
How does your organization, you know, sort of escape the dangers of group think?
Okay, so what is group think?
Group think refers to everyone in a community having the same model
or same sets of ideas about how some part of the world works.
In other words, it just means everybody thinking the same way.
So let me be clear, in some instances group think can be good.
So it's great if we're all correct.
So group think that the earth is round, at least approximately, is a good thing.
But group think that the earth is flat, wouldn't be so good.
So in other words, if we're really sure we're right,
then it's okay that we think the same thing.
But if there's a chance that we're wrong,
then we're better served if we allow for a little bit of heterogeneity of thought.
Now group think can also be good in other cases.
So if we're carrying out a common plan,
so in battle on a football field or in a dance performance,
then you want everybody following the same script.
You want group think.
But in most contexts, group think is a bad thing.
It's going to be especially bad when the system you're in is in flux,
when the landscape is dancing.
Remember, think back to Fisher's theorem.
The speed of adaptation depends on the amount of variation.
So if the landscape dances,
then our ability to adapt is going to depend on how much variation we have.
So if we all think the same way,
there's no variation on which selection can operate,
and we're going to get stuck.
Alternatively, recall the diversity prediction theorem.
We applied that in predictive context.
Now what did that say?
That says the crowd error equals the average error minus the diversity.
And diversity here is sort of diversity of the models people have.
So group think implies there's no diversity,
and no diversity means that the crowd can only be accurate
if everybody in the crowd is accurate.
And again, we're back in that situation where
we should only want group think if we're all right.
So we only want diversity in cases where the problem's hard
and we want group think in cases where the problem's easy.
So that means in most of the cases we want some diversity.
Okay, so we should all understand the dangers of group think,
but so then how does it come about?
That's the focus of the lecture.
So as I mentioned, I'm going to describe four processes,
conformity, drift, homophily, and then incentives.
Now this is very straightforward, but let's walk through it.
So one reason that group think comes about
is that we often conform to match the behavior
and thinking of the majority of people.
So by conformity what I mean is we go with the flow.
We look around and we sort of say here's what most people are doing
and we copy them.
Well, why would we do this?
Well, we do it for a bunch of reasons.
One is, well, we're insecure.
It's not easy being the only person wearing a t-shirt at a formal wedding.
It's also not easy being the only person in the room
telling Henry Ford that his new car division, the Edsel,
a lot of people think of the Edsel as a car.
It was actually an entire division that lied between Ford and Mercury
and affordability and it turned out that was a terrible idea
to introduce a new division of cars in the middle of a recession.
It's also a really bad idea to introduce cars
that the front of it looked like somebody sucking a lemon,
but no one said anything and there was group think
and Ford Motor Company made a huge mistake.
So conformity is a powerful thing.
There's a famous set of experiments known as the ash experiments.
These were run by the psychologist Solomon Ash
and he showed just how susceptible people are to peer pressure to conformity.
So here's how this experiment worked.
People were first shown a card with a line of a particular length.
Then they were shown a card with segments A, B, and C
and asked to pick the segment that was most closely matched the first line segment.
Now, here's the trick.
Psychologists like to sort of play tricks on people in experiments.
So in the experiment, there was a group of confederates.
These are people sort of in on the game
and there's one person being tested.
Now, Ash would run 18 trials.
In 12 of the 18 trials, the confederates all gave the wrong answer.
So instead of saying like, you know, if it matched A, they would say, oh, it's B.
Now, in those cases of the subjects,
approximately a third gave the wrong answer as well.
So it's like, you know, they heard 11 people in a row say,
um, no, it's this one. No, it's this one. No, it's this one.
And by the time they got there, they were like,
wow, it looks like this match is B, but everybody else just said A,
so maybe I should say A.
So even more amazing to me anyway is 75% of the people conformed
to the incorrect choice at least once.
So, you know, a third of the cases, people, you know, said the incorrect thing,
but 75% of individuals conformed at least one time.
Now, you can watch the original Ash experiments,
and it's really easy to laugh at the subjects
because you can just watch them thinking,
wow, these people also knew making the same mistake,
and then they just go along with the crowd.
But we should be careful here because most of us conform to some extent.
And if we didn't, you know, the children's story,
The Emperor's New Clothes, wouldn't be a classic.
Norman Shirley Jackson's really, you know, tragic short story,
The Lottery, in which a random person gets stoned to death,
be on so many high school and college reading lists,
because conformity does happen, it happens a lot,
and often to our detriment.
Let's look at Drift.
Drift is the second cause of GroupThink,
and this is much more subtle.
So to demonstrate how Drift creates GroupThink,
I want to construct a simple model.
Suppose we've got a 10% management team,
and suppose we're trying to figure out exactly what our competing firm is doing,
so we're competing with another firm,
and there's two equicompelling ways to look at the actions of this other firm.
One thing you could think is that the other firm is trying to maximize its market share.
So what's called that M?
Or alternatively, you could think maybe it's trying to be the low-cost provider.
So let's call that C.
Now, for the purposes of this example,
let's suppose the truth is some combination of the two.
And as long as we've got people in our firm that think both motivations are in play,
then we're actually able to predict our competitor's action with some accuracy,
just like the diversity prediction theorem.
We're going to have diverse models, and we're going to do well.
So we'd like to preserve some diversity.
But here's how the model works. It's pretty easy.
Each one of us has one of those two ideas in our head.
So some think our competitors only cares about market shares.
So we can put a little M on their foreheads.
Others think that the competitor cares only about cost.
Then we can put a little C on their heads.
So I can just represent the entire management team by a set of 10 letters.
Some are M's and some are C's.
Now, here's how drift works.
Let's suppose when two people meet,
so they bump into each other at the water core in the hallway,
there's some small probability that one of them is going to change their opinion
to match that of the person she's talking to.
So they're not conforming.
So this differs from conformity.
Because under conformity, what we do is we look around and look at the majority
and we match the majority view.
So if they're more M's, we'd all become M's.
But in our drift, what happens is we sort of randomly bump into someone.
We don't worry about how frequently what percentage of people,
other people have that opinion.
We just sort of occasionally copy someone else.
So we're not moving to the majority.
We're just randomly matching somebody else.
Now, you might say, well, this seems odd.
And it is sort of odd if you think of types like clothing or haircuts.
So if one person wears a T-shirt to a formal wedding,
it's more likely that that person's going to go home and put on a sport coat.
Then it is that somebody else who bumps into the person with the T-shirt
is going to say, oh, I think I'll take off my shirt and just wear a T-shirt.
But we're not talking about shirts here.
We're talking about cognitive models.
We're talking about beliefs.
So suppose the president's proposing a tax increase.
I'm not going to know what my friends think unless I ask them.
So it's not like I can see by looking around the room
what people think about the tax increase.
So most of these conversations are going to be one-on-one interactions.
And so there may be some drift.
Like one of my friends say, oh, tax increase sounds like a great idea.
And I think, well, maybe it does.
Maybe one of my friends says, I think it's a terrible idea.
No, no, maybe it is.
So I switch.
So we're going to see drift where these little pairs of people meet
and switch what they're doing.
We're not going to see that sort of broad-scale conformity
where I look around, take the measure of the group, and copy them.
So if I write down a random drift, here's sort of how I might do it.
So rule one, I might say, just randomly pick someone
who's going to be the influencer.
And then randomly pick somebody else.
This would be rule two, who's going to be influenced by that person.
This will be the person who's going to change your opinion.
And then the third rule is I just change the opinion of the second person
to match that of the first.
Let's see how this works.
So here I've got a simple picture.
I've got five people who have M's.
Those are the market people.
And five people who have C's.
These are the cost people.
Now, how would I get one more M?
Well, to do that again, let's just randomly pick someone.
So let's randomly pick this person here,
and they're going to be the influencer.
Now, the odds that I pick an M are going to be five out of 10.
Now, next I'm going to randomly pick someone else.
If I'm going to pick somebody else, there's nine people left.
So what are the odds I pick a C?
Well, there's five C's left.
So the odds I pick a C would be five over nine.
Right?
So if I multiply these things together, that's 25 over 90,
or five over 18 chance that an M's going to meet a C,
and that C is going to change to an M.
Well, you know, I could have equally well said,
suppose I pick the C first,
suppose I pick this person first and the M second,
that would also have probability five 18's.
So here's a way to think about this.
Let me erase this a second.
What I can do is I can say, if I look at the number of M's,
that's going to increase by one with five 18's.
It's going to decrease by one with probability five 18's,
and that means it's going to stay the same with probability eight 18's.
That's why we think of that as drift,
where we can go up one, we can go down one,
or we can stay the same, but it's just moving back and forth.
Okay?
And notice, the important thing to remember here is notice that
with five 18's chance it's going up,
and a five 18's chance it's going down.
Well, now let's suppose this is drifted around a little bit,
and we get to eight M's and two C's.
And again, this could happen again just through this drift process.
Well, now we can ask, now what's the likelihood that we move?
What's the likelihood that we get one more M?
Well, again, we'd have to pick an M first,
but this is now much more likely, because there's eight M's,
so it's an eight out of ten chance.
But to get an additional M, the next person we pick,
this is the person who gets influenced, has to be a C.
Well, the odds of picking a C, there's only nine people left,
are two out of nine.
So what I get is a 16 out of 90 chance
that I'm basically going to get one more M.
So if you think is this is a much slower chance.
So now we've got to, again, I've got this process
where the M's could go up one or down one, right?
But the thing is if you look at this, there's a much less likely,
there's much less likely they're going to go up one,
much less likely they're going to go down one,
and it's much more likely I'm going to stay at the exact same spot.
So again, we get this drift, but the drift is slower.
So we're equally likely to add a C or to subtract a C,
but the thing is it's going to slow down.
But this is why we call these processes drift.
And it's important to notice here that this process is moving more slowly
when we get to an extreme than it was in the middle,
because what that means is when we're sitting at 50-50,
the process is really likely to drift.
Remember it was five out of 18.
When we get to 80, like 80-20, then it falls down to 16-90.
Because we're less likely to get a pairing of two people with different opinions.
So what drift means is that we're not going to spend that much time in the middle
because the process moves fast,
but it will spend a lot of time at the extremes
because there the process is moving slow.
Now eventually, if we think of this as a random walk,
eventually it might get to all M's or might get to all C's.
Once it gets to either all M's or all C's, well then there's no more drift.
We have everybody being exactly the same.
We have group think.
Okay, so that's how the drift process works.
Now when we get to these cases of all M's or all C's,
these are called absorbing states.
If you took up the language of random walks,
that's what mathematicians would call it,
but we call it group think.
Now this was a really simple model, right?
I just said 10 people, only two possible models.
Well, I could construct a more elaborate model
with thousands of people, right, and dozens of possible opinions.
But I'd still run this sort of drift process,
and what's going to happen is when there's equal numbers of types,
that drift is going to move really fast,
and as it becomes more similar, as people become more alike,
the process will slow down.
And if I let the process go long enough,
eventually I'm going to get everybody thinking the same way,
I'm going to get group think.
Okay, let's stop for a second
to think back one of our core lessons.
The power of recombination.
So we've talked about recombination of all sorts of things
to make, you know, toasters that also make poached eggs
and things like that.
Well, let's use recombination here.
Let's combine our two models, conformity plus drift.
So we could have a combined model
where people might tend toward the majority,
but occasionally move in a random direction.
Well, what's going to happen if we combine the two models?
Well, we get that we're not going to see as much group think
as we'd see in the conformity model,
but we see that we're going to get more group think
than we'd see in the drift model.
But what's important is if these two processes sort of go on,
like maybe I randomly change every once in a while
and maybe I look at the majority and sort of copy them,
that's going to lead to group think.
And that's probably what goes on in a lot of settings.
Let's go to our third cause of group think.
This one is the one with a fancy name, homophily.
Homophily combines the Greek roots for same and love.
In other words, we like to hang out with people
who are like us, or at least who we think are like us.
Now, lest they sound like a broken record,
notice the recombination idea.
It's appearing once again, right?
Innovative new words for recombining old words
to create a new word, homophily.
Here's another one, bandwagon.
It's also combining two words and come to think of it,
group think is also one of those words.
Okay, so how strong is homophily?
How much do we like to hang out with people like us?
Well, here's a graph from James Moody
showing a social network of some teenagers in a school.
Now, the green dots represent African-American students.
The yellow dots represent white students.
So what this graph shows, just unmistakably, is homophily.
White kids hang out with white kids,
and black kids hang out with black kids.
Now, notice the kids also cluster by gender.
There's one green cluster that consists of African-American males
and another green cluster consisting of African-American females.
Now, you might say, look, these are teenagers, fair enough.
Well, here's another map.
Here's a map showing racial segregation in New York City.
It seems pretty clear that we sort by race
in terms of where we live.
We also sort by income.
And there's even evidence that we sort by how we vote,
so that people, when they look at households
and sort of recognize, boy,
there's sort of organic grocery stores around here.
This is like a Democratic region, you know,
a Democratic neighborhood, or this is a Republican neighborhood.
And we even sort of sort by what movies we watch in a weird sort of way.
Remember we talked about the Netflix Prize?
Well, if you go to some websites and you look at the movie data
and what movies people watch,
what you see, there's tremendous correlation with geography.
People who live in the same places watch the same sort of movies.
So there's some movies that appeal to rural people
and others that appeal to people in central cities.
So homophily, this idea that we sort of move to be around people who are like us,
produces groupthink at the local level,
because we're only interacting with people who are like us
and we don't encounter any diversity.
This explains why everyone in a firm can sort of think the wrong way
or why sometimes groups of people can do offensive things to another group
because we're not interacting with people from that other group
and we're not getting a diverse perspective on our actions.
Now there's two subtleties here that are worth pointing out.
Homophily is creating groupthink at the local level
because we're all sort of choosing to hang out with people who look like us.
But in doing so, it can maintain diversity at the global level.
In fact, it practically guarantees it, right,
because we've got one group over here and one group over here
and those groups differ.
This doesn't mean that homophily is a good thing
because if these diverse groups don't interact,
then we've just got two groups of group thinkers
and each one's going to fail.
We can't recombine any of the ideas.
We can't combine their predictions,
like in the diversity prediction theorem, to get better outcomes.
Second subtle point.
When you see people hanging out who look and act and think in similar ways,
you might wonder, well, wait, where did this come from?
Did it come from conformity or drift or homophily?
I mean, did people sort of start acting like each other
or did they choose to hang out with each other because they're like each other?
Well, that's a really good question.
And if you just have a snapshot, you can't tell.
Social scientists call this the identification problem.
So unless you have, remember we talked about a time series of data
or temporal data, so you can sort of see people moving or see people changing,
it's going to be almost impossible to tell.
So if you see a whole bunch of smokers hanging out together
or people all dressed in the same way,
if you don't have any other information,
if you haven't seen them over time, stop smoking or quit smoking or switch groups,
then you can't tell if they're hanging out because they're the same
or if they're the same because they're hanging out.
All you can tell is that they're choosing to act in the same way
and you've got this sort of group-based behavior.
Okay, last cause of group think.
This is maybe the most subtle. This is incentives.
Now, oftentimes we're given incentives to do well.
And if we all have incentives to perform best as individuals,
so if as a firm or an organization we write incentives
so people should do best as individuals,
then we might all choose to do the same thing.
Let me give an example.
So suppose I run a market research company
and I'm going to hire a team of people to do market research for me.
And suppose I say, well, you know,
I'm going to give people sort of incentives to do well,
so I'm going to pay them based on how accurate their forecasts are.
And the people who make the most accurate forecasts will get paid the most money.
So this seems to make a lot of sense,
because I'm giving incentives for people to work hard,
make accurate forecasts.
Maybe not. Here's why.
This is where the logic gets very subtle.
This could lead to conformity.
Let me show you why.
Suppose that each of these forecasters can use one of three methods.
They could survey people over the Internet.
They could phone people.
Or they can go out to maybe a mall and conduct some interviews.
Now, suppose it's the case that the Internet survey is the most accurate.
Followed pretty closely by the phone survey in the mail,
instead of going and interviewing people at the mall.
But the Internet survey is the best.
Now, each forecaster is getting paid based on her accuracy.
So what should they do?
Over time, all three should choose to do the Internet survey,
because that's the best.
But what's going to happen to my firm?
We're going to get three identical surveys.
So think back for a second.
Remember the diversity prediction theorem, right?
The firm is going to do better if the three forecasters use different methods.
Remember, like in the Netflix prize,
when Bellcore formed Bellcore's Pragmatic Chaos,
they did better by combining.
But here, I've created incentives so people don't.
Each person is actually choosing the exact same method.
And if they're choosing the exact same method,
the group isn't going to be any better than the individuals.
And this is one of the main lessons of this course.
Each of us doing the best thing individually
won't necessarily give us the collectively best outcomes.
So therefore, my firm maybe shouldn't pay people
based on their individual accuracy.
Instead, I probably want to pay them in some way
based on their collective accuracy.
So this is a key insight.
Let me say it again.
If we have incentives to perform at our individual best,
then what may happen is we may choose the same models
to carry around in our heads.
So this is sort of a really deep,
but then it's finally sort of weird insight in a way.
Your organization, right?
Or if you're a for-profit firm, your family,
any group you're in, it may be better off
if you think in maybe the second best way.
You know, so, look, it could be,
and this is for me, right, that your partner,
like my wife, is right more often than I am.
But that doesn't mean I should change how I think.
Because collectively, we may be better off
if I continue to refine my different, less accurate model.
Well, the same goes true for you.
Like, if you're at work and you realize that people
who you work with, there's somebody else
who just seems a little bit more accurate than you are.
Well, you could copy their model.
But if you copy their model,
you're sacrificing a lot of diversity.
So one way then to avoid groupthink is to stick to your guns.
Right?
That's going to prevent everybody from thinking the same way.
Before I cover some other ways to avoid groupthink,
I want to return to one of the lessons in the earlier lectures.
And this is when we talked about diversity and robustness.
And we talked about how more diverse systems
are better able to respond.
And then we talked about collapse.
And we saw a lack of diversity could result in collapse
of an entire society.
So up until now, I've been talking about groupthink
in the context of people making decisions and forecasts.
But I haven't really linked this back to collapse.
But the potential for collapse exists.
Let me give a really sort of, you know,
appropriate example that involves stock market crashes.
So 2008, the housing market crashed.
Leading up to that crash, groupthink led investment bankers
to believe there couldn't be a nationwide housing market collapse.
Now, in retrospect, this looks ridiculous because there was one
and people were really highly leveraged.
But let me speak out in defense of the investors.
Such a crash had not occurred in a long, long time.
And previous stock market crashes,
even though they've been enlarged,
had regional effects on housing markets.
So what that meant is that investment banks
increased their leverage ratios.
So what's a leverage ratio?
Well, that's the ratio of how much you owe
relative to how much you own.
So if you owe $300,000 on a $330,000 house,
that means you've got $30,000 in equity.
So your leverage ratio is 10 to 1,
the $300,000 in what you owe to the $30,000 that you've paid off.
Now, if the value of your house fell to $310,000,
well, you still owe $300,000,
and now you've only owned really like $10,000,
so your ratio would be 30 to 1.
This graph shows leverage ratios for leading investment banks
leading up to the 2008 crash.
Notice how they're all creeping upward.
That creeping is evidence of groupthink.
Had one of these banks thought differently,
he would have sold off its assets and lowered its leverage ratio.
And actually, at the end, it made a lot of money.
Let's go back to the thing about Easter Island.
The failure to think of the destruction of the forest
was also groupthink.
So groupthink can lead to bad decisions, to be sure,
but it can also lead to collapse.
So how do we avoid it?
Well, we talked about sticking to your guns.
Well, let's go back to the causes.
If we understand the causes,
we can understand how to stop it from happening.
So the first two can form it in drift,
but we can avoid those in several ways.
One way you can do it is just restrict communication.
You can put in firewalls.
It's really hard to do what the majority is doing,
or to just mimic people if you don't know what they're doing.
So there's a lot of management professors who study groupthink
who argue for these firewalls,
because once you allow communication,
then you open the door to groupthink.
Now, putting in a firewall comes at a cost,
because we lose the ability to recombine ideas,
and we saw how recombining ideas and models
can create huge benefits.
So we can't get those benefits,
those benefits that happen through deliberation and recombination,
if we put in firewalls.
So therefore, it's often preferable to make people
leap before they look.
Look, what do I mean by that?
What do I mean by leap before they look?
By this, I mean you require that people first write down what they think,
so they make some leap.
Then you have a discussion.
Now, how do you do this?
Some organizations do this by basically having a price of admission
to a meeting, and that price is you've got to write a position paper.
So in order to come to the meeting, you've got to have a written copy
of what you think prior to the meeting.
Now, you can change your mind and conform or drift
whatever you want during the meeting,
but at least your idea is getting out there.
Now, you might say, wait a minute, leap before you look.
Isn't that the opposite of the usual advice, look before you leap?
That's right, but remember, sometimes big rocks first,
sometimes little rocks first.
That's one of the other lessons from this course.
Rules of thumb depend on the context.
So if you want to avoid group think,
the rule is you should get people to make leaps out there
before you look at what everybody's done.
So other situations, right, what you wanted,
if you're hiking, you probably want to look before you leap.
What's another way to avoid mimicry?
Well, change the culture.
So remember, Diamond talked about these strong cultures.
You want a culture in which people challenge rather than acquiesce.
So some companies like Intel do this very deliberately.
So Andy Grove, who is one of the founders of Intel,
speaks eloquently on the topic of constructive conflict.
He basically says it has to be okay to disagree
because otherwise people are going to naturally tend to mimic one another.
A final way, and this is another type of firewall,
is to create what people call green fields or tiger teams.
You basically take a group of people
and put them in a separate location.
So you've got two different groups of people interacting,
and so they're not being influenced by one another.
And then you still get the benefits of recombination,
but you also get the effect of the firewall.
But then, how do we overcome this drift thing overall, though?
Because people are always going to talk to one another.
Well, we basically overcome drift in the same way we overcome conformity.
We limit communications, we leap before we look,
we create a culture of constructive conflict,
and we use green fields.
But we can also slow down drift by changing social networks.
So if some people have really high charisma or lots of contacts,
they can speed the process of drift.
So if you can somehow reign in these super spreaders, so to speak,
you can reduce the amount of drift.
So what you can do is you can get people to sort of listen less to the higher ups,
listen less to celebrities,
and listen more to sort of your idiosyncratic close friends.
Now, of course, if your friends listen to celebrities, then you're in trouble.
But you can try to encourage people to seek out different sources.
You're still going to get some drift,
but you'll drift in lots of different ways.
Another way to prevent drift is to encourage people not to copy other people,
but to mutate.
So, for example, if someone says,
oh, I just read a great book on Roosevelt by Edmund Morris,
a natural reaction to go read the same book.
That's a drift in action.
Instead, you might think, huh, you know, she just said she read a great biography.
Maybe I should read a biography.
How about Lincoln or Harriet Tubman or Andrew Jackson?
So this prevents some drift and also injects diversity.
Okay, what about homophily?
Now, we can't always distinguish homophily from mimicry.
So the methods to combat it are going to be different.
So we've got to make sure we know what it is.
But how do we combat homophily?
That's actually fairly easy.
You just mix people up.
So some companies do this by randomly reassigning offices.
Others make sure that people switch positions or locations within the company
with some regularity, because that also mixes people up.
Now, it's clear that segregation limits our experiences.
Perhaps Montaigne said it best in Vanity.
I do not know, as I've often said, a better school we're into model life
than by incessantly exposing it to the diversity of so many other lives,
fancies, and usances,
and by making it relish a perpetual variety of forms of human nature.
Neither do I.
Thank you.
