Hi, welcome back. This will be our final lecture in the course. And we've got some fun stuff ahead of us here. In the previous lecture, I left us with a hanging question. How do we cope with preference diversity? It's a really interesting question to think about.
And to some extent, there's a one-word answer. Leadership. Great leaders get everyone on the same page. They also get people to recognize the distinction between fundamental preferences, what we really want, and instrumental preferences, the policies and actions we take to achieve those fundamental preferences.
So let's get it started. Now, as you know, I teach at the University of Michigan, and I also earned my undergraduate degree there. And when I was an undergraduate, Michigan's football coach was a man named Bo Schembeckler. Bo was a great coach.
And as a coach of teams that just were loaded with talented players, he knew full well that everyone had to pull in the same direction. He knew that Michigan could only win football games if his players put aside individual goals, perhaps to be an all-American, maybe make the NFL, and focus on the team.
To instill the total commitment required for success, Schembeckler had a famous saying. It goes like this. The team, the team, the team. That's right. The team, the team, the team. Now, Schembeckler's not alone in making that exhortation.
David Packard, who co-founded Hewlett Packard, said the same thing, though not with the same fervor as Bo, or with a poetic repetition. Somehow, the chip, the chip, the chip lacks a certain phonetic charm. But here's what Packard wrote in the HP way. Let me quote him.
We thought that if we could get everybody to agree on what our objectives were, and to understand what we were trying to do, then we could turn them loose, and they would move in a common direction.
So why is a common objective so important? What turns out that we've learned why in the previous lecture? Well, sort of. Remember in the previous lecture, we had these preference cycles where A beats B, B beats C, and then C beats A.
So that meant that Patrick, Steve, and I couldn't even decide on where to go to lunch. And we saw the same thing with problem solving, but it was sort of worse, where Brian and Carlos devoted all this time and effort to have the team just walk around in an Escher staircase.
So let's remind ourselves for a moment where we are and what we know. What we know that if we're trying to make a choice that's going to lead to good outcomes, we know that diverse categorizations, interpretations, and mental models are going to lead to diverse predictions.
And we know diverse predictions matter just as much as accurate predictions when we're trying to make collective choices. So that's a good thing.
But we also know that diverse preferences over the outcomes, which would also seem to result from different models, can create these cycles. When we aggregate them, we can get these cycles. And that means outcomes can be manipulated if people act strategically.
So in other words, we want diversity in how we think, but we don't want diversity in what we want. Now is that even possible?
It is. And again, here's where leadership comes into play. And I need to remind you of that distinction I mentioned earlier between fundamental and instrumental preferences.
So fundamental preferences are what you really want, your preferences over outcome. So you might personally want good health, economic security, happy times with your family and friends, or within an organization you may want to build really great products or offer valuable services.
Or it could be more pragmatic. You might just want to increase market share. Whatever. Who cares? Those are your fundamental objectives. Now we can contrast these with instrumental preferences.
These are your preferences over the instruments or policies that produce the outcomes over which your fundamental preferences are defined. So for example, fundamentally you may care about living a long, healthy life surrounded by friends.
So this says you prefer a long, healthy life to one to quote Thomas Hobbes here, one that's solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short. So you and I may have the same fundamental preferences, but we may try and achieve them in different ways.
So let's suppose that the two of us are charged with planning a party for a bunch of neighborhood kids. So here's my idea. I suggest running one of those, you know, really cool, automatic donut machines that were in this book story about Homer Price.
So these are the ones that spit out the little circles of dough. They float down a little river. Then halfway down there's like this paddle that flips them over and then out pops this perfectly fried donut.
Those are just, they're great. Now let's suppose that you propose a trampoline. You know, kids can jump on the trampoline. Now both the donut machine and the bouncy trampoline have reasons to recommend them.
I don't think anyone's going to dispute that donuts make our lives happier, and so will the trampoline. Now both also though contribute to shorter lives. The donuts do it by clogging up our arteries and the trampoline because, well, we can maybe break some arms or legs by falling off it.
So I'm pushing the donut machine and you push the trampoline. Notice these are instrumental preferences because we don't agree, we don't differ on our fundamental goals.
We both want sort of a happy, fun party. But what we differ on is the instruments on which we achieve those goals. Which of the two actions will be the better choice?
So here's the point. Instrumental preference diversity is good. Why? Because it's suggestive of different models. We got different ideas. We got the donut machine idea and the trampoline idea.
Now because there's only two of us, we've got a problem here. We've got a split vote. But we might bring in more people and get more opinions, even more ideas. And we might come to a consensus.
Now we might realize, hey, you know, we can't make the donuts any safer because if a donut's going to taste good, it's going to have a lot of fat. But we could make the trampoline safer because we could put up netted walls.
And so maybe the trampoline's a better choice. Now notice my preferred choice doesn't win here. But I probably have to just recognize, look, collectively we made a good choice and I should be happy.
I'm talking about this more in a minute. But instead what I want to do right now is focus on something else. I want to focus on the fact, let's suppose that we didn't have the same fundamental preferences.
That we had different fundamental preferences. And then I think good health is just overrated. And you think physical health matters a lot.
Well now what's going to happen? Well now I'm going to keep with my proposal of the donuts and you're going to keep with your proposal of the trampoline.
And no matter what happens, one of us is going to be fundamentally unhappy. Because if we choose the donut machine, you're going to be upset that, you know, your kids in particular are eating greasy food and not exercising.
And if we choose the trampoline, and I'm going to be upset because my kids miss out on some really great donuts.
Okay, so now we've made sense of this contradiction. Diverse fundamental preferences means somebody's going to be unhappy.
And as we saw in the case of choosing a place to eat, that person might even have incentives to start misrepresenting his or her preferences. That's what the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem tells us.
So diverse fundamental preferences are bad. However, diverse instrumental preferences, those are good. Because those imply the diverse predictive models that help us get good outcomes.
So we can use those, those diverse models to come up with good collective predictions. And as a result, we can help take actions or choose actions that give us better outcomes, that make us happier given our, that's right, our fundamental preferences.
So this is something we should all just get, this distinction between fundamental and instrumental preferences, but we don't. And this is why leadership is so important.
I'm going to present some data from a really cool experiment run by my friend Catherine Phillips, along with Katie Lillenquist and Maggie Neal.
And this experiment is going to make this point about us not getting it by it. I mean this distinction between fundamental and instrumental preferences, really, really clear.
So here's how the experiment went. They recruited two groups of volunteers from fraternities or sororities. Now in this way, everyone has the same gender.
So it's all fraternity members or all sorority members. So any gender bias or gender issues are just pushed out of the way.
People then got presented with this really sort of fun murder mystery task, a sort of who done it, and they were asked to solve it.
So in the language of this course, this is just a classic predictive task. So here's one treatment of the experiment that they did.
They formed groups of three people all from the same fraternity who all made the same prediction.
So people individually made predictions and these people all have made the same one, and then they let those people talk.
Now what they did is for some of the groups, they added a fourth person from their same fraternity who shared their opinion.
And then for another set of groups, they added someone from the other fraternity, so a different identity person, who has a different opinion.
So the first team is homogenous in two ways. These are people who hang out together, and in this particular case, they think the same.
They have the same prediction. Now the second team differs in two ways. They don't hang out together.
They're from different fraternities, and they think differently about this problem.
Now we have these groups of four interact and collectively make predictions.
Okay, so here's a question. Who do you think makes the more accurate prediction?
I'll give you a couple seconds to think this through.
Right, of course, the diverse group. The more diverse group is more accurate.
And we knew this, right, because on predictive tasks, we should expect that the more diverse group is going to be more accurate at predicting.
We had a theorem that says that.
But here's where the experiments get so interesting, because Phillips and her co-authors also asked people how effective they thought their group was.
And guess what happened here? What happened here is people thought the homogenous groups were more effective, and people in the homogenous groups were also more confident in their decisions.
Well, why is this? This is because no one was disagreeing with them.
Think about it. When people disagree, because they disagree with you, it's kind of less fun, and it makes you less confident.
So experience and reality often don't line up.
So a good experience, hey, we all agree here, can lead to a bad reality.
Not a very good decision, because we had group think.
A bad experience, while we disagree and argued, can actually lead to a good reality, which is an accurate prediction.
So does this mean that we want to go to meetings where people disagree?
Well, yeah, sometimes we really do.
As long as that disagreement is instrumental.
I want to make this a little bit more real.
So you go to a meeting, people disagree.
Here's what you have to ask yourself.
Is this fundamental disagreement or instrumental disagreement?
Because if it's the former, then you have to push for sort of pulling back in the reins and stopping the wagons.
Because no organization, group, school, or even family is going to make consistently good decisions if you don't agree on your fundamental objectives.
And again, this is where leadership enters.
The team, the team, the team.
Great leaders do two things.
First, they get people to agree on the fundamental preferences.
Because without those, without the same fundamental preferences, you're going to get these cycles, and you're going to get manipulative behavior.
So leaders get people to agree on the goal.
Leaders do not necessarily, though, get people to agree on how to achieve that goal.
This is the second thing they do, at least not initially.
What they try and do is they get people to sort of share their ideas.
So they get people to agree on the goal, but also they promote diversity.
So considering the following situation that a friend of mine mentioned me recently,
there's a local firm that makes fresh salsa.
Now this firm's goal is to maximize shareholder value.
Their business, they're trying to maximize their value.
Well, the firm got an offer from a big box chain to supply all of the salsa under a private label to this big box store.
Well, what do you decide?
Well, one person working for this firm said,
well, you know, I think we should create this new lower cost product line because it's going to give us a lot more volume.
Now other people felt the following.
They said, well, you know, I'm afraid because this is going to put downward price pressure over time on our existing brands.
And it could cannibalize the high margin sales we're getting at specialty stores.
And it could actually hurt us in the long run.
Now the two workers both agree on the end goal, but they disagree on the route to achieve that goal.
This is good, right?
But how do we adjudicate it?
Well, here's how.
Ideally both present their models and their thinking to one another and to management.
And everyone just tries to decide which model seems more plausible.
And then you have discussions and hopefully you then gather more information,
bring in more people perhaps, and you make a good choice.
Eventually the firm has to make a choice and that choice is either going to work or it's not.
That's true not of just this particular firm but also of you and I.
At some point we've got to make decisions.
But you're going to make better decisions if you've got more diverse ideas in the room.
You've also got to recognize sometimes you're going to be on the winning side,
sometimes you're going to be on the losing side,
but this winning and losing is only with respect to instrumental choices.
It's not true with respect to fundamental outcomes.
In fact, everything that we've learned in this course tells you you should be happy
when the group disagrees about instrumental choices.
Sometimes though that's just difficult to accept.
So let's go back to those experiments about the who done it.
In those experiments the task was assigned.
The goal was to predict accurately.
So we can say with certainty that any disagreement was instrumental.
It wasn't fundamental.
Everybody had the same fundamental objective, guess who done it.
And that's why the diverse groups did better.
So let me ask the question again.
So you go to a meeting, there's disagreement.
What do you think?
Well, if the disagreement stems from diverse fundamental preferences, that's a bad thing.
If it stems from diverse instrumental preferences, then it's a good thing.
So suppose you go to a meeting, everybody agrees.
You might think, hey, what a great meeting.
What a smart group of people I work with.
And just like the people in Catherine's experiment, you might think, hey, I'm really happy.
But then ask yourself, what has to be true if everybody agreed?
What must be the case if everybody in your group thought the same thing?
That's right, no diversity.
So how can that happen?
How can we have no diversity?
Well, there's two possibilities.
First one is there's no cognitive diversity in the room.
That's a bad thing, right?
Because everybody's thinking of things in the same way.
You've got a classic case of group think, that's bad.
Or it could be the problem is sufficiently easy.
And you all saw the same correct solution.
Now in the latter case, you should probably infer that unless you really like meetings,
you just lost an hour of your life that you're never going to get back.
Now this logic that we've just worked through, it explains why companies like Hewlett Packard
promote common goals.
Remember what David Packard says?
Now at the same time, they also promote diverse ways of solving problems.
Remember he talked about letting people loose.
Those are the two components of leadership that are so important.
Creating fundamental objectives and letting people loose to use their diverse perspectives
and tools to find better solutions.
So it's not that Hewlett Packard or any other company hires only people that have one set of beliefs about the world.
So Hewlett Packard has Democrats, they've got Republicans, they've got independents, right?
But within the walls of the office, people whether they're Democrats, Republicans,
don't want different things.
They all want the same thing.
So they're not climbing an Escher staircase, right?
The team, the team, the team.
And that's why companies like Hewlett Packard are far more innovative than things like well,
unfortunately, our government.
So when a company like Hewlett Packard or any other company promotes diversity,
remember we talked about all those web pages that say we, you know, promote diverse perspectives.
They mean cognitive diversity because they want to tap into diverse perspectives,
diverse categorizations, diverse models, diverse heuristics,
without worrying about diverse preferences getting in the way of the diverse perspectives.
So this is the take-home lesson.
I'm going to drive this home one more time and it applies to how you think about your own group interactions.
You go to a meeting and it's fun and happy and you all agree,
then it probably wasn't that good of a meeting in terms of making a decision.
It might have been a great meeting in terms of building morale.
So even choirs need practice.
That's totally fine.
But when you go to these meetings and people disagree and you find your models,
now not you, but your models, your ways of thinking challenged.
And if you're pretty sure those challenges stem from instrumental and not fundamental preference diversity,
then you should be happy.
Now, neither reaction is natural.
It's really hard to learn to say, hey, we all agreed.
Uh-oh, that could be bad.
And it's also hard to say, my way of thinking was just challenged.
We're not going to do what I wanted.
I'm so happy now.
That isn't easy, but it's what you have to learn to do if you want to learn to leverage differences.
And if you want to be a good leader, if you want to be like David Packard,
you've got to enforce the logic of the team, the team, the team,
and get everybody on the same page with respect to those fundamental preferences.
What are we trying to do?
But then you've got to create an inclusive culture in which you set people free
in which people can share their diverse ways of thinking.
So you get all those ideas and ways of thinking on the table.
So diversity of fundamental preferences, bad, diversity of cognitive models, good.
Totally makes sense. We're done.
And if I look at the clock, I've got 13 minutes to spare. It's great.
Okay, so now I've got two options in these 13 minutes.
I could choose to tidy up and remind us what we've learned, or I can charge ahead.
I can continue unpacking these various types of diversity,
and I can even problematize what we've just learned
and claim that we're really not quite done
and that maybe this is where it gets really interesting
and that maybe we might even want to rethink the team, the team, the team a little bit.
At this point, we're 24 lectures in.
You probably know me well enough to guess what we're going to do.
So here we go. Hang on.
Let's go back to the Norse on Vinland, or maybe even the people on Easter Island.
Now those Norse, they may have well been chanting the team, the team, the team as well.
The problem was that the team had confused fundamental preferences,
which were surviving and thriving as a community,
with instrumental ones, like making sod roofs, which led to their demise.
So because it's easy to conflate means and ends,
the collectives of objectives may have to be questioned.
Descent may be necessary, and I personally believe it is.
Sometimes you need some descent to just make sure you're not confusing fundamental with instrumental.
Now this embracing of descent leads to something I like to call the problem of problems,
the problem of what problems we want to solve.
What challenges do we want to take on? What is our objective function?
So remember Brian Arthur from a few lectures back.
He's the one who wrote about the nature of technology.
Well, Arthur believes that in an economy, the problem of problems drives innovation.
He argues that advances come because someone sees a problem out there and they want to fix it.
So it's a personal belief that this is a problem.
What they do is they look around at all the diverse technologies that exist out there,
all the ideas, and they say, boys, they're one of these that maybe I can combine or adapt to fix this problem.
Now Arthur captures a lot of the reasons why we send innovation, but it's not always the case.
Sometimes we have the solutions going out actually searching for the problems,
like the chicken flavored ice cream.
The problem it solved, the lack of really good ice cream for dogs,
probably wasn't recognized until someone had the solution, which was the chicken flavored ice cream.
Now most of the time though, and this is where Arthur is correct,
the places we go to quote the esteemed Dr. Seuss depend on where we want to go and what we're capable of doing.
So progress depends on identifying problems and then putting together different minds to solve them.
And remember that's one of the key lessons from the history of Bell Labs.
The creation of the telephone created a host of really interesting problems
and that's how they attracted all those smart people.
So for example, how do we get all those people to talk to one another simultaneously?
How do we get a voice to carry all the way across the country without fading out?
How do we lay a cable across an ocean?
These are all really cool interesting problems that people thought up because of the phone company
and it attracted diverse minds that then solved them.
Now in their book Why Not, Ian Ears and Barry Nailbuff described many more instances of somebody seeing a problem,
fixing it, and then reaping the economic spoils.
Here's one of my favorites from the book.
So the inventors of this thing called the spinning popsicles.
This was a popsicle on a little spinner so you didn't have to lick it.
It would just spin for you.
They realized, hey, we've got this technology.
We've got this inexpensive handle that spins and we can solve a more important problem,
which is getting children to brush their teeth.
Now, look, we can argue that they actually contributed to the problem of kids needing to brush their teeth
by putting popsicles on these twisty things.
But then came up with a spinning toothbrush.
And what's really cool is the product quickly became the best selling toothbrush in America.
So they saw a problem, they recombined using existing parts, and they solved it.
We all see problems.
We see the places where we can go.
We see the ways we can make the world a better place.
And we set about trying to do that.
Now notice that if this is true, then preference diversity has this huge upside.
And the upside exists because it leads us to pursue different courses of action, different ventures.
Think about it.
We care about different things.
Then we see different problems.
We see different opportunities.
And this leads to all sorts of wonderful ideas, forms of artistic expression and even products.
So one person writes hip-hop music, another person opens up a really cool Argentinian restaurant,
and a third person organizes tours of the Baltic Sea.
All different, all great, all enriching our lives.
And as we've already discussed, these ideas can be combined.
So we could have Argentinian food on our cruise while listening to hip-hop.
It's fantastic.
Now even better, sometimes when one of us solves a problem in our own interest,
we happen to also solve a problem or create opportunities for other people.
So let me give an example.
Curb cuts.
What's a curb cut?
Well, curb cuts are those ramps that are cut into the edges of sidewalks.
So when they meet the street, instead of having this abrupt drop-off, it's a slope.
Now where did curb cuts come from?
Well, curb cuts came from the fact that people in wheelchairs and walkers couldn't cross streets.
Now these curbs made it tough because you had this lump you had to get over.
So they put in a bunch of curb cuts.
Now once the curb cuts were in place, other people benefited as well.
People with strollers, runners, kids on scooters and bikes,
parents running after children on scooters and bikes.
In fact, last week I was in D.C. and there were these Segway tours of Washington, D.C.,
all these tourists on those little Segway scooters.
If there weren't curb cuts, the Segway scooter ride would be a rather jarring experience.
In fact, there would be lots of wipeouts.
So let me push this thinking about the biodiverse preferences
and how it relates to innovation even further by linking preferences and the tools that we acquire.
So the tools that a person has, me, you, our perspectives, our heuristics and so on,
they're influenced by our preferences.
So if I care deeply about the fairness of electoral outcomes,
so it's the thing that really motivates me, then what am I going to do?
I'm probably going to devote years studying the formal tools of social choice theory.
Now if I don't care a lick about electrical systems,
then I'm not going to spend any time at all learning about capacitors
beyond what I learned in second semester physics as an undergraduate.
So what we care about plays an enormous role in what we learn and study,
how we organize all those ideas inside our heads,
and therefore it affects how we see the world, the perspectives that we have.
So perhaps, if we think about it, diverse preferences aren't so bad after all
because they can be the fuel for the diverse cognitive skills that drive collective performance.
But yet, as we learned earlier and in the previous lecture,
if within an organization like our government, we've got too much preference diversity,
well then we can find ourselves running around in circles.
Or if the institution creates multiple veto players,
we may be handcuffed in what we can achieve because we've got to satisfy too many people who want too many different things.
So how do we do it?
Well, organizations can avoid this problem by agreeing on a common goal.
Anyone who doesn't agree with that goal can go work elsewhere.
Now that doesn't mean it's easy to keep everybody on the same page.
And I once actually heard a business leader describe effective leadership
as writing on snow during a snowstorm.
Now, you have to keep writing the same thing over and over
because otherwise the snow accumulates and covers up what you've written.
So good managers, good leaders go to great lengths to keep people on task.
In fact, David Brandon, who used to be the CEO of Domino's Pizza,
used to walk on a wallet full of $20 bills
and he'd hand any employee $20 on the spot
who could recite verbatim, word for word, the company's mission statement.
Now, pretty quickly people figured this out.
They'd see him come in and memorize it quickly.
It worked because it got people to recognize the goal of the company.
Now, unfortunately, governments have no such luxury.
It's making policy for all of us and we're stuck together
and we've got to deal with it.
In fact, two political theorists, Jim Johnson and Jack Knight,
begin their book The Priority of Democracy with the following sentence.
Politics, in large part, is a response to diversity.
And indeed it is.
And here they mean more than just preference diversity.
They also mean moral and cultural diversity.
Remember all those different places that people store their ketchup.
What Johnson and Knight demonstrate is that the success of a political system
depends in large part on how a formal and informal institutional arrangements
overcome the problems created by diversity
as well as the opportunities that diversity creates.
And I agree.
And remember back, Asimoglu and Robinson, who were writing about economics.
They talked about why do some nations succeed and why do others fail?
Well, they would add that a political system's success
depends on how well it frees up and taps into cognitive diversity.
Remember, pluralism, creating a space where everyone can contribute.
All right, let me try and sum up everything in just a few seconds.
So within teams and organizations, a common objective
enables more efficient leveraging of the cognitive diversity that's the engine of progress.
Lack of a common objective is like having, well, a really lousy oracle.
One that tells you the truth some of the time and lies to you some of the time.
Sometimes it says down is up, sometimes it says up is down.
Well, that's going to make finding a better solution difficult.
But that doesn't mean we don't want some preference diversity.
Because preference diversity leads us to identify different problems.
And this can help us prevent collapse.
And the solution to all those different problems, that can improve our lives.
And oftentimes those solutions can be repurposed to solve other problems.
Unless for the politics, well, we've just got to hope we can all get along
and perhaps compromise a little bit more.
Because if we can, the big team, the team of all of us,
is going to lead much more fulfilling and interesting lives.
Now as members of that big team, we've got to ask ourselves,
what tools should I acquire?
What challenges and opportunities should I identify as my own?
And we should recognize that the answer to those questions isn't going to stay fixed.
Because we're not, as some people used to think, cogs in some giant clock-like universe.
Not at all.
We're adaptive parts of a living, changing, complex world.
And to thrive and contribute as individuals,
we need to acquire the depth and sophistication necessary to keep acquiring new tools
to accumulate new perspectives, new heuristics.
If we don't, we as individuals and as societies may collapse.
Collectively, we need even greater diversity.
We need to maintain that diversity in the face of our natural tendency to conform.
And the loss due to drift and incentives.
And that requires that we encourage people to think differently.
Both as individuals and as a society, we should heed the advice of Whitman.
We are large.
We contain multitudes.
We should contain multitudes.
Thank you.
