Lecture 19 – Quantum Uncertainty, a farewell to determinism
At the end of the last lecture, we left Heisenberg himself baffled about the peculiar nature
of the world at the quantum level.
What did Heisenberg do about his bafflement?
Well, ultimately, he went on to build a principle that embodies the fundamental bafflement
of quantum mechanics, and I want to explore that principle today.
It's the principle of uncertainty, Heisenberg's famous uncertainty principle.
If you think back, way back, you probably watched the early lectures a long time ago.
Think back to lecture three.
Its title was The Clockwork Universe.
Well, it's farewell to determinism and farewell to the clockwork universe once we have Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle in place, because quantum mechanics is going to eliminate forever the
possibility that we live in a completely deterministic universe in which everything
is predictable.
Why is that?
The fundamental reason is the reason of quantization.
We solved the problems that classical physics had with the subatomic world by pointing out
that things had to be quantized, atomic vibrations, the energy and light waves, the orbits of
electrons and atoms.
These things are quantized.
They come in certain discrete units.
How does that force on us an end to classical determinism?
Well, the fundamental idea is this.
If there's a minimum size to the interaction we can have, if there's a minimum amount of
energy, then if we want to understand the world, we have to interact with it, and the
impact of that interaction on the world cannot be made arbitrarily small.
Why?
Because there's a limit to the size, the bundles of energy we use in interacting with the world.
If there were no such limits, we as observers of the world, we as physicists, or we as people
doing experiments, we as people wanting to understand how the world works, we could do
experiments, we could probe the world, we could ask questions of it without having to
disturb it in any way at all.
But nature doesn't work that way.
Nature gives us a certain minimum size to the bundles of energy we can use when we try
to interrogate the world.
And therefore, we in interrogating the world inexorably change it.
We become a factor in the very experiment we're trying to perform.
No longer are we some objective, disconnected observer observing things, we become part
of what we're observed.
That's fundamentally, philosophically, deeply what quantization does to our ability to interact
with the world and to understand it.
We become part of the world we're trying to interact with.
We can't observe the universe without affecting it.
Well, think a little bit about experiments we might do to observe the world, to try to
understand it.
To observe things, well, the least obtrusive way probably is simply to watch them, to look
at them.
What does it mean to look at something?
Well it means to detect light that has shined on that thing and come back to your eyes or
your measuring instruments or whatever and allowed you to tell what's going on.
So let's think about a very simple experiment we might want to do to observe something with
light.
Before we do that, we have to talk a little bit about what it means to observe something
with light.
What do we want to do?
Here's our outline.
We'd like to take some object and we'll take a really simple object like an electron,
for example.
We want to see what it's doing.
We want to know how it's moving, that is how fast it's moving and in what direction,
and we want to know where it is.
Ultimately, why do we want to know those things?
Because according to classical physics anyway, if we know its position and its velocity and
we know the laws of motion which we do, then we can predict what we'll do in the future.
It's knowing the position and velocity of a particle that allows us to predict its future
behavior and gave rise to this idea of a clockwork universe that's completely determined if in
principle the positions and velocities of all the particles that make it up are known.
So let's focus on something very simple, a single electron and let's ask, how can we
go about measuring its position and velocity?
And I've just said the simplest way to do that is to try to see it, to shine light on
it and see where it is.
So that's what we want to do.
Before we do that, let me make a point though about the light we might choose to shine on
it.
Because light, after all, has this particular nature to it.
It consists of waves, yes, but it consists of photons.
If we want to know where this electron is, we're going to have to shine on it photons
that themselves are going to act pretty particle-like.
How do we do that?
Well, remember about the statistical relationship between waves and particles.
The relationship is where the light wave is strong, where it has a high amplitude, we're
likely to find the photon.
Where it has a low amplitude, we're not likely to find the photon.
If we want to make a localized photon, if we want to know where the photon is, so it
acts particle-like, as in our Compton experiment where we shot an x-ray photon and it acted
like a billiard ball, if we want to localize the photon, we've got to make a wave situation
in which the wave has a strong amplitude in a relatively localized region and otherwise
doesn't have much amplitude.
If we have a wave that's spread out over all space, that isn't going to help us much
because we don't know where the photon is likely to be, it just is equally likely to
be anywhere.
Well, to give you an example that's far from that extreme, I have here a picture of two
possible, quote, wave packets.
What's a wave packet?
It's a wave that's been put together in such a way that instead of being a continuous
undulation that goes on forever, it's negligible in most places and then has a strong oscillation,
a strong undulation in just a limited region of space.
How you put together a wave packet is a little bit interesting.
Mathematically, to make a wave packet, you actually have to combine a bunch of waves
of different frequencies.
A wave packet doesn't have a single frequency or a wavelength well-defined.
It's made up of a bunch of different frequencies and therein lies part of our problem here.
The wave packets I'm showing you consist of two different types.
There's a broad wave packet.
It's spread out over space, as you can see, this is the upper one that's red.
It's spread out over space.
It's broad.
The photon is somewhat localized, but not very localized.
If I were to try to detect a photon in this wave, the photon, remember, is likely to be
found where the wave is strongest, but here the wave is pretty strong over a fairly broad
region and therefore the photon is likely to be found somewhere in a fairly broad region.
It's not very well localized.
The wave packet has essentially long wavelength, although as I've just told you, it's made
up of a lot of different waves, but this broad wave packet, they can be fairly long wavelengths
and it can be fairly well-defined and correspondingly it's a fairly low frequency.
When you have a wave, a high frequency corresponds to a short wavelength and a low frequency
corresponds to a long wavelength.
So in this particular case, I have a broad wave packet.
If I try to find photons, where they are is not terribly well localized because there's
a broad region where the wave packet has high amplitude, where the wave is big.
It's got long wavelength and therefore essentially low frequency.
On the other hand, if I really want to make a wave where I can say with pretty good assurance
that I'm going to find a photon here, what I can do is make the lower blue wave packet.
That one is much more localized.
It's very narrow.
There's only a limited region of space where the wave has a high amplitude, so the photon,
if I find one, is going to be with very high precision within that limited region.
To do that, I had to use waves of relatively short wavelength and therefore high frequency.
Again, that's a slight approximation to what's really going on.
To make these wave packets, I have to build up a lot of different frequencies, but to
make the narrower one, it turns out the high frequencies are more prominent, the short
wavelengths.
So in a crude approximation, the narrow one has a well localized photon.
If I detect the photon, it has a short wavelength, but it has a high frequency.
So those are two different wave packets I might try to use to shine on my electron to
see what it's doing.
So the experiment I'm going to describe is actually a thought experiment.
Remember, we talked earlier about thought experiments.
They're experiments that, in principle, one could do, but in practice, they would probably
be difficult, at least at the time the thought experiment or thought them up.
But they help you to illustrate an important idea if you think about what would happen
in this thought experiment.
So this is Heisenberg's famous thought experiment, sometimes called the quantum microscope experiment,
and it consists of shining light on an electron in an attempt to determine the position and
velocity of the electron simultaneously so you can predict what the electron is then
going to do.
So how do we do the experiment?
Well, here's a very simple picture of it.
I'm going to have a light source.
I'm going to imagine shining a single photon out of that light source.
I'm going to represent that photon by one of these wave packets I've been talking about.
I'm going to shine the light, the photon, on the electron.
The photon is going to bounce off the electron and go into a detector, and I'm going to use
that to tell me where the electron is and how it's moving.
Now in practice, to do this, I'd really have to shine a beam of light and extract the information
basically, statistically, from how all the photons come off the electron, and probably
I'd do it with a bunch of electrons and so on.
But in principle, we can imagine the minimum interaction would be to look at the electron
with just a single photon, so that's what our impractical thought experiment consists
of.
We're going to shine light on the electron.
Now here I show us doing that.
The electron is moving along.
I've indicated the electron's position by where I've put it in the picture.
I've indicated the electron's velocity by an arrow.
In this case, the electron is moving to the right and slightly upward on the screen.
This is before the photon comes in and attempts to measure it.
Now what happens?
The photon I've chosen in this particular case is the localized photon.
I need that because I want to know where the electron is.
So I'm going to localize the photon because if I don't know where the photon is, I can't
tell where the electron was that it bounced off of.
So I'm going to localize the photon by generating this wave packet.
How would I do that in practice?
Well, I might take a laser beam and I might make a very, very short pulse of light, very,
very short in time, short, short pulse of light, and that would be a very compact wave
packet where I knew essentially where the photon was.
So I know essentially where the photon is represented by this wave packet.
Statistically, I'm very likely to find the photon somewhere in this little region.
This packet of waves with some statistical chance of finding, it's going to be a photon
somewhere in it, and the chances are it's very close to that localized region.
That wave packet is traveling along at speed c as electromagnetic waves do, and there's
a photon somewhere there if I tried to detect it.
That photon is going to interact with the electron.
So what happens?
Well, the photon interacts with the electron, it bounces off, and I get it in my detector.
Now actually, I'd have detectors all around so I could be sure I knew where it came off
at one angle and so on, but in my simplified experiment, it goes right into my detector.
Great.
Because I had a localized photon, I knew where it was, I knew that wave packet was very narrow,
I've got a very precise measurement of the electron's position.
So I've measured very precisely where that electron is.
Unfortunately, there's a problem, and the problem is that localized wave packet, that's
the one that had a narrow distribution in space, it corresponded to short wavelengths
or high frequencies, high frequencies.
Remember the solution of all the quantum problems, or all the problems classical physics had
at the end of the 19th century.
The solution was quantize.
Quantize energy, in particular, as Einstein said, quantize the energy in light.
It comes in little bundles.
How big are those bundles?
E, the energy of one of those bundles, is Planck's constant H times the frequency.
Well, here we have a high frequency photon.
We needed the high frequency in order to localize it, so we could measure precisely where the
electron was.
The problem is high frequency through quantization, and this is where quantization comes in.
Through quantization, high frequency means high energy, E equals HF.
So this photon necessarily has high energy.
If you want to work with light at that frequency, if you want to have a localized wave packet,
then there is a minimum amount of energy you can be sending out there to interact with
the electron, and that minimum amount of energy is relatively big, because E is HF, and F
is big.
It's a high frequency situation, E is HF, E is, therefore, relatively big.
So this photon had high energy.
It hit the electron.
Remember what happened when they did the demonstration on this table?
When the electron hit the electron, the photon recoiled in some direction, and the electron
took off in some direction.
Whatever the electron was doing, however it was moving before the photon hit it, that
high energy photon disturbed its motion in a significant way, which I can't exactly predict,
because even though the photon is fairly well localized, I don't know exactly where it is
in relation to that electron, so I don't know exactly how it hit it.
And I've represented that on this picture by showing you a bunch of possible arrows
that represent the possible states of motion of the electron after it's been hit by the
photon, and a big fat question mark that tells you we don't know the electron's velocity
after this experiment has been done.
Why not?
Because it's been hit by a high energy photon that has disturbed its velocity.
That's the problem.
Quantization tells us there's a minimum size to this photon in terms of energy.
I can't interact with the electron with any less energy than that.
If I do interact with the photon with the electron with that relatively large amount
of energy, I disturb its motion.
I change its velocity, and I've measured its position to high precision, but I know
nothing about what it was doing before I hit it.
So in measuring its position to high precision, I've destroyed any information about how it
was moving, about its velocity.
That's not good.
I set out to try to measure the electron's position and its velocity to high precision
because that's what I needed to predict its future behavior.
I ended up measuring its position to high precision, but I destroyed any information
I had about its velocity.
Its velocity is now not what it was before.
So even if I could measure its velocity precisely, at this point it's not what it was before,
because the electron has been disturbed.
Why?
By the fundamental bundle of energy, the minimum size I could have for energy of a photon
of that frequency, that wavelength, that compactness, that localizedness.
Well, surely there's a way out of this problem.
Surely the way out of it is to use a lower energy photon.
Remember, quantization doesn't say there is an absolute minimum energy any photon can
have.
It just says if I have light of a certain frequency, the waves are oscillating at a certain
rate, then for that frequency there's a minimum energy HF, but I can make the energy lower
by making the light ridder, making the frequency lower, making the wavelength longer.
If I do that, I'll have a lower energy photon.
Its interaction with the electron will be less violent, it will disturb the electron's
velocity less.
And in principle I can take the frequency of the photon and therefore its energy down
as close to zero as I want.
I can't do that for a fixed frequency, but I can do it by taking the photon frequency
down and therefore I can minimize the disturbance of the electron's velocity.
Now I can measure the velocity.
Great, let's do that.
So here's the microscope experiment again.
Now I've put in not my localized high energy, short wavelength, high frequency photon, but
my wave packet that is spread out, it's broad, it has long wavelength, it has low frequency,
therefore it has low energy equals HF, therefore it's not going to disturb the electron very
much.
Again in principle I can make it as low frequency as I want and make that disturbance as small
as I want.
And therefore when the photon bounces off the electron, I can get a precise measurement
of its velocity and I'm confident that's still the velocity because the photon carried
very little energy and therefore it disturbed the electron as little as I wanted to.
Great, I've measured the velocity of the electron, but there's a problem.
Because I used a low energy, low frequency, long wavelength and therefore broad and spread
out wave packet, I don't know where the photon was.
The photon was not localized in this case and sure it bounces back into my detector
but I don't know exactly where it was so I don't know where the electron was.
So I've measured the electron's velocity accurately but I can't tell you anything about its position
or very much about its position.
And I've represented that in this picture by a big fat question mark and a lot of possible
positions for the electron after the interaction.
It's got the same velocity it did before the interaction this time because I've minimized
the disturbance by lowering the energy of the photon but lowering the energy of the
photon necessarily spread it out in space and I couldn't localize it and therefore
I don't know where the electron is.
Note, what's the problem?
Well, we've got a kind of a trade off.
I can measure the position accurately with a high energy photon but then I disturb the
velocity.
I can measure the velocity accurately with a high energy photon but then I don't know
anything about the position or I can do something in between, I can kind of compromise, I can
take a medium energy photon that will disturb the velocity of the electron somewhat but
not too much but I won't know exactly where it is but I'll know somewhat where it is.
There's a trade off here.
Try to measure the position accurately, you destroy information about the velocity.
Try to measure the velocity accurately, you destroy information about the position.
There's a compromise place in between, you can measure the velocity with some reasonable
degree of precision and the position with some reasonable degree of precision but they'll
both be off a bit.
You can't simultaneously, at least with an experiment like this, measure simultaneously
both the position and velocity of a particle.
Why?
Because, ultimately again, it's because of that point I made at the beginning.
To measure something about the world is to interact with it and quantization sets a fundamental
minimum size to that interaction for a given frequency of light that you want to use and
we've seen how that results in a disturbance of the electron and if we try to get around
that by lowering that frequency to lower the minimum energy of the interaction then we
lose information about position.
So we can't simultaneously measure the velocity and position of an electron or in principle
any other particle.
That's basically what the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle says.
The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle is basically a formal statement of that quandary, that
tradeoff that you can't measure simultaneously the position and velocity of a particle with
arbitrary position.
Can't measure simultaneously the position and velocity, actually technically Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle says not velocity but momentum and momentum is the product of the
particle's mass with its velocity.
You can't measure them both with arbitrarily high precision.
You can measure one with perfect precision and know nothing about the other.
You can measure the other with perfect precision and know nothing about the first or you can
measure them both with some degree of precision but neither will be perfect.
Strictly, mathematically, Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle is stated by saying the product
of the uncertainty, how uncertain you are about the position, with how uncertain you
are about the momentum, again the mass times the velocity.
That product can't be zero.
In classical physics it could be zero and we could measure both with arbitrary precision.
In quantum physics it can't be zero, in fact it has to be bigger than a number which is
approximately, guess what, Planck's constant H, that fundamental number that sets the fundamental
graininess, the fundamental quantization of the universe.
Remember I said, Planck's constant, or quantum mechanics is really the physics about the
fact that Planck's constant isn't zero.
If Planck's constant were zero, that product of uncertainties could be zero and that means
I could measure them both with arbitrary precision.
Both uncertainties could be zero.
If the uncertainty is zero, it means I know the quantity precisely.
If Planck's constant were zero, the product could be zero and both uncertainties could
be zero and I could measure with arbitrary precision.
But Planck's constant is not zero, it sets that fundamental graininess and in the quantum
microscope thought experiment it's that graininess or the imprecision associated with the wave
particle duality that led to my inability to measure both the velocity and the position
simultaneously.
Mathematically then, Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle reads something like this.
The uncertainty in momentum, which is the mass times the uncertainty in velocity, times
the uncertainty in position is greater than H. In this expression, m is the mass, delta
x is the uncertainty in position, that Greek letter delta, capital delta, symbol, a triangle
like symbol, delta to a physicist or mathematician means a change in or a range in some number,
a variation.
And so delta x means a range in x, the position, x is the variable that stands for position,
v stands for velocity.
So this says take the mass of the particle, multiply it by the uncertainty in its position,
how unsure you are.
Do I know it to within plus or minus 2 meters?
Do I know it to within plus or minus 10 light years?
Do I know the electrons to position within plus or minus a nanometer, a billionth of
a meter?
What's the uncertainty?
Take that number, multiply it by the uncertainty in velocity.
What is the velocity 25 meters a second plus or minus 1 millimeter a second?
Or is it half the speed of light plus or minus a third of the speed of light?
What is the velocity and how uncertain it is?
The important number is how uncertain it is, plus or minus how many meters a second, miles
an hour, whatever.
That's the delta v, multiply them together, those numbers cannot come out smaller than
approximately H, whether it's exactly H or H divided by 2 pi or different things, depends
exactly on the details of your wave packet.
It's approximately a number on the order of H, and H is a very small number.
That means the product of the uncertainties can be very small.
What that means, and also look at the mass in there.
I could divide both sides of that equation by the mass and I have delta x, delta v greater
than H over the mass.
That means for massive objects like a tennis ball or me or a car, the product of the uncertainty
in position and uncertainty in velocity is minuscule.
That's why the uncertainty principle doesn't affect macroscopic size objects like tennis
balls or people or cars or the earth.
Do I know what this tennis ball is doing?
To an enormously high degree of precision, I can measure that.
I can measure its position very accurately and its velocity very accurately because it
has a pretty big mass, and it's the mass times the uncertainty in position times the uncertainty
in velocity that has to be bigger than that tiny, tiny little number H, and so the uncertainty
in position times the uncertainty in velocity, which has to be bigger than that tiny number
H divided by the relatively big mass of this tennis ball.
That's a pretty tiny number, and so I don't have to be very uncertain about either.
For all practical purposes, I can measure the position and velocity of macroscopic objects
to a tremendously good degree of accuracy, and I can predict their subsequent motion
very, very precisely.
In principle, though, I can't predict it with infinitely good precision, but in the case
of objects like basketballs and tennis balls and stars and spacecraft and cars and airplanes,
the uncertainty principle has a negligible effect on our ability to predict what's going
to happen.
On the other hand, for things like electrons that are not very massive at all, again, divide
both sides of that equation by M, then H, which is a small number, gets divided by another
small number, and that makes things a bit bigger.
For things the size of electrons, for things on the atomic scale, the product of the uncertainty
in position with the uncertainty in momentum becomes significant, so that's why it's only
at the atomic scale that we begin to notice quantization.
That's why quantum physics wasn't obvious.
If we lived in a world where H was not one over one with 33 zeros after it, but in meter
kilogram second or pounds and inches and second system of units, it had value around
one, then all this would be obvious to us.
When you turn on a light bulb, you'd be bing, bing, bing, bing, hit by photons because
they'd be much bigger, and quantization would be obvious to us, and we would live intuitively
with the uncertainty principle, and we wouldn't really be able to play basketball very well
because we wouldn't even know where the basketball was, and couldn't go through the hoop, and
maybe it went through the hoop, and maybe it didn't go through the hoop, and it's like
it may be interfered with itself.
All those things would happen at the macroscopic world, and quantum mechanics would be obvious.
It would be a very strange world to live in.
It's the smallness of Planck's constant again that makes quantum effects important almost
always only at the microscopic subatomic kind of level, and again it's because H is so small,
and so the product of these uncertainties is small.
Well that's the physics of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, but what does it mean?
Well there's where things get interesting.
According to most physicists, but not all, the philosophical interpretation of the uncertainty
principle says this.
It follows the school of philosophy called logical positivism, and one of the tenets
of logical positivism is that if you can't measure something, it makes no sense to talk
about its existence.
I could say there's a big purple hippopotamus standing on the stage with me, but it's invisible,
and you can't weigh it, and it doesn't reflect electromagnetic waves, and it doesn't emit
heat, and all these other things, and anything you try to do to detect it, I'm going to
say, no, you can't do that.
Well that's nonsense.
Maybe it's there, maybe it's not, but there's no way we can ever verify that, so it makes
no sense to talk about it.
That's what logical positivism says.
Well along comes Heisenberg saying, look, I can't measure the velocity and position
precisely.
Magical positivism and the so-called Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, which
flows from it, which most physicists subscribe to, says, well, if you can't measure both
the velocity and position simultaneously, it makes no sense to say the electron or any
other subatomic particle, or actually the earth or a bowling ball, for that matter,
has a precisely defined velocity and position at the same instant.
It makes no sense to talk about those.
If you can't measure them, and the uncertainty principle says you never can, then it makes
no sense to say it has them.
That's the Copenhagen interpretation.
Most physicists believe that, or else they simply do quantum mechanics, and they try
not to think about the velocity of it, because believe it or not, quantum mechanics makes
wonderfully accurate predictions about some kinds of things, and allows us to build computers
and semiconductor devices and lasers and all kinds of things that would be impossible
without it.
So it works.
And so a lot of physicists sort of forget about the philosophical interpretation, but
it's there.
And when pressed, most physicists would say, yep, I agree with the Niels Bohr and the Copenhagen
interpretation, which says a particle simply doesn't have a velocity and position.
That's a meaningless statement to say an electron has a velocity and a position, but I can't
measure them.
Because I can't measure them, it's like the purple hippopotamus.
It doesn't exist.
That's the Copenhagen interpretation.
Remember I told you our language would fail us when we came to quantum mechanics.
Here's how it's failing us.
We want to think of an electron as a little billiard ball-like thing.
I grab this steel ball and say, here's my electron.
It's got a position and a velocity.
It doesn't, according to quantum mechanics.
It's not like a little billiard ball.
It's a kind of fuzzy statistical thing, according to the Copenhagen interpretation.
This picture of the atom is way wrong.
The atom can't consist of electrons in precise orbits, the way the Earth is in a precise
orbit around the Sun, because at that scale Planck's constant H comes into play and is
big enough, tiny as it is, that it says, no, you cannot describe an atom by saying that
electron is right there at this instant moving that way.
The electron is a fuzzy, smeared out statistical kind of thing.
You can say, oh, well, it's got a velocity in this range and a position somewhere in
this range.
And about the most you can say about the position is it's somewhere within about a tenth of
a nanometer.
That's about the size of an atom, a tenth of a billionth of a meter.
You can say, well, I'm pretty certain it's in that region.
Maybe it's a little further out.
Maybe it's way far out, but there's not much probability of that.
You can't talk about electrons and protons or atoms or anything else as having precise
velocity and position.
If they don't have precise velocity and position, then the whole clockwork universe idea dies
because the clockwork universe was based on the idea that every particle had a precise
velocity and position.
And even though we might not be able to know it, it was sufficient to know that it had
them because then the laws of physics would take over and they would determine the future
behavior of that particle and all the other particles in the universe and everything would
be completely determined.
But once you let go of the notion that particles have unique velocities and positions well
defined at all times, then that idea is gone.
So farewell to determinism, farewell to the clockwork universe.
Now does everybody believe this?
No.
The most famous physicist who refused to believe this was Einstein.
Einstein went to his grave very, very troubled with quantum mechanics and he had a series
of wonderfully famous debates with Bohr.
Einstein's famous statement about quantum mechanics is summed up by saying, God doesn't
play dice.
He just could not believe that the universe was fundamentally probabilistic and statistical.
He didn't quite say God does not play dice.
He said instead, it is hard to sneak a look at God's cards, but that he would play dice
with the world is something I cannot believe for a single moment.
That's Einstein on quantum physics.
It looks like Einstein was wrong.
There have been other schools of physicists who tried to pursue this idea, who tried to
say, look, we can't measure these things simultaneously, but really they still exist.
And they searched for so-called hidden variables operating at a lower level that we could never
detect but that would determine exactly what was happening.
Those theories, although there are still physicists and philosophers who are working
on them, those theories were dealt a very serious blow with a series of experiments
done in the 1980s, particularly, and we'll get to those in lecture 21.
And for now, it really looks like quantum mechanics is giving us a very strange and
new philosophical picture of a world that at the fundamental level is fuzzy and probabilistic
and imprecise in a very, very fundamental way.
