Lecture 20, Particle or Wave
Did I say that right? Didn't I have a title just like that before?
Well, if you think about Lecture 18, the title was Wave or Particle.
This one's very, very similar for reasons that will soon become obvious.
Where are we at this point? Well, we've studied the wave particle duality for light.
We asked the question, is light a wave? Is light a particle?
And we ended up with this somewhat unsatisfying answer.
It's both, but we recognize through Bohr's principle of complementarity
that that was not a contradiction, that we need both aspects of light
to describe fully its behavior.
Well, that's true for light. What about matter?
In 1923, a French prince, whose name was Louis de Broglie,
finishing his PhD thesis in physics, had a brilliant insight.
He said, if light, which we thought was a wave, exhibits particle-like aspects,
why shouldn't matter, which we think is composed of particles, exhibit wave-like aspects?
Why shouldn't there be a wave particle duality for matter, as well as for light?
And in his PhD thesis in 1923, de Broglie proposed a wave particle duality for matter.
And he said, I think with each matter particle, there is associated a wave of a certain wavelength.
How do you calculate that wavelength, said de Broglie?
Well, it depends on the particle's mass, one of its fundamental properties.
And it also depends on how fast it's moving.
And it depends on that fundamental number of nature that tells us about the quantum physics,
tells us about quantization, tells us about that fundamental graininess of the universe at the subatomic scale.
I'm going to show you the equation that de Broglie wrote to talk about the wavelength of matter waves.
Again, we aren't getting very mathematical here, but I want to give you a sense of what that equation looks like
so you can understand how it works.
So let's take a look at the equation. Here it is.
It says wavelength, that is, the length of a matter wave associated with a given particle, is equal to a quotient,
Planck's constant, H, the same Planck's constant we've seen before,
divided by the particle's mass times its velocity.
Same as in all of quantum physics, if H were 0, the wavelengths of all particles would be 0
and they wouldn't have any wave aspect.
But quantum physics is about the fact that the fundamental graininess, the fundamental divisions of nature are not 0,
that there is a fundamental limit to how much you can subdivide things,
and it's set by the size of that constant, H.
And so here we have wavelength equals H over mv.
The wavelength of a matter wave is Planck's constant divided by the mass times the velocity of the particle we're talking about.
And I've drawn here a little picture of a wave to remind you what the wavelength means.
The wavelength is the distance between two wave crests.
It's the distance along the wave over which the wave repeats itself once.
So that's what I mean when I say the wavelength of a matter wave.
Now, what does it mean to talk about matter waves?
Do I have a matter wave associated with me?
Does a car running down the road have a matter wave associated with it?
Does the moon in its orbit have a matter wave associated with it?
Well, in principle, yes.
But in practice, we don't notice the wave properties of things like people or baseballs or the moon or other large macroscopic objects.
We wouldn't even notice it for something like a bacterium.
It takes very small objects to notice the wave properties.
Why is that?
Let me give you an example.
If you walk out of the room in which you're now watching or listening to this course,
and don't do it if it's your car, but otherwise walk out of the room a minute,
and you'll notice something.
You can probably still hear me talking,
but you probably, unless you're right in the line of sight to your TV screen,
can't see me talking about this anymore.
Why not?
Well, light seems to travel in straight lines,
and light does not go around corners,
and light goes out of the door of the room you've walked out of,
but it doesn't bend around the corner.
Sound does.
And yet light and sound are both waves.
Why the difference?
Well, it turns out that the wave properties of a wave are most noticeable
when it interacts with systems, other things in its environment,
that are themselves roughly comparable to the size of a wavelength.
If those systems are much, much bigger than a wavelength,
you don't really notice the wave aspect of the phenomenon you're talking about.
That's one of the reasons why it wasn't obvious from the outset that light is a wave,
why Newton and Huygens could disagree about whether light was a wave or a particle
long before quantum physics came along,
because most of the objects with which light interacts in our everyday experience
are much bigger than the wavelength of light.
The wavelength of light is not infinitesimally tiny.
It's about a thousandth of a millimeter.
A thousandth of a millimeter.
It's a pretty small amount, but it's in the scheme of sizes physics measures.
It's still not that small.
It's actually a rather big distance now in the scale of, say, integrated circuits
we use in computer chips, for example.
So the wavelength of light is not infinitesimally tiny, but it's pretty small.
That's why you couldn't just take a couple of holes in a wall
and do a double slit interference pattern, although you could do it, as I described,
by taking two razor blades, putting them very close together.
And if you do that, you get a spacing which is many times the wavelength of light still,
but at least it's close enough that you can begin to see the interference.
So here's the point.
Wave interference occurs and other wave-like phenomena occur
when a wave interacts with a system that is roughly the size of a wavelength.
So you get a good double slit interference pattern
if the slits are close together, approximately the size of a wavelength.
There are a few wavelengths.
If they're further apart, you still get an interference pattern,
but the light, dark, light, dark, light, dark comes so often they smear together
and you don't notice it.
Similarly, if a light wave goes through a small hole comparable to the size of a wavelength,
then we get that spreading-out effect that we saw when we had our light
in the interference experiments going through a slit.
On the other hand, if light goes through a very large hole, like the door to your room,
then it basically goes through in straight lines as if it were a particle.
That's why when you walk out of the room, you don't see me talking on your video screen anymore
unless you happen to be looking in a direct line of sight to it.
Why do you hear me talking?
Because the wavelength of sound waves is comparable to the size of the door of the room,
and so the sound wave exhibit waves' behavior quite dramatically in that situation,
and part of that behavior is bending analogously to the way the light waves
in our double slit experiment spread out in circular paths after they went through the slits.
So the important point there is a wave is noticeable,
or the wave behavior of some wave-like phenomenon is noticeable when it interacts with a system
that's roughly a wavelength in size or maybe a little bit bigger.
But if it interacts with a system that's much, much bigger than a wavelength,
then you don't notice the wave aspect of it.
Well, let's go back to De Broglie's equation.
Wavelength is Planck's constant, which is a tiny little number
divided by the mass times the velocity of the wave.
Mass of a big object like me or the moon or the earth or this tennis ball
is a pretty big number compared to the mass of something like an atom or an electron.
So the wavelength of this tennis ball as it's moving along like this
is Planck's constant, that tiny, tiny number, 1 over 1 with 33 zeros after it,
divided by the mass, which might be a good fraction of a kilogram,
divided by its velocity, which might be a meter or a second or something like that,
and that comes out to a tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny number,
like 1 over 1 with 33 or 34 or 30 or something zeros after it of a meter.
Infinitesimally tiny will never, ever notice the wave properties of this tennis ball
even though, according to quantum physics, they exist.
So we don't notice the effect of De Broglie's hypothesis on ordinary matter,
the kind of matter we deal with for two reasons.
One is it's Planck's constant is so small,
and second, ordinary matter that we deal with is sufficiently massive
that we don't notice the wave aspects because the wavelength is too small
to be of any comparable size to the object itself
or anything with which the object might interact,
like in the case of the tennis ball or tennis racket, for example.
On the other hand, if we look at subatomic particles back to De Broglie's equation again,
M is very small, and the wavelength can become large.
And when the wavelength becomes comparable to the size of the systems
that are important for those objects, those microscopic objects, those subatomic particles,
then the wave aspects will become quite dramatic.
For example, for a typical electron in a typical atom,
if you take Planck's constant divided by the mass of the electron
times the typical velocity an electron might have in an atom,
you'll find the wavelength associated with that electron
is roughly comparable to the size of the atom itself.
Well, there's a situation in which the electron is interacting with a system,
the atom of which it's part,
in a situation where the size of the system is comparable to the wavelength,
then the wave properties ought to be noticeable.
So if De Broglie's hypothesis is correct,
we ought to notice wave aspects at the subatomic world,
the wave aspects of matter,
but we won't notice them in the macroscopic world.
There is one interesting exception to that last point,
and I'm not going to dwell on it in this course because it's kind of an aside,
but it's worth mentioning.
Look once again at De Broglie's hypothesis.
Wavelength is Planck's constant divided by the mass times the velocity.
If I could make the velocity of a particle very small,
even if it had a substantial mass,
I could make the wavelength big.
If I could bring this tennis ball truly to rest,
I could make its wavelength very big.
I can't bring it to rest because it's composed of zillions and zillions of atoms
and things bouncing around,
and the tennis ball is always really jostling around.
But if I could bring it to rest,
I could see quantum effects even in macroscopic size systems.
That is systems that are the size of ordinary everyday objects that we deal with.
There is one case where I can actually do that.
If I cool matter to temperatures very, very close to absolute zero,
then that frenzied vibration that basically is heat comes as close as it can to a stop.
Quantum mechanics doesn't let it stop altogether,
but it comes as close as possible to a stop.
And then even macroscopic size systems will exhibit very bizarre behavior,
which is directly attributable to the fact that matter has a quantum wave aspect to it.
That's one reason low-temperature physics is such a fascinating field.
It's used to confirm quantum mechanics sometimes with systems that are not tiny little microscopic systems.
So that's one way we can look at de Broglie's matter wave hypothesis.
This is not the most obvious way.
The most obvious way, for example, is to say,
OK, de Broglie, you claim that particles like electrons have a wavelength,
have a wave associated with them.
Well, one way to prove that would be to do a double slit experiment with electrons.
Send a beam of electrons, like you generate in the back of your TV set,
through a double slit apparatus and see if you get an interference pattern.
Those experiments have actually been done.
They were done as early as the 1920s.
De Broglie's hypothesis, remember, is 1923.
By the end of the 1920s, those experiments had been done.
They aren't done quite like the double slit experiment I described.
They're physically different, but conceptually similar.
What one typically does is send a beam of electrons at a crystal of some metal
or some other substance.
A crystal is simply a regularly ordered structure with atoms at particular locations.
And the spaces between the atoms act like the slits in a double slit interference experiment,
and the electrons go through and you get them onto a photographic plate or a screen or something,
and you look at what happens.
And lo and behold, you see patterns that are identical to the same patterns you would get
if you sent light or x-rays or something through that same structure.
You get interference patterns with electrons.
And if you say to yourself, OK, which slit?
Let's pretend it's just a double slit experiment instead of one of these atoms.
It's conceptually one of these crystals.
It's conceptually the same thing.
You say, which slit did the electron go through?
The electron is a matter particle.
You run into exactly the same situation you did with light.
It went through both slits.
It went through neither slit.
It somehow sampled both slits.
It wasn't an electron.
While it was going through the slits, it was a wave.
And exactly the same questions we asked about light.
Is it a wave or a particle?
It can be asked about electrons or other subatomic particles.
And the answer comes out the same.
There is a wave particle duality for matter as well as for light.
Is matter solid particulate stuff and light is ethereal waves?
No, we already know light isn't just ethereal waves.
It's got waves, but it's also got particle aspect.
Now we're finding out that matter, which we thought of as solid little things like little tiny billiard balls,
it's got a wave aspect as well.
Both matter and light have wave and particle aspects to them.
And there's no getting around that.
Don't try to ask which slit did the electron go through any more than you can ask which slit did the photon go through.
Somehow the electron is acting as a wave when it's going through that crystal or through that double slit apparatus.
And it is sampling all the slits or both slits or whatever there are.
And only when you try to detect the electron, only when you say, I want to find an electron, a little hard sphere like ball,
then you'll find a little point like object.
And you'll say, oh, the electron's here.
But if you leave the electron alone and let it go on its own, its wave nature determines what it does.
Very strange.
Well, this is in one way baffling.
In another way, it's a beautiful kind of symmetry.
What's true for light, that it's both wave and particle, is now true for matter.
It's both wave and particle.
Kind of parallels Einstein's matter and energy being, in some sense, equivalent.
It's not the same thing, but it's got an aesthetic symmetry to it.
Both matter, which we thought of as hard, solid, particulate, and light, which we thought of as ethereal and wavy,
both of them have aspects of what we thought the other was.
Both have a wave particle duality.
How are we going to develop a physics that can describe the behavior of a universe in which both matter and light are both wave and particle?
I want to spend a few minutes showing you how that, in fact, was done.
We already know the answer for light.
And after I review the answer for light, then the answer for matter will become more obvious.
In the case of light, we have equations, Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism,
that we showed, not mathematically, but conceptually, how they led to the prediction that there should be light waves.
Because these equations lead to electric fields changing, which make magnetic fields changing, which make electric fields change.
And that whole structure propagated through space, and we found it did so at the speed we call C.
And out of that, we developed the idea of special relativity.
But the conceptual framework for doing that was we had some equations.
In fact, Maxwell's equations reduced to what's called a wave equation, an equation that described the waves.
We had this wave equation, this equation that describes how waves behave, and we solved that wave equation,
and it tells us how electromagnetic waves behave.
It tells us what they look like.
It tells us how fast they go.
It tells us everything we'd want to know about them.
So the conceptual framework, if you will, of classical physics explaining wave behavior,
is to say, OK, we have a wave equation ultimately coming from the theory of electromagnetism,
and it predicts the behavior of the waves and all the properties.
That's it.
In our wave particle duality quantum description of light, we modified that,
but we didn't throw out the wave equation.
We didn't throw out Maxwell's equations altogether.
What we simply said was this.
We have this theory that leads to a wave equation, Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism.
It leads to a wave equation.
The wave equation predicts the behavior of waves.
In classical physics, those waves are the reality.
In quantum physics, we make that one step removed.
OK, we say the wave equation predicts what the waves will do.
Then there is a statistical link between the wave equation and the possibility of finding the associated particle.
Where the wave equation predicts a strong wave, we predict that we're likely to find photons.
Where the wave equation predicts a weak wave, we predict that we are unlikely to find photons.
We do the double slit experiment.
We theoretically think about the double slit experiment.
We say, oh, yes, I see what happens.
We predict that there should be a strong wave at this point on the screen,
a weak wave here, a strong wave here.
That doesn't tell us exactly where we'll find photons,
but it tells us we are more likely to find photons at the place where the wave is strong.
There's that statistical link.
So we have equation predicts wave behavior,
but wave behavior does not determine exactly what happens.
Instead, it gives a statistical determination of what is most likely to happen.
Well, the situation for matter turns out to be exactly the same.
For every particle, there's a wave equation that describes the behavior of its associated matter wave,
the wave that De Broglie talked about, the wave that De Broglie hypothesized.
There's a wave equation for electrons and other simple particles in the approximation
where they're moving at much less than the speed of light.
So sort of a Newtonian situation, a non-relativistic situation.
We do have relativistic equations, but I'm not going to talk about those yet.
In that situation, in 1926, Erwin Schrodinger came up with a wave equation
that describes the behavior of the quote, matter waves associated with simple particles like electrons.
The equation is a little bit more complicated than the wave equation that follows from Maxwell's equations,
but it's pretty simple.
And people in first or second year physics and college regularly solve this equation
and understand how it predicts the behavior of matter in quantum mechanical-sized systems with considerable accuracy.
So Schrodinger came up with this Schrodinger equation.
What does the Schrodinger equation do?
Well, it does what Maxwell's equations did.
It gives us the behavior of a wave.
What wave, in this case, the matter wave that De Broglie associates with the particle?
And then how do we determine what the particle itself actually does in the same way?
Once we know the solution to the equation that describes the matter wave,
we know how the matter wave behaves.
But we don't say the matter wave is reality.
Instead, we say the matter wave gives us the probability that we'll find the particle.
So this sounds a little involved.
If you want to know how an electron behaves in quantum mechanics,
you do the same thing you would if you want to know how a photon behaves.
You solve the associated wave equation that describes the waves,
and then you ask yourself, OK, where am I going to find this electron?
What's it going to be doing?
It's going to be found where the wave amplitude is big,
and it's unlikely to be found where the wave amplitude is small.
Let me just summarize that with a little conceptual diagram here
that gives you a sense of how this all works,
first in classical physics and then in quantum physics.
In classical physics, we could predict the behavior of a matter particle very simply.
How did we do that?
If we had a classical particle of matter, we had some equations.
And again, I'm not getting mathematical here.
I'm just telling you what a physicist would use.
If we had equations, in that case, they were Newton's laws of motion
that told how particles move in response to forces.
If we solve those equations of motion,
we immediately get from that the behavior of the particle.
So the solution to the equation of motion
leads directly to the behavior of the particle.
In classical physics, if we wanted to know how a wave behaved,
a typical example of a wave is light,
we would solve a wave equation.
In the case of classical light waves,
the wave equation ultimately comes from Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism.
And the solution to that wave occasion gives us the behavior of the wave.
So in classical physics, whether we're dealing with matter or waves,
we solve one equation.
In the case of matter, it gives us the behavior of the particles.
In the case of waves, it gives us the behavior of the waves,
and that's reality, and we're done with it.
What happens in quantum physics?
In quantum physics, we have this street-step process I've been describing,
and the quantum concept here holds for both matter and light,
because now with the broy, we have this complete symmetry between the two.
We solve a wave equation, the Schrodinger equation,
if it's a matter particle, the wave equation coming from Maxwell's equations,
if it's light, if it's a photon we're talking about,
we get a solution for wave behavior, but that isn't reality itself.
That's only a kind of probabilistic guide to reality,
and that tells us the probability of finding the particle,
whether it's a photon or an electron.
So there's a conceptual look at how this all works out.
What do we gain with the broy's hypothesis?
Well, we gain immediately some explanations for some aspects of quantum mechanics
that before we couldn't explain, and I'm going to give you two examples of that.
We gain, first of all, an understanding of Bohr's atomic theory.
Remember Bohr said the electrons were stuck in these orbits,
and they couldn't jump between them and so on, but he gave no explanation of why.
Now we have a very good explanation for these allowed orbits in the electron,
and here's why.
I'm going to do this with an analogy with, say, a violin string.
Suppose I have a violin string, and I want to make a noise,
vibrating with the bow of the violin, and it can make certain notes,
but it can't make every note.
Why not?
Here's why not.
Take a look.
These are called standing waves, the kind of waves that oscillate up and down
on things like violin strings or piano strings.
On the left you see a wave.
The ends of the string are held fixed.
So a wave that can vibrate on that string has to be a wave where it fits,
actually a certain number of wavelengths or half wavelengths,
an integer number of them, between the two ends.
That's what the wave on the left is doing.
Look at the wave on the right.
It doesn't work on a string of this length,
because the right end of it isn't pinned at rest like it's supposed to be in the violin.
So you can't make the note corresponding to the right-hand wave on this string.
That's not a possible allowed vibration on this violin string.
Well, the explanation of the allowed electron orbits using the Brøy's matter wave hypothesis
is exactly analogous, except these orbits are circular orbits around the nucleus,
and so we're talking about how many waves can fit in this circular kind of orbit.
In the atomic orbits, on the left we have a situation where an integer number of these
half wavelengths of these de Brøy matter waves fit around that particular orbit.
That's an allowed orbit.
But on the right we have a situation where the number of wiggles is a little bit more
and the wave doesn't come back on itself.
That's not a possible situation.
And in fact, if you work out the details of this,
you find that if you apply de Brøy's hypothesis,
you indeed get the allowed orbits in the Bohr theory of the atom.
You get the orbits that are allowed because they're the only orbits
on which these waves can close back on themselves,
on which these standing waves can exist.
So matter waves explain Bohr's atomic theory.
The one on the right's ruled out, the one on the left is allowed.
And since the energy is related to the frequency of vibration and so on,
the energy levels in the atom are indeed quantized,
and we have an explanation for all that.
The second phenomena can be understood if you think about what a wave is.
A wave is kind of a continuous spread out thing.
Have a wave going along, it can't just stop abruptly.
It has to kind of spread continuously.
And the mathematics that comes out of the wave equation describes that.
Let me give you an example where that's important.
In the very first lecture, I talked about time travel, tunneling, tennis, and tea.
Let's go to that second word, tunneling.
Remember I had you in a concrete prison cage and you were pacing back and forth,
and then all of a sudden you found yourself on the outside.
Here's why that's possible.
It's a phenomenon of quantum tunneling.
Here I've got a barrier and I've got a ball that's moving back and forth
and the walls of that barrier can't get out.
So there it is.
A little while later I might find it moving that way.
A little while later I might find it moving that way.
And if this were a classical particle and obeyed the laws of classical physics,
I'd never find it outside of there.
But this is a quantum mechanical particle.
In a quantum mechanical box, maybe some silicon structure we've fabricated
in making a microelectronic circuit.
Maybe it's just an electron in an atom trapped there by the electric forces or something.
But it's got some kind of associated matter wave.
The way we describe its particle, its behavior is to solve the matter wave equation.
Look at the matter wave where the matter wave is big.
The particle is likely to be found where it's small.
It's not likely to be found.
I'm not going to go through the solution procedure,
but there's in fact what the solution, what the matter wave looks like for that particular case.
It's very big and of basically constant amplitude inside that barrier.
That says we're equally likely to find the particle anywhere inside that barrier.
Again, it's the overall height of the matter wave,
whether we're locally at a high point or a low point, that's important.
It's the overall amplitude.
So anywhere between those pieces of barrier, the matter wave is equally likely to be found.
The mathematics of the Schrodinger equation,
the equation that describes these matter waves,
requires that the wave be continuous.
And so it can't suddenly end abruptly at that barrier.
Instead, what has to happen is the wave amplitude tapers off as we go through the barrier,
as you can see it doing.
And then when we get outside, there's still a little bit of waviness left.
And the waviness outside the barrier has a much lower amplitude than it does inside the barrier.
That means we're very unlikely to find the particle out there, but the probability is not zero.
So it may happen that sometime we suddenly find the particle outside the barrier.
Don't ask how it got there.
Don't try to follow it through the barrier,
because if you try to follow it through the barrier,
you'll be doing just what we tried to do when we tried to follow the photons through the slit
and the double slit apparatus, and we'll destroy the wave phenomenon we're looking at.
So you can't ask that question,
but it is possible that the wave will be found outside the barrier.
Does that really occur?
It sure does.
Those radioactive alpha particles that Rutherford used to find the atomic nucleus
in fact escaped from the nucleus of uranium atoms by quantum tunneling through an electrical barrier
that classical physics says they don't have enough energy to get through.
As I mentioned the very first day, I think, the very first lecture,
quantum tunneling also occurs as two hydrogen nuclei come together on the sun.
There's an electrical repulsion because they're both positive,
and classically they typically at even the 20 million degree temperature at the center of the sun
don't have enough energy to overcome that,
but yet they quantum tunnel through that barrier, come together,
fuse, release energy that makes the sunlight that keeps us alive.
Finally, we are increasingly using micro-electronic devices that use the principle of quantum tunneling,
and in fact we may be building computers in a few years that are thousands of times faster than today's computers
because they rely on a very cold, near absolute zero quantum tunneling device.
That one happens to be called the Josephson Junction,
and people are working on computers that may use these devices.
Here's a picture in fact from our newfound ability to manipulate matter.
This is a picture taken from a scanning tunneling microscope,
which is itself a device that uses quantum tunneling to image systems as small as individual atoms.
What you see here is a so-called corral of 48 iron atoms on a copper surface,
and inside there is an electron, and what you're seeing are ripples that represent the wave function of the electron.
The wave describes the electron, and the electron is sort of trapped.
You can just see this beautifully in this picture, trapped inside that circular barrier,
but there is a chance it will be found outside, and you can see that in the slight hint that those ripply waves continue outside the barrier.
So this is a so-called quantum corral. It was made at IBM.
They manipulate individual atoms into that place, put 48 iron atoms down on that copper substrate with an electron trapped inside,
but it's not completely trapped because there's a finite chance that it will tunnel out.
Wow, the wave particle duality for matter is giving us a richness that we never imagined possible.
Finally, let's take one more look now that we understand that matter also has a wave and particle aspect just like light.
Let's take another look at the uncertainty principle because it's now entirely possible to understand the uncertainty principle just from the wave particle duality.
As long as you acknowledge that matter like light has both a wave and a particle aspect,
you have to see immediately that it makes no sense to talk about the position and velocity of a particle at the same instant.
Why is that? Let's just take a look.
Suppose I have a wave that extends forever in both directions,
and I've intentionally made this wave go right off the edges of your screen because I want you to get the sense that this wave extends forever in both directions.
Now that wave is continuous. Its wavelength is absolutely precisely known.
Remember in the last lecture we talked about wave packets and how you made a little localized wave packet by combining waves of different wavelengths,
and so the packet was slightly undefined in terms of its wavelength and frequency.
There was some ambiguity.
Well, this continuous wave, there's none of that ambiguity.
The wavelength is absolutely known because the wavelength is absolutely known,
and because de Broglie says wavelength is Planck's constant over mass times velocity, that means the velocity is absolutely known.
So this wave represents a particle for which we know exactly what its velocity is.
There is no uncertainty in its velocity.
On the other hand, remember how to interpret the matter wave.
The matter wave gives you the probability of finding the particle.
This wave extends forever with equal amplitude everywhere.
Where's the particle? Could be anywhere.
We know nothing about this particle's position.
The uncertainty in its position is infinite.
The uncertainty in its velocity is zero.
This is the extreme case where we know nothing about position and everything about velocity.
So this is a situation where the position is completely uncertain.
On the other hand, we could make a wave packet.
To make a wave packet, we combine waves of different wavelengths.
So in this packet, the position is pretty well known.
In this particular case, it isn't perfectly well known, but it's quite well known.
It's localized.
Certainly the particle is not going to be found out here where the amplitude is zero.
Might find it here, but unlikely, almost certain to find it in this region.
Position is well known, but because we had to combine a lot of different wavelengths to make that wave,
the wavelength is uncertain, and because the wavelength is Planck's constant over mass times velocity,
the wavelength, and hence the velocity, is also uncertain.
So quantum physics tells us that the uncertainty principle follows directly from the wave particle duality.
If you admit that waves and particles are both aspects of matter,
then you have to acknowledge that you can't measure the velocity and position of a particle at the same instant
because you invariably mix the wave and particle aspects.
There's no way around that.
Now, I don't want to leave you with the sense that quantum mechanics is all fuzzy and uncertain.
There are some things it predicts exactly.
It predicts the energy levels of atomic electrons.
It predicts the spectra precisely, and the things we measure are exactly in accord with those predictions.
What quantum mechanics can't do, though, is give us a billiard ball-like clockwork universe prediction for the behavior of particles.
