Lecture 23, Cosmic Connections
Since lecture 16, we've been exploring the universe at the smallest scales,
till in the previous lecture we were down to the scale of quarks and electrons,
the really fundamental things that make up the universe.
But before that, we dealt with general relativity,
the theory that describes, among other things,
the large-scale structure of the universe on the largest possible scales,
the galaxies and the whole universe itself.
Now, in our next to the last lecture, we're going to combine the largest and the smallest
in a look at what we know about the universe,
that general relativity and our theories of subatomic particles,
the standard model of particles and forces, can tell us.
The bottom line is, we know now that we live in a universe which is expanding
and which appears to have had a definite beginning.
And there are three main lines of experimental evidence
that lead us to that conclusion.
I want to describe those for you in some detail.
The first goes back to the year 1920, roughly.
Before 1920, astronomers looking through what were then the most powerful telescopes in the world
would see faint fuzzy patches in the sky, and there was some debate about these patches.
Some astronomers believed they were clouds of gas or dust or something
within the general system of stars that constitutes our Milky Way.
Others, though, took a more visionary approach.
They said, perhaps these are distant, quote, island universes,
whole assemblages of stars, like the Milky Way,
maybe containing billions or hundreds of billions of stars that are so vast,
we can't see the individual stars.
Well, before the 1920s, that was the debate.
But in the 1920s, large new telescopes became available,
and with those, it became very clear that these distant, fuzzy, so-called nebulae,
at least some of them, were indeed island universes,
were distant galaxies containing hundreds of billions of stars,
and the whole human idea of the scale of the universe expanded enormously,
unfathomably largely at that point in human history.
Well, during the 1920s, an astronomer named Edwin Hubble undertook a series of observations
of these distant, now discovered galaxies, and he found something remarkable.
He found all the galaxies beyond any reasonable distance from our own
seemed to be moving away from us.
And the further away they were, the faster they were moving.
How did Hubble find this out?
Well, he needed to know the distances to these galaxies,
and he needed to know how fast they were moving.
Distance is not terribly hard.
If you look at an object the further away it is, the dimmer it appears.
If you make the reasonable assumption that these galaxies are all approximately the same kinds of objects,
then by looking at how bright they seem in your telescope,
you can give a rough sense of how far away they are.
How do you get a sense of their speed?
That actually turns out to be fairly easy.
If you stand by the roadside and listen to trucks going by,
you hear something like this.
As the truck goes by.
What's going on there?
As the truck is approaching you, it emits sound waves at successive intervals,
but because the waves are being emitted as the truck is moving toward you,
the frequency that you hear for the waves appears to be increased.
You hear the waves, the sound waves, at a higher pitch.
After the truck goes past you, the truck is receding from you,
the sound that's emitting is being emitted at successively greater distances,
and that results in a lowering of the pitch of the sound waves.
That's the kind of thing you hear.
That's called the Doppler effect.
It's well known, and it happens for all kinds of waves, including light waves,
although the description of physically what's going on is slightly different,
because light waves, unlike sound, have no medium,
but they still exhibit the Doppler effect.
The speed doesn't change, but the pitch changes.
That is the frequency of the light wave,
depending on whether objects are moving toward you or away from you.
In the case of astronomical objects, galaxies, they're all moving away from us.
That means all their light is shifted toward the red.
Do they look red or well?
Most of them don't, at least in Hubble's day they didn't.
What one can see very easily is the spectral lines emitted by atoms in those galaxies.
Remember how atoms emit these discrete spectral lines?
That was one of the pieces of evidence that led us to quantum physics.
Very discrete colors, very particular colors.
When one looks at the light from distant galaxies,
one can analyze these spectral lines, and one finds that indeed they are shifted toward the red,
and one can use that shift to measure the speed of recession of the galaxies.
So Hubble found that all the galaxies were receding from us,
and they were doing so with speeds that depend on their distance from us.
Now, I have to give you an immediate caution.
It sounds like we've broken the Copernican paradigm.
It sounds like we're at the center of this cosmic expansion going off in all directions.
Well, in a sense, we are at the center, but so is everybody else.
There's nothing special about the Earth.
We've known that throughout this whole course,
and Hubble's observation doesn't change that at all.
How is that possible?
Let me give you two analogies.
One analogy would be a loaf of raisin bread.
You mix up your dough, you knead it, you knead in the raisins.
You got these raisins all spread throughout this big lump of dough,
and to make life easier, let's imagine the dough is infinite.
Well, if you don't like infinite, don't worry about it.
The dough is there, it's got raisins in it, and it's expanding.
And what happens?
Every raisin moves apart from every other raisin.
If you were sitting on one of those raisins, you could see through the opaque dough,
you'd see all the other raisins moving away from you.
The further a raisin is from you, the more dough is expanding in between you and it,
and the faster it seems to be going away.
And yet no raisin can claim to be at the center,
especially if I make the assumption that this particular weird loaf of raisin bread
is infinite in the extent.
So we don't have to be at the center.
Let me give you another analogy, which I'm going to show you here on the screen.
I have a picture showing a whole lot of little elliptical-shaped objects spread randomly
all over the screen in random direction.
Those are galaxies.
I'm going to take this same picture and I'm going to enlarge it by about 25%,
and I'm going to put the enlarged picture on the same screen.
So we're going to see what the universe looks like at a certain time
and what it looks like a bit later when it's expanded by about 25%.
So here's what happens.
Now, I happen to have placed this particular expanded universe
so that this galaxy right here is viewing the expansion.
So this galaxy doesn't see itself going anywhere, so the bigger version is right on top of itself.
By the way, the galaxies themselves do not expand.
My picture shows that they do, but that isn't what really happens.
Simply the distance between them grows.
So this galaxy, which is, quote, at the center, but it isn't really at the center,
looks out and sees nearby galaxies that have moved slightly from there to there.
This one's moved from there to there.
If it looks further away, it sees galaxies that have moved a little bit further.
This one's moved from there to there, further out.
This one's moved from there to there, and so forth.
So this particular galaxy, whose viewpoint we're taking in this picture,
sees all the other galaxies moving away from it at speeds that are proportional to how far away they are.
Let's look at the perspective, though, from another galaxy.
This one, it sees exactly the same thing.
It sees all the galaxies expanding, moving away from it at speeds which are proportional to how far they're away.
Here are some close by ones. They haven't moved much.
Here's one that's further away. It's moved from here to here.
Here's a rather distant one. It's moved from here to here.
No matter which galaxy I look at this picture from, I see the same thing.
I see an expanding universe expanding in all directions.
One more case.
Now looking from the point of view of this galaxy right down near the bottom of the screen,
and it, again, sees the same thing.
Nearby galaxies have moved slightly.
More distant galaxies have moved further.
Way distant galaxies have moved quite a bit away.
Every single galaxy sees the universe expanding in all directions at speeds proportional to the distance,
and not one of them is at the center.
Now there's an obvious implication of this universal expansion.
If the galaxies are all rushing apart at speeds proportional to their distances, what happened in the past?
Well, the obvious implication is in the past they were closer together and closer together and closer together,
and if you measure the present expansion rate and make some simple assumptions,
in fact, if you apply general relativity is the best thing to do,
you can extrapolate back in time and ask yourself, was there a time when all the galaxies were close together?
And the answer is yes, and the answer is that time seems to be somewhere on the order of 12 to 15 billion years ago.
That time is called the age of the universe,
and the measurement of it comes from looking at the expanding universe and exploring how the galaxy's motion depends on their distance from us.
So it appears that the universe began in some kind of cosmic explosion.
That explosion is called the Big Bang, and that explosion took place, we believe, something like 12 to 15 billion years ago.
Now Hubble made this discovery in the 1920s to honor his discovery.
Of course, the Hubble Space Telescope is named after him,
but through much of the 20th century there was debate about whether cosmic expansion really implied a beginning, a Big Bang.
There were other competing theories.
For example, there was a theory that the universe has always been expanding,
and new matter is created to fill the void as it expands, and so it really always looks the same and never had a beginning.
But most of those theories were put to rest in the 1960s with the discovery by two scientists,
Penzias and Wilson at Bell Laboratories, of what's called the cosmic microwave background radiation.
These guys were actually doing communications kinds of experiments with a radio telescope,
and they had a peculiar static in their telescope, and they couldn't get rid of it.
They tried and tried and tried, and they shoveled some pigeon dung out from pigeons that were nesting in the telescope
because that produces some electromagnetic radiation as it decomposes.
It didn't help, nothing helped. They pointed the telescope up, they pointed it down.
This mysterious static was coming from everywhere.
And then they learned of some theorists at nearby Princeton University who were arguing that if you look at a scenario of a universe expanding from a Big Bang explosion,
there ought to come a time when a burst of electromagnetic radiation is released,
and that radiation ought to travel throughout the expanding universe and manifest itself today as a kind of cosmic background everywhere,
most of which is now in the microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Microwaves are very short wavelength, radio waves basically.
They're used to cook in a microwave oven, they're used for communications.
UHF television signals are often in the microwave region of the spectrum.
So, Penzias and Wilson and the Princeton theorists got together and realized that Penzias and Wilson had discovered the cosmic microwave background radiation,
a fossil remnant from a time about 500,000 years after the Big Bang, and I'll show you why that is a little bit later.
So they discovered the cosmic microwave background, it's very difficult to explain with other theories.
By the way, if you'd like to see the cosmic microwave background sometime when you're watching some boring soap opera or something on television,
turn instead to a channel where there's no signal in your area, and you see just a fuzzy snowy pattern on the screen.
The cosmic microwave background is strong enough that for a UHF television channel,
a few percent of the signal you're getting that fuzzy snowy static is actually cosmic microwave background.
You are receiving in your TV antenna photons of microwave radiation that have not interacted with anything since a time 500,000 years after the Big Bang when they were created.
So take a look at that, it's a lot more interesting than other things you might find on television.
Today, we look at the cosmic microwave background, not with antennas at Bell Laboratories,
but with a satellite, particularly the cosmic microwave, the cosmic background explorer satellite, COBE,
which has discovered that the background radiation is very, very uniform to a high degree of precision,
but it's also discovered very, very faint ripples in the microwave background, ripples that suggest the formation of a large-scale structure in the universe,
and this has solved one of the major outstanding problems, which is how did we get from a universe that might have been smooth and homogeneous at the beginning to a universe which is very clumpy
and shows us galaxies and clusters of galaxies and so on.
So in the 1990s, we discovered the structure, these very faint ripples in the cosmic microwave background radiation.
So the cosmic microwave background provides a second major clinching of the theory that we live in a universe which is A, expanding, and B, had a definite beginning.
It's very difficult to explain the universe and what it's doing now and having a cosmic microwave background radiation without invoking some kind of big bang beginning.
The third piece of evidence, and this is where we tie in previous lectures and tie in the very small, the third piece of evidence comes from advances in particle physics in the last half, particularly the last quarter of the 20th century.
And I outlined for you those advances in the previous lecture culminating in the standard model of particles and forces with which we can predict with reasonable accuracy the interactions of the fundamental particles.
And so what we can do with that is go back to a time very, very early in the expansion.
We can say, what did the universe look like when it was literally a billionth of a second old?
And we know it was very hot then, and we know the energies involved, and so we know the kinds of interactions that occurred among the quarks, and we know what the constituents of the universe looked like then.
And we can say, what if it expanded a little bit more? What then would be going on?
And we can ask ourselves, what would this original primordial soup of quarks and things evolve into?
And when we follow that, using our standard model of particles and forces, we find that it evolves to a universe whose constituents, mostly hydrogen and a little bit of helium and a little tiny bit of everything else, are in fact what the universe today seems to contain. Remarkable.
So the advances in particle physics that I've described in the last lecture, the advances that took place particularly toward the end of the 20th century, those advances led us to a further confirmation of the Big Bang picture because they allowed us to go back to conditions that prevailed very early in the Big Bang.
In fact, one way of describing the energies of our big particle accelerators is by saying, how far back in time can they take us?
The new particle accelerator I mentioned that's going to come online in the first decade of the 21st century, that particle accelerator can take us back to about a trillionth of a second after the Big Bang occurred.
Why? Because it can create energies typical of the particle energies that existed in the universe at that time.
So we have these three pieces of evidence that give us a picture of a universe that has been expanding from a Big Bang explosion.
What exactly does that expansion look like? What's the history of such a universe?
Well, I want to give you the main theme in that history and then I want to describe in detail some of the major events in that timeline.
The big theme is this though. The universe starts out incredibly dense, maybe infinitely dense.
It expands. As it expands, it does the same thing that if you let air out of a tire, let air out of your car tire, you feel it's cooler.
As the gas expands, it does work. It loses energy. The vibrations of the constituent particles slow down and that's cooling.
So as the universe expands, it cools. And as it cools, the forces that hold matter together, which in a very, very hot universe are not strong enough.
If I have two particles stuck together by one of those forces and a third particle comes along with high energy, it can knock them apart.
And it's hard for things like atoms or at early enough stages in the universe, even nuclei and at even earlier stages, even protons and neutrons to stay together
because they get knocked apart by high energy particles in the very hot, early universe.
But as the universe cools, things can stick together more and more.
And so part of the main theme is expansion, cooling, and therefore more complex structures can form.
And that's the main theme and I now want to look at some of the details of that evolution.
So I have here a cosmic timeline. I'm showing you a cosmic timeline. It's very approximate. It's not to scale.
There's not an even division or even a logarithmic even division for those of you who are into such things between these numbers on my bottom scale.
It goes from a time of 10 to the minus 43 seconds. That's 1 over 1 with 43 zeros after it.
We don't know what happened before that time and there's a very good reason for that.
We do not have a theory that would allow us to understand the behavior of matter at those extreme densities
and the reason we don't is because at that point we need to take into account both quantum physics and general relativity
because we have extreme space-time curvature because of the high density of matter
and we're dealing with a very tiny region so we have quantum physics and we don't know how to handle that.
That's called the Planck time and we don't know what to do before the Planck time.
But beyond that our standard model of particles and fields can give us at least some sense of what's going on.
So what happens? Planck time, quantum gravity, we don't know.
After that at about 10 to the minus 35, 10 to the minus 34 seconds, 10 to the minus something means a 1 over 1
with that many zeros after it. These are incredibly small times.
We believe the universe went through a period of enormously rapid expansion.
I'll have a little more to say about that a little bit later.
That happened about 10 to the minus 34 seconds after the Big Bang.
Sometime around a millionth to 100,000th of a second, 100,000th is 10 to the minus 5 seconds.
For the first time things got cool enough that out of what had been a soup of quarks and very elementary particles
for the first time quarks could stick together without being knocked apart and they could form protons and neutrons.
So we had protons and neutrons forming in the first millionth or 100,000th of a second.
Again these numbers are all approximate.
As things cool in a period from about 3 to 30 minutes roughly in that interval,
for the first time protons and neutrons could stick together and they wouldn't be knocked apart
because the energy of the particles whizzing around was low enough now and helium nuclei formed.
And when we do calculations based on our understandings of nuclear physics,
we find that during that time, given the conditions we think existed,
the universe should have evolved from pure protons and electrons, that's hydrogen,
but it wasn't hydrogen atoms yet, it was just protons and electrons.
A proton is a hydrogen nucleus, hydrogen is the simplest atom, one proton, that's it, in its nucleus.
At the end of that roughly 30 minute period, enough protons and neutrons should have come together
to make the universe approximately 25% helium nuclei and the rest hydrogen nuclei
and after that the building of these nuclei essentially stopped.
So at the end of that time there should have been about 75% hydrogen, 25% helium,
a very tiny, tiny amount of a few other very light elements, lithium, beryllium,
a heavy hydrogen kind called deuterium, but nothing else.
None of it, no oxygen, no iron, no uranium, none of the stuff we're made of that comes later.
At the end of 30 minutes there should have been 75% hydrogen, 25% helium roughly.
We go out and look at the universe today and we can see what its composition is,
we can look at stars, we can look at interstellar gas clouds,
we can look at gas now that's between the galaxies, very rarefied, but we can look at it.
We can look at it spectroscopically, we can study the spectral lines,
we can determine what elements are present and in what abundances,
and lo and behold for the universe overall, not for this hunk of rock we call Earth,
but for the universe overall 75% hydrogen, 25% helium and a smidgen of other things.
That's a prediction of the theory, standard model applied to conditions in the Big Bang
that is confirmed by the state of the present universe.
About half a million years out, atoms formed for the first time.
Before that, although we had nuclei, it was too hot to have atoms.
If electrons got in orbit around nuclei, bang oh another electron or an atom came along
and knocked them out and we couldn't have atoms.
What we had at that time then were nuclei which are positively charged particles
and electrons which are negatively charged particles,
and since charged particles interact strongly with electromagnetic waves
which consist of electric and magnetic fields which are what exert forces on charges,
electrons and protons, because of that the universe was opaque.
As soon as an electromagnetic wave got going, it quickly got absorbed by a proton or electron
that vibrated in response to its waving electric field.
So the universe was opaque, but at the instant the atoms formed, it wasn't an instant,
it was a period of time, about half a million years out,
relatively short period of time.
Electrons joined into their orbits around the nuclei, making neutral atoms.
Two things happened.
One, as the electrons fell from higher energy states into the lowest energy states
they could be in those atoms, the quantized lowest energy states, they gave off photons.
The atoms become electrically neutral and their interaction with electromagnetic radiation,
light and so on, is much less.
And therefore the universe became at that time transparent
and it emitted at that time a burst of electromagnetic radiation.
At that time the electromagnetic radiation consisted of photons with very high energies.
But the universe was then transparent and those photons would move throughout the universe
with relatively little chance of interacting with anything, most of them would just continue on forever.
As the universe expanded, it cooled, those photons had to do work against the gravitational attraction
of all the stuff in the universe and they too cooled, they lost energy.
A photon can't slow down, it has to go at speed c, we know that,
and they lose energy, as I said in the discussion of gravitational redshift,
they lose energy by going to lower frequencies because e equals hf,
so they can lose energy by lowering their frequency.
They became not x-rays or then they became ultraviolet and visible light and infrared
and they ended up in the present universe as electromagnetic waves in the microwave region of the spectrum
and that's the cosmic microwave background.
It's the fossil remnant of the time in the universe when atoms first formed
and at that point the universe became transparent.
And when we detect it in our radio telescopes or you in your TV antenna, as I said,
you've grabbed a photon or one's interacted with your TV antenna,
that photon has been traveling through the universe since that time 500,000 years ago,
500,000 years after the Big Bang, 12, 15 billion years ago,
and this is the first time it's ever interacted with anything, remarkable.
So you're looking right back at that time and by studying that radiation then,
we have a very good picture of what conditions were like in the universe 500,000 years after the Big Bang
and again it confirms what we seem to think we know about the Big Bang theory.
Sometime around 100 million years, pretty fast in the grand scheme of things,
maybe a little bit later but galaxies begin to form
and certainly by a few billion years most of the galaxies have formed.
This is one of the hardest things for us to study
and until very recently it presented a big problem for cosmologists,
people who study the history of the universe.
But with the discovery of the ripples in the cosmic microwave background,
we understand the seeds of that large scale structure that became the galaxies
and clusters of galaxies and clusters of clusters of galaxies
and all kinds of larger scale structures, great walls of clusters of galaxies
and then big voids in the universe.
That structure was there and we think we understand a little bit about how it happened.
And now we are looking back so far in time with the Hubble Space Telescope,
you see these quasars that I've mentioned before
that are probably black holes at the centers of primordial galaxies
and there's great amounts of energy spewing out as material falls into the black holes
and heats up and radiates away a lot of its energy.
So we think we understand pretty much how galaxy formation began
and we think we're looking back far enough that we're now seeing primordial galaxies.
So that happened actually fairly early.
By a few billion years there were galaxies.
Five billion years out roughly, five billion years ago,
this is a 10 billion year scenario, but five to seven billion years ago then,
maybe 12 billion years old, maybe it's 15 billion years old, I'm not sure exactly what,
but Earth forms five billion years ago.
The solar system, the sun, Earth, all that forms about five billion years ago.
Earth is actually 4.5 billion years old.
We can date it pretty accurately with radioactive elements in it.
Earth forms and by about 10 billion years out, 12 billion years out, 15,
depends on exactly how old you take the universe to be.
Intelligence evolved, at least on Earth, and many of us believe it probably evolved
lots of other places because it's probable that the standard theory of particles and forces
which contains the interaction of all the forces somehow contains what it takes to make life and intelligence.
That may be a natural outcome of matter.
It doesn't mean we believe in flying saucers and being visited by aliens,
but many physicists and astrophysicists and cosmologists believe that the evolution of intelligence on Earth
is not a unique event, that it's probably a natural outcome ultimately of the laws
that govern the interaction of the quarks and the leptons to make complex matter.
Remarkable how those few simple particles can evolve to such complex things.
That's a very brief history of the evolution of the universe as we understand it,
and it's an understanding built on our theory of the biggest things in the universe,
the clusters of galaxies, the galaxies, and the whole large scale structure of the universe
coupled with our understanding of the smallest things, the elementary particles.
What's going to happen in the future?
Well, general relativity gives us an overall answer.
Here's a graph that has time on its horizontal axis, the quote,
size of the universe on its vertical axis if you don't like the size of the universe
because the universe may be infinite, but it may not, we're not sure.
Take this to be the typical distance between two galaxies,
and as time goes on that distance increases.
General relativity tells us there are basically three kinds of scenarios that could occur.
There's a scenario in which the universe might expand forever.
If that's what's going to do, the universe is infinite in extent, it's called open,
and it has negative curvature.
Its curvature is actually shaped like a satellite surface,
it would be a two-dimensional analogy for that, the curvature of space-time
being the sum of all the gravitational effects of all the matter in the universe.
Another possibility is that it just barely expands forever.
Such a universe is also open and it's infinite, but its overall geometry is flat.
It's like that of a flat sheet.
There are dimples in that flatness due to the space-time curvature associated
with individual mass of objects, but the overall space-time curvature is flat,
and that universe will just barely expand forever.
And finally, there's the possibility that the universe will expand
reach a point where it stops expanding due to the gravitational pull of everything in it
and collapses back to another big bang.
Such a universe is closed, it's finite, and it has positive curvature.
However, I hasten to add it has no edge and no center
because it's a four-dimensional space-time that is curved back on itself
and nobody's at the center.
I don't have time to go into that, but it's a fascinating topic in itself.
Now, I have to modify this picture slightly.
All these pictures show the expansion slowing down as you would expect it to do
if gravity is trying to pull this expanding stuff back.
But in fact, discoveries right at the very end of the 20th century, astronomical discoveries,
one of them by my colleague Alex Filipenko, who has an astronomy course with the teaching company,
those discoveries show that there may be an acceleration of the cosmic expansion,
and if there is, there's some new ideas in physics that have to be brought in
or some old ideas of Einstein's that he discarded that have to be recycled
to explain what's going on there.
So it may be that the expansion is actually accelerating instead of slowing down.
The recent astronomical evidence suggests that that may be the case.
Which of these scenarios is favored?
Well, currently there are some subtle problems involved in the Big Bang theory,
and they can be explained away by assuming, as I indicated on my timeline,
that there was a period of extremely rapid inflation where the universe expanded
many, many, many-fold in a very, very tiny short time at about 1 over 1
with 34 zeros after it, seconds after the Big Bang.
What that would do is expand the universe so much that any curvature was flattened out
in that overall expansion, and the universe became essentially flat.
That's the current prevailing theory, and that theory accounts for several of the quandaries
we have in the Big Bang theory, several subtle things that are a little bit difficult to explain otherwise.
For example, why is there matter and not antimatter?
Why does the universe appear to be almost flat?
Why do we not see any large-scale overall curvature in the universe?
So there's the inflationary universe scenario.
That would be a course in itself, but I just give you a hint of what that idea is.
However, a universe that is just barely going to expand forever
requires more matter than we can see out there.
When we look out in the universe and count up all the stars in the galaxies,
and we ask, is there enough matter to pull the universe back in to close it?
The answer is no.
Is there enough to just barely halt that expansion and make us a flat universe,
that middle case that seems to be favored?
And the answer is no.
The matter that we can see is only enough to make a universe that is going to expand forever
with a lot of energy left over.
On the other hand, if we look at the galaxies and the matter in them,
the orbits the matter in the galaxies described suggest there exists additional dark matter
in the galaxies that is causing additional gravitational effects,
and we don't know what that dark matter is.
In fact, in order for the current Big Bang theory of the universe to work,
and most cosmologists believe it is,
we have to assume that most, not even, it's not only a small fraction,
but most of the matter that makes up the universe is in some form that we don't even know about.
Some of it may be mundane stuff like dead stars,
but made of ordinary matter,
but most of it actually has to be, and you can prove this with current cosmological theories,
has to be in a form we don't even know about.
It's not protons and neutrons and quarks and things, it's some totally new kind of matter.
And it's a very sobering thought that we may not know about what 90% of the universe is made of.
The universe may be made of and governed by something that we know nothing about,
and the stuff that we're made of, ordinary matter,
may be just a small fraction of it going along for the ride.
That's a sobering thought.
What's our place in this grand scheme?
Well, I want to give you two just quick insights into that.
First of all, we're very much children of these processes,
particularly we're children of the stars.
I mentioned that the Big Bang cooked up helium and a few other light elements,
but it didn't make the oxygen, the carbon essential for life,
the iron, the zinc, the silicon, all those other things.
It didn't make those at all.
They were cooked up by nuclear processes in the interiors of stars,
and when those stars exploded, they spewed that material out into interstellar space,
and gradually that material would recongeal into new stars, new solar systems,
planets, eventually life evolved.
We are, in fact, living on a planet in orbit around a so-called third-generation star.
It contains material from two previous generations of stars
that exploded, spewed this material out into interstellar space,
and we are star children made, literally, of elements that were cooked up in the interior of those stars.
That's our direct connection to all this.
I'd like to end this lecture with a vision by physicist Freeman Dyson
from the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
Dyson did a study and said,
what happens if intelligence once evolves in an expanding universe?
Could it continue to evolve forever?
And he concluded that even if the universe went through eons of infinite expansion,
things got further and further apart, cooler and cooler and cooler.
There might come a time when an intelligent being was some kind of crystal structure
locked into some solid material or with some gas cloud or something,
but he concluded that intelligence once established could continue to exist forever
and could continue to communicate with itself across this vast void.
It may be near the start of a very long, infinitely long, perhaps adventure
in which intelligence continues to exist in the universe
and ponders what went on before it
and appreciates this vast richness that those simple laws of physics give us.
