Welcome to lecture 21, Quantum Weirdness and Schrodinger's Cat.
This lecture, which is new to this version of the course, is a digression into a couple of topics that are of considerable interest in the popular study of quantum physics.
There are also matters of debate among philosophers and physicists who are interested in the interpretation of quantum physics.
One of them was back to the early years of the 20th century, another is still a matter of very much contemporary research.
So we're taking again a digression into a couple of interesting questions that arise in the study of quantum physics.
Before we do, let me discuss a particular concept called a superposition state.
In quantum physics, because systems are described ultimately by waves, remember it's ultimately a wave equation you solve,
you get a wave solution and that wave solution then determines, but only statistically or probabilistically, what particles are doing.
So the wave equation and the wave nature of a quantum system is important.
And waves have the property that one can form a superposition of more than one wave.
Two waves can exist at the same place at the same time. That's a superposition.
That's what leads to interference if you have constructive interference or destructive interference.
Because of the possibility of superposition, you can have quantum systems whose state is somewhat ambiguous.
For example, when you ask, does the electron go through slit one or slit two or does the photon go through slit one or slit two?
One way of posing that is that when I answer for you, well, you can't answer that question.
We don't know, it goes through both.
One way is to say, well, the electron is in kind of a superposition of two states.
One state is the state of going through slit one and another state is the state of going through slit two.
It's not the pure matter particle that's absurd nonsense.
When we talk about waves, that's entirely possible.
So the wave nature of matter and of light makes possible these superpositions.
To give you another example, I could have an atom in which an electron is definitely in one of the allowed orbits.
I could have an atom in which it's definitely another of the allowed orbits.
I can't have an atom where it's in between one or the other, but I can have an atom in which an electron is in a superposition.
I've got a 25% chance of being in an upper orbit and a 75% chance of being in a lower orbit, or maybe it's 50-50 or whatever.
That's a superposition state.
When I go to measure, when I go to detect or determine what's going on, what I've actually got,
I'll always find the electron in either the lower orbit or the higher orbit.
If the wave equation is telling me I've got a 75% mix of the lower orbit wave and a 25% mix of the upper orbit wave,
then if I do the experiment 100 times, I'll find roughly, not exactly because this is all statistical,
roughly 75% of the time I'll find the atom in the lower orbit state.
25% of the time I'll find the atom in the upper orbit state.
That's what a superposition state is.
It's a mix of two possible wave solutions, and it's entirely possible because of the wave nature of matter and of light in quantum physics.
So we can have these superposition states.
The problem is, once we go to measure the system, if we ask which slit did the electron go through,
we can ask that question and we can ask, did it go through the left-hand slit?
And we can determine the answer to that question.
At that point, the electron ceases to be in the superposition state,
and it becomes in the definite state associated with going through the left-hand slit.
If I look at this atom that's in this mixed superposition state and I say,
OK, is this particular atom in the lower level or the upper level?
I do a measurement, even though it's originally in this superposition.
I'm going to find either it's in the lower level or it's in the upper level.
I'm not going to find both.
I'm not going to find somewhere in between.
In other words, what I'm going to do by measuring the system is force it into one of the two possible states.
The superposition collapses.
The uncertainty associated with knowing which state the system was in goes away.
The wave behavior also goes away, and I find the system in one definite state.
That phenomenon of making the measurement, of taking a quantum system
that may be in an ambiguous or superposition state and doing a measurement on it,
is the process of measurement, and measurement itself is a matter of philosophical debate in quantum physics.
Exactly what does measurement mean?
And again, the reason that's a matter of debate and interpretation
goes back to this original situation in quantum mechanics
that because of the quantization, because there's a minimum interaction we can have
when we interrogate nature, when we do experiments,
the act of measurement becomes an act that involves, disturbs, interacts with the system in question
in a way that is not reducible to zero interaction.
And consequently, measurement becomes a major, the theory of measurement,
what it means to measure becomes a major part of quantum physics.
One thing it means to measure, though, is to force a system into a definite state.
I've got a wave going along and there's a photon associated with that wave.
Say it's a light wave and we say, well, the wave is spread out all over space
and we know the photon could be anywhere.
The act of measuring the photon, the act of catching the photon,
the act of detecting the photon with a photoelectric experiment
or with a Compton-type experiment or with some other experiment
like a photographic film or an electronic detector,
the act of localizing the photon and saying, aha, here it is.
That act collapses that uncertain wave function
into one where we know exactly where the photon is.
It's called the collapse of the wave function.
In all these superposition states, we have quantum measurements
that then collapse the wave function and result in a definitive value
for whatever quantity we're trying to measure.
In the process, they may destroy any evidence about some other quantity
we might have wanted to measure.
For example, in Heisenberg's quantum microscope, we had an electron.
We didn't know its momentum, its velocity state,
what is what velocity it had, what direction it was moving and how fast.
We didn't know exactly where it was.
We set out to measure them if we did an experiment
that collapsed the wave function to one of definite position,
we lost information about velocity.
If we did an experiment that collapsed the wave function to one
that had information about a definite velocity,
we lost information about position.
We collapsed the wave function.
We find the quantity we're trying to measure.
Quantum physics gives us a definitive value,
but in the process, we lose the properties that the system had before.
Now, we've known about this quantum superposition idea for a long time.
The idea, for example, of an atom that isn't necessarily in one definitive state
but has a chance of being found in this state or that state,
that's been with us for a long time.
There are more bizarre instances of quantum superposition
that have only recently been realized experimentally.
For example, experimenters have recently created a single atom
in a superposition state that involved being in two quite different places
separated by many times the size of an atom at the same time.
What does that mean?
Well, it meant when you weren't looking at the atom,
remember when you're not looking at a quantum system,
it's the wave behavior that governs how it evolves.
When you're not looking at it,
there's a probability that the atom will be here
and another probability that will be here,
and they created the wave function
in such a way that there's not much probability in between.
But which of those two places is it? You can't say.
You go to do a measurement and you look here
and you find the atom here, the wave function collapses
and there's no longer any chance you'll find it here.
You've now put it in a state where it's definitively here.
You measure over here and see if it's here, and if you find it,
there it is, and you've collapsed the wave function to a state
where the atom is definitively here and not here.
So by doing the measurement, you influence the system,
you take away the ambiguity,
you force the quantity you're looking for,
position of atom in this case, to have a definitive value.
But before you did the measurement,
you had created a state in which the atom in that case
was equally likely to be found in either place.
You do 100 measurements and roughly 50 of them, not exactly,
but roughly 50 of them, it comes up here,
and roughly 50 of them, it comes up here.
And that experiment has recently been done
and a single atom was created literally in two places at once.
So it was in two places at once,
but you never caught it in two places at once.
You knew you created a wave function that had that property.
When you go to measure it, you find it in one place or the other
with a certain probability in either place.
Remarkable.
Can this have any bearing on the macroscopic world?
Well, Schrodinger himself posed a very, very famous example
to get us to think about this question
of whether quantum superposition could exist in the macroscopic world,
the world of everyday-sized objects.
The famous example is called Schrodinger's Cat.
There's a book, by the way, in my bibliography for this course
called The Search for Schrodinger's Cat,
which is a good general introduction to quantum physics
and especially some of these quandaries it presents.
And here's how Schrodinger's Cat experiment works.
Schrodinger's Cat is, again, a thought experiment.
I hope nobody's carried out this experiment
because it's a little bit gruesome.
So let's take a look at what the experiment looks like.
Here's the experiment.
We take a nice, friendly, live cat,
and we put it in a closed sealed box.
And in this box, we put some kind of quantum mechanical system.
Now, remember the main aspect of quantum mechanics
is that the behavior of a system is governed by its wave equation,
but what actually happens, ultimately,
is only statistically linked to what the wave solution says.
So we're going to put in this box a radioactive atom.
And I'm going to choose a radioactive atom
that has a half-life of one hour.
What that means is if I take 100 of these radioactive atoms
in an hour, 50 of them, roughly, again, it's statistical,
so it might be 49 or 47, or rare chance it might be 62 or something,
but on the average, it's roughly 50.
We'll have decayed away, spewed out a radioactive particle,
and decayed into something else.
And the other 50 won't have.
That's what it means to have a half-life of an hour.
Another way to put it is if I have just a single atom there
and I wait an hour, there's a 50-50 chance that I'll find the atom there or not.
Now, you can debate what statistics means when I have only one thing.
Ultimately, I think what it means is if you repeated the experiment 100 times,
50% of the time it would do this and 50% it would do that.
That's my interpretation of it.
But anyway, we've set up the system.
We've got a radioactive atom.
It's got a half-life of one hour, meaning it has a 50-50 chance
of having decayed sometime in the next hour after we start the experiment.
We have a radiation detector, a Geiger counter,
or some other radiation detector, looking at this radioactive atom.
If the radioactive atom decays, the Geiger counter
detects that high-energy particle that's spewed out in the radioactive decay.
The Geiger counter makes an electrical pulse.
If you've ever heard a Geiger counter, it goes, click.
It makes a little loud pulse and a loud speaker.
Every time a high-energy particle comes through its detector system,
and that's entirely doable.
We've known how to do that for a century.
So the radiation detector works.
It detects the radiation, and it's hooked up not to a loud speaker that goes, click,
but rather to a flask of poison.
And if the radioactive atom decays, a mechanism associated connected to the Geiger counter
opens the flask of poison and the cat dies.
That's the Schrodinger's cat experiment.
It's cruel and gruesome, and that's why we don't want to do the experiment.
But it's an interesting thought experiment to think about whether
the probabilistic nature of the quantum world can affect the macroscopic world.
And in this case, it clearly can.
The first thing we can say is because the decay of the radioactive atom is truly a random event.
Remember, it's got a 50-50 chance of decaying.
If you will, its wave function after an hour has evolved to a superposition
that says we're 50% likely to find the atom intact
and 50% likely to find it in the form of a high-energy particle that's spewed out
and a remnant of something else other than the original atom.
That's what that means.
If we calculated the quantum mechanical wave function for this system,
it would evolve from a system that started out as pure this atom
into a system that was a superposition of this atom and a decayed state.
And if we did a measurement, if we looked at the atom, we would find either one or the other.
We would collapse the wave function, and it either would have decayed or it wouldn't have decayed.
So this is a random event.
This random event, microscopic atomic scale event, quantum mechanical random event,
is linked through the Geiger counter, which might just make a benign click,
but in this case it's going to open a vial of poison to a macroscopic system.
So whether the cat dies or not is truly random.
Truly random.
It's not deterministic.
There is no clockwork universe at work here.
We set up this experiment and we cannot predict what's going to happen.
There's a 50-50 chance the cat is going to die.
You can do a thousand of these experiments and in roughly 500 of them the cat will die
and in roughly 500 it won't, but in any single one there is nothing,
nothing that gives you the ability to predict that.
That's what that statistical link from wave equation to wave behavior, definitive,
but from wave behavior to what we actually find in the particle material world,
that's statistical and there is no going deeper than that
according to the standard interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Okay, so we set up the apparatus, we put the radioactive atom there,
we turn on the Geiger counter, we set the mechanism for the flask,
we drop the cat in, we close the box and we wait an hour.
And the fascinating question is not so much whether probability rules the life or death of the cat.
We already know that's a probabilistic event.
The fascinating question according to Schrodinger is,
what state is the cat in an hour later before we open the box?
Now surely your answer is going to be sometime during that hour the atom may have decayed.
If it's decayed, the radioactive particle has gone into the Geiger counter,
the Geiger counter has sensed it and the Geiger counter has operated the mechanism
that opens the vial of poison and the cat is dead.
Or maybe the atom didn't decay and the cat is just fine.
But surely it's either alive or dead.
That interpretation turns out to be inconsistent with at least the strictest interpretation
of quantum mechanics according to Copenhagen School.
The Copenhagen School would say, until you do the measurement,
until you collapse the wave function, until you do something that forces that superposition state
into one of its possible concrete outcomes, the system is in a superposition state.
It's like that atom I just described that is in two places at once.
It literally is. It's got a wave function that says it's likely to be 50% in that case,
likely to be here, 50% chance of being here, until you ask where it is
and actually do the experiment to measure where it is.
It is in both places at once or in either place.
If you ask the question, I guess I'd answer which place is it? It's both.
If you measure it, 50% chance you'll find it here, 50% chance you'll find it here.
The strict, Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics says,
in the case of Schrodinger's cat, you wait an hour and the cat is in a superposition state
of half dead and half alive.
You wait half an hour and it's in a superstate, it's a position state of more alive than dead,
but there's still a chance either way.
And that is the interpretation Copenhagen School imposes on the Schrodinger's cat experiment.
This macroscopic sized object, this cat, is according to people who go by the strict interpretation
of quantum mechanics in a state that is neither dead nor alive.
It's a 50% superposition of dead and alive.
You then do a measurement.
You open the box and in the process you collapse the wave function to one of those two possible states
and you find a cat that's dead or alive.
But the strict interpretation of quantum physics says the cat is neither dead nor alive
till the moment you open the box and your act of doing that is what determines what happens.
Wow.
And you might say, wait a minute, didn't the Geiger counter measure whether the atom decayed
and therefore wasn't that the thing that collapsed the wave function
so the cat really is dead or alive?
Well, the strict interpretation of quantum physics says no, the Geiger counter and the atom and the cat
and the flask, they're all part of the sealed system.
They're all one system subject to laws of quantum physics and it's the wave function of that system
which has evolved itself to the superposition state and it's really you opening the box
that collapses the wave function and creates which state it is, whether the cat is dead or alive.
The obvious retort to that is what on earth about the cat, what does the cat feel all this while?
I don't want to get into that.
That raises the whole question of consciousness which is a fascinating question that some people are trying to link with quantum physics.
I don't know yet how successfully, I don't know what consciousness is.
It's a fascinating question.
I'm not even going to think about that right now but I'll let you speculate about what the cat feels
especially if it's in a superposition of dead or alive or worse put yourself in there instead of the cat.
Are there ways out of the strict Copenhagen interpretation?
Yes, there are.
Some of them are rather bizarre.
There's a logically consistent but extremely unusual interpretation of quantum physics which says it's called the many world theory
and it says every time a situation occurs where a wave function collapses.
For example, I have the two atoms here.
Every time I do a measurement to see if the atom is here, 50% of the chance I find it is, 50% of the chance I find it isn't.
The many world theory says every time I do a measurement like that both possibilities are realized
but the universe splits, bifurcates, and suddenly where there was one universe there are two universes
in one of which the atom is here and in one of which it's there.
Or in Schrodinger's cat, when I open the box the universe bifurcates in two and there's a universe in which the cat is dead
and a universe in which the cat is alive.
And at every place an interaction is done that forces a superposition to collapse, a wave function to collapse
to one definitive state.
The universe splits into multiple universes depending on how many outcomes there are
and each outcome is realized in a different universe.
Wow.
Talk about richness of the universe.
That is a logically consistent interpretation of quantum mechanics, bizarre as it sounds.
I think a more reasonable way of looking at the Schrodinger cat situation is one that's been discussed
in the context of how much can we apply quantum physics to macroscopic systems like the cat?
For example, we can apply quantum physics to all the individual atoms and molecules.
And as long as they retain a kind of quantum coherence, their waves all sort of know about each other
and are in step with each other, then we can talk about quantum mechanics applied to the whole macroscopic object like the cat.
But if you take that interpretation you can show that in a very, very, very short time,
a minuscule almost instantaneous time for something as complex as a cat,
the individual wave functions of the individual parts will become incoherent
and the system will no longer be a quantum system.
It will be a classical macroscopic system to which our everyday common sense applies
and the cat will after a very short time, in fact, be either alive or dead and not in some silly superposition.
Well, I don't know the answer. That makes the most sense to me.
But what it points to is one thing we don't understand about quantum physics is where's the boundary between quantum physics?
We know that things the size of atoms, even some of our microscopic electronic circuits,
are governed almost completely by quantum physics.
Things like baseballs and ourselves and even bacteria are governed by classical physics.
Where's the boundary in between?
Bohr has another principle, the correspondence principle, that says quantum physics has to go over smoothly to classical physics
in the limit as the size of the quantum system gets bigger and certain numbers in quantum physics get bigger.
So it's a smooth transfer. Where does it occur?
And what's going on in this mid-scale region?
That's the region some people are looking, for instance, for explanations of consciousness.
There's a lot to learn still about that boundary between classical and quantum physics.
Well, let's move on from Schrodinger's Cat and look at one other example of quantum weirdness.
In this case, something called the EPR experiments, about which a lot has been in the philosophical debate lately.
This goes back to 1935, when Einstein, Podolski and Rosen came up with a thought experiment
that they claimed showed that the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics couldn't be right.
And I'm going to give a description of the EPR experiment, which is rather different than what they proposed,
but it's rather easier to understand conceptually.
And before I can give that, I've got to give you a little exercise in particle physics.
It turns out that many of the elementary particles, like electrons, can be thought of very crudely as being in a state of spinning,
like a little ball spinning around an axis.
Now, this is a very bad way to think about it, but it's the only way we can really picture.
And I've added a little pencil to this ball representing an electron to show you the direction it's spinning in.
In fact, what I'm going to say is if it's spinning this way, counterclockwise, if I look down from above,
then I'm going to have the pencil pointing up.
And if it's spinning this way, clockwise, as viewed from above, I'm going to point the arrow down.
So I'm going to use the direction of the arrow to represent which way it's spinning.
If I curl my right hand around the pencil, let my right thumb point toward its point,
that's the way the thing is spinning.
So that's what the pencil represents, the direction of spin.
I don't care what these particles are, I'll just call them particles.
But I'm going to imagine I have another particle that has the property that its spin is zero.
Spin, by the way, is closely related to angular momentum, rotationalness.
This one has no spin and it's radioactive.
Now, spin or angular momentum is conserved. It means it can't change.
This one has no spin, but it's radioactive and it's going to decay into a couple of these.
If it decays into a couple of these and it had no spin, what's got to be true?
The pair of particles it decayed into has to have no spin either.
But this one's got a spin and this one's got a spin.
So if this one's spin is this way, this one's spin's got to be down to cancel it.
And that's the basic idea we're going to be using in the EPR experiment.
We're going to start with a particle that has no spin
and we're going to end up with two particles which have spins in opposite directions
because they have to to conserve that quantity.
Now, there's another thing you need to know about spin.
It's a funny quantum concept.
And its direction is not uniquely determined until you measure it.
Just like any quantum quantity, as we've now found, isn't really determined until you try to measure its value
and then you collapse the wave function.
So here's a particle with spin, but I don't know which way this arrow is pointing.
And I send it through a detector.
And the detector can detect either spins up or spin down.
But nothing in between.
And I send the particle through the detector and I will always find that it either has spin up or spin down.
And I'll find it, unless some weird situation is giving it asymmetry,
I'll find that it has a 50-50 chance of being up or down.
But before it went into that detector, I can't say it has any particular direction at all.
It could be anywhere.
And if I made a detector aimed at detecting spins that were either this way or this way,
and I sent the same particle through that,
I would find it spin was either this way or this way.
That's the way quantum physics works.
I ask a quantum question and I'm going to get an answer that's consistent with the question I ask.
Is the spin up or down?
Yup, it's either up or down.
Is the spin sideways or backwards?
Yup, it's either sideways or backwards.
You'll find one or the other.
So that is the...
That spin property is what I'm going to use to probe this unusual paradox that EPR talked about.
So here's the EPR paradox situation.
What we're going to do is start with a spin detector.
And for our spin detector, we're going to use some kind of apparatus that can tell us
whether the spin of a particle is up or down.
So there's my spin detector.
I'm going to put somewhere to the right of the spin detector that zero spin particle,
the one that has no spin and that is radioactive and that is going to decay.
So what's going to happen?
The particle is going to decay.
It's going to send out two particles going in opposite directions.
They're going to have spin, but the spins are undetermined until I make the measurement.
After the left-hand particle has passed through the spin detector,
I can look at the spin detector and it will tell me the direction of its spin.
Perhaps measure the spin up.
50% of the time it will measure up, 50% of the time it will measure down.
If I determine the spin this way of the left-hand particle,
and I'm in the situation shown in the picture right now,
if I determine the spin of the left-hand particle is up,
what do I know about the right-hand particle?
Well, because the original particle had zero spin and spin is conserved,
if the left-hand particle has spin up, I know immediately the right-hand particle had spin down.
Well, so what you say?
That's no big deal.
It is a big deal.
And the reason it's a big deal is because before the left-hand particle went through the spin detector,
the spin was undetermined.
That doesn't mean nobody knew what it was, or I hadn't measured it yet.
It means it really was indeterminate.
It could take on any value.
When it went through that detector, it was going to take on a positive value of 50% of the time
and a negative, a downward value, 50% of the time,
and you can't know ahead of time which.
It really was indeterminate.
And the value of the spin of the right-hand particle was also at that instant indeterminate.
So when I passed the left-hand particle through the spin detector,
that act determined immediately and instantaneously what the spin of the right-hand particle was,
even though it was way far away.
And Einstein-Pedalski and Rosen argued from that that this is absurd.
They said, no, those spins had to have been established beforehand,
and the interpretation of quantum mechanics that these quantities are undetermined
until you measure them can't possibly be right.
And that's what they argued.
Bohr said, nope, Bohr says the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics is what really rains,
and it really is true that the act of measuring the spin of the left-hand particle fixes the spin of the right-hand particle.
Well, how are we going to resolve this?
Well, in 1964, John Bell developed a famous theorem which looked at the statistics of doing this measurement.
In fact, he particularly said, what happens if I put a second spin detector after the first one?
And Bell was able to show, using some mathematics I'm not going to go through,
that the statistics of how many times, take that spin that's now up and run it through a spin detector
that looks for spins horizontal or vertical, or back and forth rather, rather than up and down,
and you'll get some statistical chance of finding it one way versus the other way.
Bell showed that the statistics of the outcome of that experiment depends on whether or not the spins were established
at the instant the two particles were created, or whether they were really established by the measurement at the spin detector.
And Bell's theorem, Bell's inequalities, they're called, gives a very definite prediction that those statistical outcomes should be different,
depending on which of those two cases is correct.
Remember, Einstein, Podolski and Rosen said, well, this proves that really the spins must have been created up and down
right when the particles were created.
Bohr says, no.
Bell says, I know how to tell the difference. You do this experiment.
Now, it's a very difficult experiment to do.
It was a thought experiment for Einstein, Podolski and Rosen.
But it was, in fact, done in the 1980s by Alan Aspect at University of Paris first and then repeated by many others.
And the first experiments that Aspect did indeed confirm the statistics that suggest quantum indeterminacy reigns here.
The statistics were consistent with the Copenhagen interpretation that the spins didn't have actual values until the left-hand spin was measured,
and then the right-hand spin instantaneously acquired its value.
Those experiments have done with increasing sophistication since then.
There have been even experiments set up in which the spin detector essentially didn't exist or didn't have an orientation at the moment the particles were created.
And in the short time it took the particles to fly to it.
The electronics was done fast enough to switch that spin detector in different orientations.
And nevertheless, the experiment comes out the same.
Recently, the experiments have been done with such sophistication that now the particles were piped by fiber optics,
they were photons in that case, to different suburbs of Zurich, Switzerland,
different suburbs on different sides of Zurich, Switzerland,
and the measurement was made in one suburb of the one particle,
and that immediately determined the state of the other particle.
Weird.
Einstein was really bothered by this.
He called it spooky action at a distance,
and you can imagine he didn't like it,
because what we have happening is here a measurement over here of the one particle determines instantaneously,
instantaneously, the state of the other particle.
How's that jibe with relativity?
Doesn't sound too good.
Actually, it isn't a problem for special relativity,
and the reason is there is no way we could send information using that mechanism.
There's no way because we don't know what the spin is going to be.
We can't say one if by land and two if by sea like Paul Revere did.
We can't use that to signal.
We can't say if you measure a downward spin of the second particle,
that means the British are coming.
Can't do that.
Why?
Because we don't know what the spin of the second particle is going to be,
so we can't send information.
But nevertheless, somehow the first particle has...
Has it sent information?
Well, I don't know, but somehow the first and second particles are connected
in a kind of strange quantum way.
And it appears that that connectedness, that so-called non-locality,
is a part of the quantum world.
You can imagine that philosophers, maybe even theologians,
all kinds of people are having a heyday with that.
There does seem to be this strange quantum connectedness.
There is some kind of connection between something happening over here
and something happening over here.
Now, it doesn't mean we're all connected in some kind of giant holistic web, necessarily,
but it does mean there are strange situations,
and the EPR experiment brings them out in which quantum weirdness is so weird
that what happens over here instantly affects what happens over there,
and in some way those two particles were intimately connected from their creation,
and they remain connected even as they spread to significantly large distances
throughout the universe.
That's quantum weirdness.
