Lecture 14, Curved Spacetime
In the previous lecture, I introduced the general theory of relativity, and with it,
Einstein's description of gravity not as a force, but as the geometrical structure
of four-dimensional spacetime itself, as the curvature of spacetime.
And I introduced Einstein's notion that the law of motion becomes a simple statement
that objects move in the straightest possible lines,
but they're not Euclidean straight lines anymore in this curved spacetime.
I left dangling though the question, what causes spacetime to curve?
And Einstein gave an answer to that question too, and it's a very simple answer.
Spacetime is curved by the presence of matter and the presence of energy,
the two basically being the equivalents that we discussed when we talked about E equals mc squared.
So it's matter and energy that curve or warp spacetime and matter in turn
responds to curved spacetime by moving in the straightest possible paths,
but where spacetime is curved, those are not straight lines.
The end result is Einstein's general theory of relativity developed in 1914,
or published in 1914. It took Einstein nine years after the special theory of relativity
to develop the general theory. It took him about six weeks of actually working
to develop the special theory, so this is quite a change.
And the reason it took so long is, as you can see from the idea of curved spacetime,
general relativity is a conceptually very difficult idea compared with special relativity
in many ways, although again the essence of it is simple.
Matter and energy curve spacetime and matter responds to curved spacetime
by moving in the straightest possible lines.
Another reason general relativity is difficult, and it's a subject that's difficult enough
most undergraduate physics majors don't study it,
is that the mathematics used to describe four-dimensional curved spacetime is very, very complex.
Einstein basically had to learn that mathematics. It was a whole branch of geometry
called non-Euclidean geometry, not a very commonly used subject
because the geometry of the everyday world we deal with seems to be essentially Euclidean.
So Einstein had to learn non-Euclidean geometry and all the complicated mathematics
for dealing with that and for describing laws of physics in curved spacetime.
But he did so, and in 1914 he published the general theory of relativity.
And historically I think the general theory has to rank as one of the really
crowning intellectual achievements of humankind.
Why? Partly because Einstein developed this theory entirely from his own mind.
It came out of his saying, this is the way I think the world has to be.
How can I make gravity consistent with what I already know, namely the principle of relativity?
How can I make gravity consistent with special relativity?
How can I generalize special relativity so your state of motion, whatever it is,
doesn't matter? How can we formulate a physics that works for all observers?
In the process gravity and acceleration got mixed up as we saw in the last lecture
through the principle of equivalence and general relativity became a theory of gravity.
But this all came out of Einstein's mind. He had absolutely no experimental evidence,
no observational evidence telling him Newtonian gravity is wrong.
There was one minor, minor unexplained deviation from Newton's gravity that existed
in solar system observations, and I'll get to that later in this lecture.
But that wasn't Einstein's motivation at all.
Einstein's motivation was simply gravity, as Newton described it, cannot be consistent
with the principle of relativity. How can I make it consistent in the process?
How can I generalize special relativity to get rid of that restriction to uniform motion only?
So Einstein thought, cogitated, learned mathematics, and developed a theory that emerged full-blown
in 1914 with at that point essentially no experimental confirmation
and no obvious way to verify it, and Einstein nevertheless said, this is correct,
and later came verifications, which I'll also be discussing in this lecture.
But let me give you the essence of general relativity, because here it is,
and it consists of two simple statements. The general theory of relativity states,
first of all, that matter and energy curve spacetime.
They shape the geometry of spacetime, and the second statement, the very simple one I introduced last time,
objects move in the straightest possible paths through this curved spacetime.
But again, because spacetime is curved, those straightest possible paths are not straight lines.
It's very difficult to picture this. My globe is an imperfect analogy.
I'm going to give you another analogy in a minute, which is also imperfect.
The reason they're imperfect is because it's not just space that's curved, it's spacetime,
and spacetime is a four-dimensional entity, and motion through both space and time is involved
in determining these straight line paths, or straightest line paths, in curved spacetime.
I want to do a very simple demonstration that gives you the flavor of what it means
to have matter curve spacetime and to have objects move in curved spacetime.
It's again an imperfect analogy, and what I'm going to use is this circular embroidery hoop,
and I have stretched across it a piece of shrinkwrap plastic.
That shrinkwrap plastic is right now completely flat, and that represents a flat Euclidean spacetime.
I'm now going to set up a demonstration which will show you what it means to warp the spacetime
and what it means then to move in the straightest possible path in curved spacetime.
Here we are with a two-dimensional analogy for general relativity with its curvature of four-dimensional spacetime,
the curvature being caused by the presence of matter and energy,
and matter itself moving in response to that curvature in the straightest possible lines.
I have here a small steel ball that's going to represent my piece of matter that moves through curved spacetime.
I've taken the embroidery hoop with the sheet of plastic that I showed you,
and I've laid it on a horizontal surface, and I have a camera pointing directly down at it,
and right now there is no curvature to my spacetime.
It's stretched, taut, and flat.
And I'm going to take my small steel ball and I'm going to roll it across the curved spacetime.
I'm going to give it a push, and let's watch what happens.
So here it goes.
It moved in a perfect straight line.
It did exactly what Newton's law would say, and in fact what Einstein's law also says.
It moved in the straightest possible line in curved spacetime.
In this case, because spacetime is not curved or it's got zero curvature or it's flat,
that straightest possible path is a true Euclidean straight line.
Let's do it again in a different direction.
Here it goes.
Straight line path, constant speed obeying the law of inertia.
Spacetime is not curved and the ball rolls straight across it in a straight line path at constant speed.
No curvature.
That's the second part of Einstein's general relativity,
that matter responds to the curvature of spacetime by moving in the straightest possible path.
But in this case, spacetime was not curved.
Now I'm going to warp my two-dimensional analog for spacetime,
and here's where the analogy becomes a bit imperfect.
I'm going to take this large steel ball.
This might represent a massive object like, for instance, the sun or the earth.
And my small ball will then represent a satellite or the earth going around the sun
or the moon going around the earth or whatever.
And I'm going to place the large steel ball in the center of my sheet.
Now you can't see the curvature any more than you can see the curvature of four-dimensional spacetime in which you live.
But that large ball has distorted the sheet, the plastic sheet.
It's done so through the agency of gravity, but don't get that confused.
That's only to distort the sheet.
We're not here demonstrating earthly gravity.
We've simply distorted that sheet in some way or other,
and this small ball, which is constrained to move on that sheet,
is now going to move in the straightest possible path it can describe
in what is now a curved two-dimensional analog to a curved four-dimensional spacetime.
So what happens?
If I roll it past the big ball, you see the path curves as it goes by the big ball.
It's as if we're attracted to the big ball.
It's not attracted to it.
What it's doing is getting its marching orders, as Taylor and Wheeler tell us,
from the local geometry of the spacetime through which it's passing.
That's the second part of general relativity.
Objects move in the straightest possible paths in curved spacetime.
But those straight possible paths are, in this case, not the straight lines of Euclidean geometry,
but curves pass that reflect the curvature of spacetime.
If I'm very careful, I can get it actually to go into an orbit
for a little while before friction slows it down.
There it goes.
It's in an elliptical-like orbit now around that massive object.
Again, it's not responding to any pull from the massive object.
It's responding to the curvature of spacetime in its immediate vicinity.
You can't see the difference because you can't see the warping of that plastic sheet,
but it's there.
That's the curved geometry of spacetime, and this small ball simply senses
the curvature of spacetime that it moves through, and it moves in a curved path.
That's an imperfect geometrical analogy, or two-dimensional analogy,
for the geometry of four-dimensional spacetime.
There is no attraction between these two balls.
One of them simply distorts the geometry of spacetime.
In this case, that two-dimensional sheet, and the second one then describes a curved path
instead of the straight line it would describe otherwise in that curved two-dimensional spacetime.
That's our analogy, an imperfect one, but nevertheless an analogy that lets you see
both parts of what general relativity has to say,
that the presence of matter or energy curves spacetime,
and that other matter then responds by moving in the straightest possible paths in curved spacetime,
and those straightest possible paths may be anything but straight.
They can be things like the orbit of the Earth around the Sun, the moon around the Earth,
or my small steel ball around the large steel ball.
So that's an analogy for the entire content of general relativity.
So you now know, in essence, what general relativity has to say.
It talks about how matter and energy curve spacetime,
and how matter then responds to the curvature of spacetime.
But what predictions does it make?
What does it say about how the world should behave
that will allow us to tell whether this theory is correct?
What predictions does general relativity make?
In fact, general relativity makes a number of predictions about the behavior, matter,
predictions that in places where gravity is weak agree almost,
but not quite with the predictions of Newton's law of gravity.
That's not surprising.
Newton's law does a very successful job of predicting the motions of the planets
or allowing us to launch spacecraft to Jupiter
or put satellites in orbit around the Earth.
Newton's theory of gravity is pretty close to being correct.
In places where gravity is weak, and by the end of today's lecture,
and particularly in the next lecture,
I'm going to define exactly what I mean by weak and strong gravity,
but in places where gravity is weak,
the predictions of Einstein's theory differ only slightly
from the predictions of Newton's theory of gravity.
For most of the 20th century,
we had access only to places where gravity was relatively weak,
and therefore tests of whether general relativity was correct or not
were very sensitive tests which tins on measuring very minuscule differences
between the predictions of Newton's theory and the predictions of Einstein's theory.
And general relativity, for that reason,
has not, at least until recently, been verified nearly as strongly
as was special relativity.
But in recent years, with the discovery of extreme situations in astrophysics,
particularly situations where gravity does become very strong,
we're much, much more confident now that general relativity is correct.
And general relativity is really an essential theory now
to understanding very extreme objects in astrophysics
and indeed to understanding the overall structure of the whole universe.
We're still not as convinced of its correctness in every detail
as we are of special relativity, but we're becoming very convinced.
There are a few competing theories, most of which have been ruled out,
and general relativity really is beginning to reign as the correct theory of gravity.
So we're quite confident of it, although through most of the 20th century,
we certainly didn't have the kind of dramatic confirmation
that, for example, the Mulan experiment provided for special relativity.
Now, in the case of special relativity,
I was able to lead you from the basic principles to understanding rigorously
the predictions of time dilation, for example,
or relativity of simultaneity and things like that.
In general relativity, I can't do that.
I can't take you from those simple statements about curvature of space-time
and matter moving in the straightest possible paths.
I can't take you from that to a rigorous understanding of the predictions.
So I'm simply going to tell you what they are and run you through them
and give you a sense of what observations and experiments have indeed helped us
to confirm that general relativity is right.
Well, the first thing, one obvious thing that general relativity will talk about
is the orbits that planets follow.
In Newton's case, the prediction is, as we saw and as Kepler had first told us,
that the orbits of the planets should be perfect ellipses.
And in the case of Kepler and Newton, those ellipses should simply repeat again and again
and again and again exactly the same ellipse.
General relativity predicts a slight deviation from that prediction.
General relativity predicts that the ellipse should swing around
and be in a slightly different orientation with each subsequent ellipse.
I've got a picture of that over here.
It's called orbital precession.
So an elliptical orbit starts out initially with its long dimension this way.
And with each successive orbit, the long dimension swings slightly
until toward the end of this operation, the long dimension is pointing that way.
There's been a precession from one orientation of the long dimension of the orbit to another.
That's called orbital precession.
That does happen in the solar system.
It happens most dramatically, although hardly dramatically at all, as you'll see,
for the planet Mercury.
Why? Because Mercury is closest to the Sun, the most massive object in the solar system,
and the one with the greatest gravitational force.
So Mercury exhibits this precession, but in Mercury's case,
it amounts to about a hundredth of a degree of angle.
A degree is a pretty tiny angle.
About a hundredth of a degree of angle every century.
Nevertheless, years and years of accumulated observational evidence
from astronomical observations is enough to see that effect.
And at the end of the 19th century, it was known that the orbital behavior of Mercury
deviated slightly from the predictions of Newton.
This was not a crisis in physics, because there possibly were other explanations.
Maybe there were unknown planets somewhere that were exerting subtle effects or something like that,
or maybe the Sun wasn't perfectly spherical, or other effects could explain that.
It wasn't a crisis for physics, but Einstein did know about it.
And one of the first things he did with his general theory of relativity
was to figure out what the orbit of Mercury should be,
and lo and behold, he was delighted when he found he could explain this precession of the orbit of Mercury
precisely with his theory of general relativity.
So this very, very sensitive test based on this one hundredth of a degree of angle per century
helped confirm Einstein's theory, but it's hardly a very dramatic effect.
Today, however, we know of astronomical systems where gravity is really strong.
They consist of collapsed stars.
A collapsed star is a star, a thing with roughly the mass of the Sun.
The Sun is about a million miles in diameter.
It's collapsed into the size of, oh, the Earth in some cases,
or in more extreme cases, the size of, say, a city to an object a few miles across.
Such an object is called a neutron star.
These things tend to spin very rapidly, as meant as a few hundred to a thousand times a second,
and if they have hot spots on them or magnetic regions, they emit bursts of radiation,
and as they come by, or they emit a beam of radiation, is that beam comes by Earth, we hear bursts,
bup, bup, bup, bup, bup, like that.
These things are called pulsars, and they give us a very regular timing signal
from which we can determine a lot about the system in question.
Well, in the 1970s, a very famous system was discovered called the binary pulsar.
It consists of one of these very densely collapsed stars in a very tight orbit
around another collapsed object, and because these two objects are very, very dense
and very collapsed, a lot of mass crammed into a small space, they have very strong gravity,
they're in a very close orbit, and these effects are multiplied many, many, many fold.
Studies of this binary pulsar, which have taken place since it was discovered in the 1970s,
and it's the people who worked on it, Joseph Taylor and Russell Hulse, who also, Taylor, discovered it,
won the 1993 Nobel Prize for this work.
They've been painstakingly studying the system for many, many years,
and I'll have much more to say about that a little bit later in this lecture.
But the regularly spaced emission of radio signals from this pulsar allows us to calculate
just what it's doing in its orbit as it comes toward us or moves away from it.
The frequency of those signals changes slightly, and we can calculate out what the orbit is doing,
and we can verify directly that this procession is occurring, and it's occurring at a much greater rate
than it does for Mercury, and it confirms, again, general relativity.
There's another prediction of general relativity, and that's a prediction that time should run slower
in regions where gravity is stronger.
Another funny effect on time.
Not surprising because after all, general relativity is about the distortion of the geometry of space time by mass.
In regions where gravity is strong, or to put it in general relativistic terms,
where space time is very sharply curved, time runs slower.
This is a gravitational time dilation, and what it means is this.
It means that if I take two clocks and I put them at different heights in the Earth's gravity,
they run at different rates.
This clock runs slower than this one, and if I hold them in this position for a very long time,
this clock will be seen to be lagging behind this one.
Over this distance of a few feet, that's an absurdly difficult thing to measure with clocks like this,
but nevertheless, it's a real effect, and the prediction of general relativity is that time should run slower
as you get into regions of more intense space time curvature.
That is regions that Newtonian terms we would call regions of strong gravity.
Can we measure that?
Well, remarkably, in 1960, scientists at Harvard, using a 70-foot tower basically,
a 74-foot tower, a stairwell basically in one of the Harvard University buildings,
measured the gravitational time dilation using a very, very sensitive timing device
which consisted essentially of the frequency of decay of a radioactive atom,
and they were able to measure the shift in the frequency from the bottom to the top of that 74-foot height.
Not a very big height compared to the radius of the Earth.
It was a very sensitive test, and they proved that gravitational time dilation occurred.
Gravitational time dilation is now verified much more dramatically by looking at emission of signals
from the surfaces of these compact stars where gravity is very strong,
and we see atomic processes, for example, slowed down to an extent that is commensurate with general relativity.
We can even see this for processes on the Sun.
Atomic processes, vibrations that give rise to light waves, happen at a slightly slower rate.
Again, the Sun is not a source of very strong gravity, so these effects are very subtle in the solar system,
but we can nevertheless see them, even for the Sun.
We can see them much more dramatically for these compact objects.
Gravitational time dilation is also important in situations here on Earth.
For example, in the round-the-world atomic clocks experiment that I described to you,
and it's listed in your bibliography, I used that as an example of the twin paradox,
showing us that the twin situation really happened.
We flew clocks around the world, they came back 300 nanoseconds slower than the clocks that were left behind,
but I pointed out that there were effects both of special and general relativity.
The special relativistic effect was due to the motion of the clock relative to the clock that remained behind on Earth,
and it was non-uniform motion because it went around in a circle, that clock came back younger,
but there was another effect, and that is the clocks that went in the airplane went up higher,
they went up to regions where gravity was weaker, and therefore they actually ran faster for that reason,
and both those effects had to be taken into account.
Finally, although I've emphasized that space-time curvature, or equivalently the strength of gravity in the solar system,
is in some absolute sense rather weak, in the sense that the gravitational predictions of Einstein's theory
don't differ significantly from those of Newton, nevertheless they do differ slightly.
And in very, very precise measurement applications, those differences can be important,
and a case in point is the global positioning system.
People think, what on Earth does general relativity have to do with me?
What's its relevance to the everyday human being?
Well, as more and more of us use the global positioning system to navigate our cars,
or in the airplanes we fly in, or whatever, or to find ourselves when we're lost in the woods,
we're relying on a positioning system that involves timing, precise timing of signals
from a whole constellation of satellites above the Earth,
and the programs that calculate where you are based on the timing of those signals
have to take into account not only the motion of the satellites,
which affect their internal timekeeping because of special relativistic effects,
but they also have to take into account the gravitational time dilation
associated with the altitudes of the satellites.
If those general relativistic effects were not taken into account by about one day,
the global positioning system would accumulate errors of a good fraction of a mile,
and this is a system that's supposed to localize you within a matter of meters.
So general relativity really is relevant.
It's right there in the global positioning system.
If we didn't take general relativity into account,
the global positioning system would fail utterly,
at least at localizing us to any kind of reasonable precision.
So general relativity, although it's a very abstract theory about the curvature of space-time,
is nevertheless important to us here on Earth.
There's some other examples of general relativity's predictions that are important.
General relativity predicts that light should be bent in a gravitational field.
Light should be bent by gravity.
Why is that?
Let me show you.
Here's a situation where I'm going to use the equivalence principle
to convince you of something that must be the case.
Here I am, again, in my laboratory, falling elevator, whatever you want to call it.
I'm in intergalactic space. I'm moving uniformly.
There's no gravity anywhere near me,
and I'm going to imagine a light beam enters my spaceship or elevator or laboratory,
whatever it is, traveling horizontally,
and what's it do? It comes in through a hole in the spaceship,
and it hits the wall opposite itself.
No problem.
But because we believe the equivalence principle,
we believe this situation is equivalent in every respect
to this laboratory, elevator, spaceship, whatever, freely falling in Earth's gravity.
If the thing is freely falling in Earth's gravity,
the light enters the left side.
A while later, the light has to hit the right side.
If these two situations are equivalent,
it has to hit the right-hand wall exactly opposite where it entered.
The problem is, in the left-hand situation,
when we're freely falling near Earth, we've fallen,
and the right-hand wall is somewhere else.
The light still hits at the same place on that wall
because these two situations are equivalent,
and therefore it had to have curved.
Light must be bent by gravity.
And the most dramatic confirmation of general relativity came in May of 1929,
and there's an interesting historical...
1919, rather, May 29th of 1919.
The experiment was carried out,
or the observations were carried out by the British astronomer Sir Arthur Eddington.
Eddington had been a conscientious objector in World War I.
He was a Quaker, and in return for agreeing...
for not serving in the military, he agreed to carry out an expedition
to observe an eclipse as soon as the World War I hostilities were over.
It turned out that the first occasion for that after World War I was May 29th, 1919,
and it also turned out that, at that time,
the greatest number of bright stars were in the sky in the immediate vicinity of the sun,
and you'll see just a minute why that was important.
It's important for this reason.
Let's take a look at the situation.
Here's the Earth and some star, and we want to observe the light from this star,
and normally the light from that star comes straight to Earth,
and we point our telescope straight at the star, and we see it.
What I'm about to show you is highly exaggerated.
This is a very subtle effect for the sun.
What if there's some time of year when the sun,
whose motion relative to the Earth and the sky is different from the stars,
the sun comes between the Earth and the star, something like that?
Well, we can't observe the star by looking directly through the sun,
but what happens?
Light that leaves the star, if the prediction of general relativity is correct,
will be bent by gravity and may come to the Earth nevertheless.
And we look in a rather different direction than we would
if the sun had not been in that position in order to see that star.
Now, again, this is highly exaggerated.
We don't really see stars that are behind the sun in this situation.
What we do see are slight changes in the positions of stars
that appear to be very close to the sun already,
so this is highly exaggerated, but it shows you what we see,
or the idea of what we see.
So this is the gravitational bending of light,
and this gravitational bending of light was observed
by very carefully taken photographs of the positions of stars
at the time the sun was between the Earth and the star.
You might say, well, how on Earth can you see stars
when the sun is right there in the sky very near them?
Well, the answer is the only time you can do that
is during a total eclipse of the sun when the moon moves between the sun
and the Earth and blocks out the sun,
and that's what happened on May 29, 1919,
and that's when Eddington was able to make these measurements.
And it was a very happy coincidence that the first available eclipse
coincided to a time when there were so many bright stars near the sun.
Now, today we routinely make similar measurements,
except instead of using the bending of sunlight,
a bending of starlight by the sun,
we look at very distant objects, distant galaxies or quasars,
which are actually sort of infant galaxies so far away from us
that we're looking at that amount of time
before they've evolved into galaxies.
I'll say more about those later.
And here's the typical situation.
We see a quasar in between the quasar and Earth.
The galaxy and light from the quasar reaches us
by either that path or that path,
and a remarkable thing we see when we look at the quasar then
is we see, actually, we see it looking in one direction,
we see it looking in a slightly different direction,
or equivalently, if we take a picture of the quasar,
or of the sky where the quasar is,
we actually may see multiple images of the quasar.
If the situation were perfectly symmetric,
as I've drawn it, we might actually see the quasar stretched out as a ring.
If it's not perfectly symmetric, we will see multiple images of it,
and some of the images will be distorted.
We call this situation gravitational lensing.
The gravitational field of the intervening galaxy,
or in relativistic terms, the warping of space-time,
acts as a lens that can focus or distort
or actually create multiple images.
And I have a couple of examples of that to show you.
This is a dramatic image taken with the Hubble Space Telescope.
Near the center of it, you see a bright cluster of galaxies,
not terribly distant galaxies, a bright cluster of galaxies.
And in the regions around there, you can see some in here,
you can see a blue structure that's sort of elongated.
Out here, you can see almost a ring of blue distorted-looking structures.
Those are multiple images of the same galaxy.
The galaxy is actually very distant.
It's behind that nearby or nearer clump of galaxies,
cluster of galaxies, and the intense gravitation,
the intense warping of space-time by this cluster of galaxies
is distorting the images, distorting the paths of light
coming from way behind it from these distant galaxies
and making this ring-like structure of distorted-looking objects.
That's an example of gravitational lensing.
And the Hubble Telescope, as well as other telescopes,
now have given us dramatic examples of gravitational lensing
by typically galaxies of more distant galaxies or quasars.
Another example of a gravitational lensing is this object.
What we're seeing in the yellow object in the middle
is a galaxy, some hundreds of millions of light-years away,
and that is imaging a distant quasar,
which is billions of light-years away.
And the quasar appears here not as a single image,
but as four dots, four images of the quasar
because of the particular geometry of the lensing here.
This particular object is called the Einstein Cross
because of its cross-like shape,
and obviously named after Einstein,
who gave us the notion that gravitational fields
should bend light, that the bending of space-time itself
should cause light itself to travel in the straightest possible paths,
but they aren't necessarily straight lines.
Today, gravitational lensing has become
not just a way of confirming that general relativity is right,
it's become a way of searching for objects.
One of the problems we have in cosmology
and understanding the origin of the universe
is that we don't know where most of the mass of the universe is.
More on this in lecture 23.
But one way we can search for dark objects
that we can't otherwise see is
if a dark object passes in front of a distant star,
there may be a temporary increase in the brightness of the light
from that star as the gravitational field
or, if you will, the warping of space-time
by this massive but dark object
causes a lensing effect on the light from the distant stars.
These are called microlensing events,
and they're now used in a search for kinds of objects
that hypothetically may make up some of the mass of the universe.
Finally, general relativity predicts
the existence of gravitational waves.
If some dramatic event happens to a massive object
and it starts wiggling or two black holes collide
or something like that, that will start waves,
literally waves in the fabric of space-time,
and those waves propagate outward with, guess what, speed.
The maximum speed they can, the speed of light see,
and they carry information about that event to the distant universe.
For several decades, astronomers have been trying
to detect gravitational waves.
They first did it by building enormous aluminum cylinders
with delicate sensors at the end
that would sense any vibration set up in the cylinder
by the passage of a gravitational wave.
We're moving toward a much more sensitive form of gravity wave detector.
Now, we're building Michelson-Morley-like experiments
in which we send laser beams, not a few yards,
but thousands of miles in space-based Michelson interferometer-type situations,
and these should be in orbit in the next few years,
and we should be able to look at gravitational waves
produced by all kinds of dramatic astrophysical events
in the distant universe,
and that will open for us, literally, a whole new window in the universe.
The binary pulsar that I mentioned earlier ought to emit gravitational waves,
and in fact, we haven't detected those waves,
but as it emits those waves, it ought to lose energy,
and the orbits ought to change,
and we have detected those changes in orbit.
That's part of what got Taylor and Hulse the Nobel Prize.
By studying that event, they saw the energy loss,
and the energy loss is exactly as predicted by general relativity
if the energy is carried away by gravitational waves.
Finally, general relativity predicts the existence of an entirely new
and dramatic kind of entity, the black hole,
and the black hole deserves a whole lecture in itself,
and we'll be talking about them next.
