Welcome to lecture number four, Let There Be Light.
This lecture will be an attempt to give you a half an hour of what I normally teach in an entire semester, namely the subject of electricity and magnetism.
If motion were all there were to the study of physics, our story of the history of physics before relativity would be essentially over.
But there's a whole other branch of physics, electricity and magnetism, that actually was known about for a long, long time.
The ancient Greeks coined the word alecatron for the substance amber, which, because it's a very good insulator of electricity,
somewhat like styrofoam, tends to exhibit a lot of static electricity and things cling to it, the way socks cling to each other today when they come out of the dryer, for example.
And the ancient Chinese also knew about magnetism and magnetic compasses were already in use by the 12th century.
Nevertheless, in terms of a rigorous base of knowledge on electromagnetism, electricity and magnetism came after mechanics, after the study of motion.
And we need to take a look at electricity and magnetism because relativity really, more than most people realize, is a direct outgrowth of the study of electricity and magnetism,
and the questions that were asked about it in relation to the kinds of questions we've already asked about the study of motion.
So we want to spend most of this lecture looking briefly at the subject of electricity and magnetism, and in the end, coming to a very important conclusion from that subject,
and a conclusion that you'll need to realize is true, you'll need to appreciate it, and you'll need to grasp its significance if we're going to go forward and understand where relativity comes from.
So I want to begin with just a brief description of some early experiments with electricity.
People studied things like they would rub a piece of glass with a fur of a cat and something would stick to it, little particles of dust or paper would stick to it.
You've seen things like this happen. You rub a balloon and you can stick it on the wall. This was the phenomenon of static electricity.
And through a number of experiments like this, people gradually realized that a property called electric charge is a fundamental aspect of matter,
and that electric charge comes into varieties. And it was Ben Franklin, the American statesperson who actually studied this in some detail and coined the terms positive and negative for those two kinds of electric charge.
There's nothing positive about positive charge and nothing missing about negative charge. They're just two words for two basic fundamental properties of matter.
If you ask me as a physicist what charge is, I'm going to have to say I really don't know.
It's a fundamental property of matter. The most basic particles we know about the electrons and the quarks, more about them later in the course, they have electric charge.
Some have positive charge, some have negative charge. We don't know what charge is. It's a fundamental property.
If you ask me what mass is or weight, I don't really understand what that is either.
But I know what it is from feeling heavier objects and lighter objects.
And similarly from doing experiments with electricity and magnetism and from building electromagnetic devices, we have a feel for what electric charge is.
It's a fundamental property of matter. And one important aspect of electric charge is that like charges, imagine these two tennis balls are two identical electric charges, like charges repel.
So it's hard to push like charges together. They want to fly apart. There's a repulsive force between them.
It's actually somewhat similar to the gravitational force that Newton came up with centuries ago.
It falls off in strength with the inverse square of the distance between the objects.
So when they're far apart, they don't feel much force. When they're close together, they feel a very big strong force.
The force is repulsive if the two charges are the same. The force is attractive if the two charges are different.
A positive and a negative charge will be attracted together. And absent any other forces, they will simply come together.
So like charges repel, opposite charges attract. That's not something we can have with gravity because there's only one kind of matter, one kind of mass.
It's all positive, basically, and masses all attract each other. But electricity works a little bit differently.
There are two kinds of charge, opposite charges attract, like charges repel.
So that was basic knowledge of electricity. And in the 1700s and into the 1800s, people experimented with other aspects of electricity.
They developed batteries. They could make electric current flow through wires. Frog's legs twitched when touched with pieces of metal.
And that led to the discovery of the battery into electric currents and everything we know today about electric circuits.
So there was a lot of work being done in the 1700s, early 1800s, on the study of electricity.
Now I'm using the word electricity here. The title of my lecture, Let There Be Light, I then introduced as a lecture about electromagnetism or electricity and magnetism.
But so far I've said only electricity. People also knew about magnets and magnetism.
And I have here a couple of magnets and I just want to review what you probably already know about magnets.
The typical magnet has two ends called poles, north and south, and magnets have the properties that north and south poles are attracted.
So if I bring the north pole of this magnet and the south pole of this magnet together, they come together.
And it takes work to pull them apart. And then that force falls off rapidly as I move them further and further apart.
Here I feel no force between them. Here I just begin to feel an attractive force. Here they come together and they come very closely together and are attracted.
If I turn one of the magnets around, so I'm putting two south poles together, now I get a repulsive interaction.
Again, opposites attracting likes repelling. So here we go, two opposites. I try to push them together and it gets very hard to do.
They want to fly apart. So we have these magnets with their poles, like poles, repel, opposite poles attract, similar to what happens with electric charge.
But magnetism is not electricity. Magnets are not electric charges. The ends of the magnets are not charged.
We seem to have two different phenomena. We have the phenomena of electricity that involve this fundamental property of matter, electric charge, and we have the phenomena of magnetism that seems to involve things like magnets.
And by the way, there are naturally occurring materials that are magnetic.
Before I go on and introduce the idea of electromagnetism, let me say a little bit more about how we conceptualize this interaction between either electric charges or electricity or magnetic poles.
Here are two electric charges. One of them is positive, one of them is negative, say.
As I described their interaction, I said, OK, these two charges are attracted to each other.
This one exerts a force on the green one, exerts a force on the yellow one, the yellow one exerts a force on the green one, Newton's third law, by the way, tells us that whatever force the green one exerts on the yellow one, the yellow one exerts an equal and opposite force on the green one.
That was Newton's third law. And they come together.
There's a problem with that, a philosophical problem and also a mathematical problem with trying to describe the interaction that way.
When I say the green charge exerts a force on the yellow charge, I'm saying that somehow this green charge reaches out across empty space and grabs onto this yellow one.
Now, how does that happen? Newton called that action at a distance. How does action at a distance happen?
How does an object that's way over here exert an influence on one that's over here?
And a particularly disturbing question about that issue is this. What if this one suddenly disappeared, suddenly disappeared, ceased to exist?
Would the yellow one know that immediately? Would it know immediately to stop feeling an attractive force in this direction? Or wouldn't it?
And if you want to go to a bigger picture, imagine that we're talking about gravity, and this is the Earth, and this is the Moon,
and if the Earth suddenly disappeared, would the Moon know immediately to stop moving around in its orbit? How did that information get to it?
It's a problem. It's going to be a big problem we get to relativity, and we find we don't want there to be ways where information can get from one place to another instantaneously.
So this description of the electric interaction or the magnetic interaction in terms of a force that somehow reaches out across a distance and pulls on the other object,
there's something a little bothersome about it philosophically.
There's also a bit of a problem mathematically, which really isn't as deep a problem, but still bothered people, and that is this.
Here's this green charge. Positive or negative, I haven't decided which, but it's one of those two, and it's attracting this yellow charge, which is the opposite.
What if I took the yellow charge away and put another green charge there? Well, then it would be repelled, and I'd have to describe the interaction all over again.
What I'd really like to know is what electrical influence does this charge exert on objects I might put anywhere in its vicinity?
And there's a way to describe that with a new concept, and it's a somewhat abstract concept, but it's important to understand it for purposes of this lecture and then what follows.
And the idea is the field, the field of force.
And I'm going to introduce the field of force first in terms of gravity, and then go back and describe it in terms of electricity and magnetism.
Let me use gravity as an example. This is now not going to be a charge, but what it is, a tennis ball.
Again, there are two ways of describing the interaction between this tennis ball and the Earth.
One is to say the Earth, way down there, all the mass that makes up the Earth, the stuff right below the floor, Mount Everest on the other side of the planet, all the water in the Pacific Ocean, all the water in the Atlantic Ocean,
the continent of North America, the continent of Africa, all the ice and Antarctica, all those aspects of the Earth reach out and pull on this tennis ball and somehow result in a force which beautifully, and Newton proved this to be the case,
is directed toward the center of the Earth. And as a result, the tennis ball falls.
The Earth reaches out, pulls on it, and down it goes.
Not just the Earth right here, but all parts of the Earth.
And similarly, by Newton's third law and by the universal law of gravitation, the tennis ball reaches out on all parts of the Earth and pulls on them and the net result is a force upward on the Earth.
It's just the Earth is so massive.
Force equals mass times acceleration. Its motion hardly changes when I let go of the tennis ball because of the force of the tennis ball on the Earth.
The tennis ball is very light. Its motion changes fairly dramatically when I let it go and it falls to Earth.
But they're actually both pulling on each other and the action at a distance view would say the Earth reaches out and grabs on the tennis ball.
Earth reaches out and grabs on the moon. Earth reaches out and grabs on a satellite and exerts a force that swings in its orbit.
The field concept says, no, there's a more sophisticated way of looking at that.
And the more sophisticated way is to say the Earth creates in its vicinity a thing called a field of force, in this case a gravitational field.
At every point in the Earth's vicinity, there exists this invisible entity, the gravitational field.
And it has the property that if I put matter there that matter will experience a force.
The stronger the gravitational field, the stronger the force it will experience.
And the bigger the mass of the object, also the bigger the force it will experience.
And the direction of the gravitational field that has a direction is directed toward the center of the Earth.
So there's a gravitational field right at this point and it's directed toward the center of the earth.
And there's a gravitational field right at this point and it's directed toward the center of the earth.
of the Earth. And there's a gravitational field above Antarctica, which is directed
in a different way toward the center of the Earth, but that's a different direction at
Antarctica. And you could imagine the entire Earth surrounded by these invisible arrows
almost that describe the strength of the gravitational field and tell us what would happen if we
put an object there. What do we gain by this picture? Well, one thing we gain is the description
of the Earth's gravity independent of particular objects like tennis balls or the moon or satellite
that I might choose to put there. The other thing we gain is a way around that philosophical
problem I described earlier. Because if the Earth suddenly disappeared, this description
says that doesn't mean the gravitational field that the Earth created in space around
it disappears immediately. It takes time for that information about the Earth disappearing
to get out to the moon. It takes time for the moon suddenly to stop moving in its circular
orbit and go in the straight line. It goes in if there's no force acting on it. So the
field concept describes an interaction between two objects, a gravitational interaction in
this case, an interaction involving gravity, in a very different way. It says a gravitating
object like the Earth creates a gravitational field all through space surrounding it. And
objects respond to the gravitational field not somewhere far away, but in their immediate
vicinity. This tennis ball doesn't need to know about the Earth and Mount Everest. It
needs to know about the gravitational field they've created at this point in space. The
field idea is a local idea. It says objects behave the way they do because of their local
environment. Now that local environment is shaped by the distant parts of the Earth,
but it's nevertheless the local environment to which the tennis ball responds. It's the
same thing with electricity and magnetism. Let's go back again to these being two charges.
The old fashioned action in a distance description would say the green one reaches out, exerts
a force on the yellow one and pulls it. The yellow one reaches out, exerts a force on
the green one, pulls it, they come together. The field concept says, no, the green one
creates a field at all points in space. In this case, an electric field because this
is electrically charged. It's a force field. And if I put some other charged object in
its vicinity, it will experience a force that depends on the electric field right where
I put it. Now that electric field arose, came about because of the presence of the green
one. But again, there's that philosophical distinction. The force on the yellow one arises
because of what's happening in its immediate vicinity. Namely, there's an electric field
of force there. I put any charge there. It will experience a force that depends on how
charged it is and on how strong that field is. Similarly, if I want to talk about magnetism,
I can say that this magnet creates a field of force. And if you've ever seen the demonstration
where a magnet is plunked down in a pile of iron filings, they line up to create a visual
picture of that field of force, which way it points. There's a field of force surrounding
this magnet. If I put another magnet somewhere in that vicinity, that other magnet experiences
that field of force and gets a force exerted on it. And that's a description of the magnetic
interaction. So it's very abstract sounding, but we've gone from the point where we said
two objects interact magnetically, gravitationally, or electrically because each one pulls or
pushes on the other to saying each object creates this mysterious field and space around
it, and the other object responds to that field. Very abstract sounding, but it has
a tremendous reality. Because as soon as you acknowledge the existence of these fields
and you study electricity and magnetism a little more, you find these fields, for instance,
have energy. They have substance to them, in a sense. We can't see them, we can't touch
them, but they're there, and they actually are repositories of energy. And we find other
things about them. We find, in particular, that if we think about the fields, we come
to understand a relationship between electricity and magnetism, a really deep and profound
relationship. And I want to take a few minutes to describe briefly what some aspect of that
relationship are. It turns out that if I move an electric charge, again, here's my electric
charge, if I simply move it along, that creates magnetism. In fact, what's going on inside
this magnet is not that there are lots of funny little fundamental magnetic things,
but rather that there are moving electric charges. There are the electric charges in
the atoms that make up this material, and this happens to be a rod of iron, which I've
painted one end silver to mark the South Pole and mark things on it. The atoms in iron,
in particular, have a property that they all line themselves up, so all their little electron
motions are going around basically together, and that creates a big composite effect of
electric charge moving, which in turn creates magnetism. So that's where magnet comes from.
It's really arising from moving electric charges. Similarly, in an electric motor, which is
a device you use every day, it runs your refrigerator, it runs your CD player, it runs
the fans that keep you cool, it runs your air conditions, it runs the subway trains
you travel in, it runs electric trains, it runs the starter motor of your car, it runs
your watch. I could go on and on and on and on. Electric motors simply consist of coils
of wire with electric currents flowing through them. They become magnets, and the magnetic
forces that are so generated cause them to spin. There's another example where electricity
and magnetism are related.
More fundamentally, there's a relationship directly between the electric fields and the
magnetic fields, and the relation is something like this. If I have magnetism, if I have
a magnetic field arising from, say, a magnet, for example, I'm going to grab this magnet
again, this magnet creates a magnetic field in the space around it. If I change that magnetic
field in any way, for example, by moving the magnet around or something, the fact is that
that creates electricity, it creates an electric field. The fields that I've talked about, these
abstract entities, have existence of their own, basically. Changing a magnetic field
by moving a magnet creates an electric field. I've got a little demonstration of that here.
With the device I borrowed from my daughter, it's a flashlight, but it's a very special
flashlight because it has no batteries. And I'm going to run this flashlight by cranking
the little crank at the bottom. As long as I do that, the flashlight is lit. Now what
I have here is a miniature electric generator. The electricity that runs your televisions,
your computers, your refrigerators, all your household lighting, most of our industrial
machinery is generated by large scale versions of this. And it consists of nothing more than
a coil of wire in the presence of a magnet. The coil of wire spins, it senses changing
magnetic field because it's moving in the vicinity of this magnet, and consequently changing
magnetism creates an electric field, and there are electrons in that wire, and they
respond to the electric field, they feel an electric force, and they're driven through
the wire and make the electric current that ultimately lights that light bulb. This little
device could be an entire course in electromagnetism all in itself. But the point I want to leave
you with from this is there is an intimate connection between electricity and magnetism,
and the connection is that changing magnetism makes electricity. To be a little more precise
about that, a changing magnetic field makes an electric field. There are many ways to
change the magnetic field. I can move a coil of wire around near a magnet. I can wave a
magnet in the air like I was doing before. I can turn a magnet, electromagnet on or off,
and that makes a changing magnetic field. In all those cases, I produce electricity.
There's a lot of practical consequences of that. I already described electric generators,
but you're all either watching or listening to this course with video or audio tape, and
what's going on there is the information of this course has been impressed as a pattern
of magnetization on a thin strip of tape containing metallic oxides that are themselves
magnetic. What's happening in your tape player, whether it's video or audio, is that tape
is being moved rapidly past a little coil of wire. The changing patterns associated
with the changing magnetic information on that tape is producing changing electric fields.
Those changing electric fields are producing forces on electrons in the coil of wire. Those
electrons are flowing in patterns that correspond to the visual appearance of what I'm doing
into the sound of my voice, and that's ultimately being amplified and displayed on your television
screen and or coming out your loudspeakers. Audio and video tapes, computer disks work
the same way. Your credit card stripe, when you swipe your credit card and that magnetic
stripe gives out its information, works the same way. The pattern of magnetization on
that credit card stripe is swiped past a little coil of wire, and the changing magnetization
makes electricity. So a key thing you need to know without knowing a whole lot more about
electricity magnetism is that changing magnetism makes electricity. So where are we at this
point? Well, we've really seen sort of three things. We've seen a brief discussion, not
quantitative, no equations or anything that describes how like charges repel and opposite
charges attract, the force between electric charges. We've talked about electricity and
described electricity briefly. We've talked about magnetism. We've described how there's
an attractive force on opposites and a repulsive force on like poles. We've described magnetism
independent of electricity. So there's two things. I've described electricity and I've
described magnetism. And then I've talked about a relationship in between the between
the two whereby changing magnetism produces electricity and my little generator powered
flashlight is an example of that. Something's missing there. Something's missing. I talked
about electricity. I talked about magnetism. I talked about a relationship between the
two whereby magnetism makes electricity. To be precise, changing magnetism, a changing
magnetic field makes an electric field. Something's missing. In the 1860s, the Scottish physicist
James Clerk Maxwell thought about this a lot. So there is something missing here. Now remember
I talked in the first lecture about how science is a creative activity. It isn't just a bland
go in the laboratory and test your hypothesis kind of activity. Well, Maxwell was displaying
the creative almost aesthetic side. He said there's something missing. There's not a symmetry
there that I kind of expect to see in nature. We know about electricity. We got laws that
cover that. We know about magnetism. We got laws that cover that. We know that changing
magnetism produces electricity. Why doesn't changing electricity produce magnetism? And
Maxwell says, I think it should. You know, if I were creating the universe, I would make
it that way. It would have more symmetry. It would be more beautiful. There's nothing
practical about this. There's nothing technological. This is aesthetics, pure and simple. Maxwell
said, I think this should be the case. Now he had some technical reasons also for proposing
that. But there was no experimental evidence directly for it. Maxwell proposed, I think
a changing electric field should also produce a magnetic field. And he formulated then out
of what had been known before and this new idea for laws of electricity and magnetism.
And in his honor, they are called Maxwell's equations, and they represent the second of
the great synthesis I've been mentioning in this course. In that synthesis, electricity
and magnetism become joined in one subject, electromagnetism. And I'm going to show you
these equations, not because I want to do lots of mathematics, but because to a physicist,
they're so beautiful. So here's a picture showing you Maxwell's equations. On the left,
I've got the equations. There are four of them. Don't worry about the funny looking
symbols. That's not what I'm trying to impress you with, although I am trying to impress
you with the fact that those four equations tell us everything we physicists need to know
about electricity and magnetism, at least at the level before quantum physics becomes
important. In the whole macroscopic realm from things the size of atoms and on up practically,
this describes basically everything there is to say about electricity and magnetism.
And there are four of these equations. The first one talks about electricity alone. You
see the E in the equation. That's for electricity. You see the B, sorry about the terminology,
but that's for magnetism. So what are these equations say? The first one talks about how
charges attract and repel. The second one talks about magnetic poles. They always come
in north-south pairs. We won't get into that. It's an interesting fact. It has some profound
implications, but that's what that one says. It's the last two that are important to us.
The third one says that a changing magnetic field produces an electric field. That funny
symbol on the right with the B magnetic field and the T time talks about changing magnetic
fields and it says that makes electric field. You see that on the left. The bottom one says
what we knew for a long time, namely that electric charges in motion create magnetism.
That's what the J stands for. But it also tells us that changing electric field makes
magnetic field. There's the E and the T on the right. Electricity changing with time.
There's the B magnetism on the left. What's the point of all this? If you don't know anything
else from either this lecture or from, of course, you might take an electricity magnetism,
come away understanding that changing magnetism makes electricity and changing electricity
makes magnetism. Because Maxwell then went ahead and said, what are the consequences
of this fact? And he came up with a brilliant prediction. He said, look, suppose I had some
changing magnetic field, I might make it by taking a magnet and wiggling it a little
bit or something. Well, now I have changing magnetic fields here. What do they produce?
They produce electric fields. And the likelihood is depending on how I wiggle this stuff, unless
I wiggle it in a very smooth, regular, continuous, steady fashion, those electric fields will
also be changing. And therefore, what do they produce? They produce changing magnetic field.
And what do those changing magnetic fields produce? They produce changing electric fields
and so on. And Maxwell envisioned then there could be a structure of started out with either
electric or magnetic fields. I don't care which changing creates changing the other field
back and forth changing electric changing magnetic changing electric changing magnetic
changing electric. And the thing leapfrogs its way through space. It's acquired an independent
existence and it carries with it electromagnetic energy and it propagates through space as
a wave. Maxwell predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves. And he did something
He predicted the speed that those waves should travel at. If you look at my picture of Maxwell's
equations again, you'll see some funny little Greek letters. There's a mu and an epsilon.
Those are numbers that describe how electricity, the strengths of the electric and magnetic
fields behave. Basically, how strong electricity is, how strong magnetism is. They were numbers
that were arrived at by laboratory experiments doing things like taking a couple charged
objects and measuring how strong the force is or taking a current flowing through a wire,
and seeing how strong a magnetic field it produces and so on. Nothing to do with optics,
among other things. Maxwell calculated that the speed of his electromagnetic waves depended
on those numbers and nothing else. And he calculated that speed and it came out to be
the known speed of light. Now until this point, nobody knew what light was. People had speculated
since about the early 1800s that it was a wave. Newton thought it was a particle. Much more on
that later in the course. But it was known by Maxwell's time that light was a wave. Nobody
knew what it was a wave of. All of a sudden, Maxwell, putting together this theory of electricity
and magnetism, predicts that there should be waves of electromagnetism and they should
propagate through empty space. They should travel through empty space, carrying energy
with them, electromagnetic energy with them, and they should do so at the known speed of
light. And it immediately became obvious that light was a form of electromagnetic wave.
And Maxwell asked other questions about electromagnetic waves. Are there other forms other than light?
And yes, there are other forms. There are forms like radio waves and infrared waves and
ultraviolet waves and x-rays and gamma rays. These are all electromagnetic waves. They're
all basically identical. All that differs in them is how rapidly they vibrate. Light waves
vibrate about 10 to the 14 or 10 to the 15 times a second. That's a one with 14 or 15
zeros after it times a second. Radio waves vibrate maybe a million or 100 million times
a second. FM radio is about 100 million times a second. That's why you tune your dial to
100 megahertz or 101.5 or whatever. AM radio, tune your dial to 850. That's 850,000, 850,000
vibrations a second. All those waves are the same. They're basically electromagnetic
waves and they consist of changing electric and magnetic fields. And the important point
for our course here is that Maxwell's equations predict the existence of those waves and equally
importantly predict the speed that those waves should go at. Today we know a whole spectrum
as I say of electric and electromagnetic waves. A whole spectrum from radio waves, the slowest
vibrating ones, but they all go at the same speed. It's just a question of how fast the
vibrations of the electric and magnetic fields are occurring. The waves themselves are all
moving at exactly the same speed. It's the known speed of light, about 186,000 miles
a second, 300,000 kilometers a second, or to put it in terms that are better for people
who design electric circuits and so on, it's about one foot per nanosecond. So in a nanosecond,
a billionth of a second, light goes about one foot. That by the way sets a limit to
the speed of our computers because computers need to move information around at speeds that
are close to but can't be faster than the speed of light for reasons you'll soon see
and therefore they can't be very big. If they were too big, they'd be too slow in terms
of the time it takes them to get information. So Maxwell has proven the existence of electromagnetic
waves. People set out to prove his hypothesis and Heinrich Hertz in 1887 succeeded in generating
electromagnetic waves on one side of a laboratory and with another apparatus on the other side
receiving those waves. So he demonstrated that Maxwell was correct by making, if you
will, artificial electromagnetic waves as opposed to the natural ones that are all around
us. That was in 1887. By 1901, the Italian Marconi transmitted electromagnetic waves
across the Atlantic Ocean for the first time. And so the electromagnetic wave discovery
became a very, very practical thing. And today, electromagnetic waves are used in our cell
phones. The mouse I've been clicking to operate my computer, visuals over here, is transmitting
its clicks by electromagnetic waves, by radio waves in that case, all of radio, television,
waves, infrared devices, all these things, lasers, all these things are generating and
using electromagnetic waves. Electromagnetic waves are ubiquitous. And the important point
for us is they all arise in exactly the same way. You somehow make an electric or magnetic
field change, maybe by electrons going back and forth in a wire antenna, maybe by doing
something to the electrons in atoms, as in a laser. Whatever you do, once you've started
that process, the electromagnetic wave propagates away. And at least if it's in vacuum, it does
so at one unique speed, no matter what kind of wave it is, radio, television, infrared,
visible, whatever, x-rays, gamma rays, it goes at the speed which we designate by the
letter C, 186,000 miles a second, a foot per nanosecond, 300,000 kilometers a second.
In fact, if you are religious, and I'm not trying to be religious here, but if you were
religious, I think you would embellish Maxwell's equations in the following way. And this way
involves the title of my lecture here. Maxwell's equations, if you were creating the universe
and you wanted a universe in which there was going to be light, from what we know of light,
you would need to create a universe with electricity and magnetism, a universe that obeyed Maxwell's
equations. So if you want to think of it in sort of terms of Genesis, and God said this,
blah, all those equations, and there was light, because that's where light came from. Light
comes from electromagnetic waves, light is electromagnetic waves, it's a result of electromagnetism.
Where are we going with this? What I want you to take away from this lecture is the
idea that electromagnetic waves are a necessary consequence of the branch of physics called
electromagnetism, and that electromagnetic waves as predicted by that branch of physics
travel with a known speed. It's the speed of light, it's a known definite number, there's
no exceptions to that. Electromagnetic waves in vacuum travel with this known speed which
from now on we'll simply call C.
