Welcome to Einstein's Relativity and the Quantum Revolution, a course in modern physics
for non-scientists. I'm Professor Rich Wilson from Middlebury College. And before I begin,
I'd just like to say a little bit about my title to emphasize two terms in that title.
First of all, the term modern physics. This is a course in the great ideas that shape
the physics of the 20th and 21st centuries. It's not a course in all the physics, and
it's not a course in the really latest, most contemporary ideas, although we will touch
on those. Rather, it's a course in the true fundamental ideas that set the tone for all
the physics that's occurred since the year 1900. Before I describe the course and give
you a brief introduction, I'd like to tell you two stories that give you a sense of what
modern physics is about and how radically it's reshaped our notions of the physical
universe, in particular our notions of space and time and causality. The first involves
a couple of twins. Imagine you're a twin, and you're 20 years old in your youth, and
you have a twin sister, and you and your twin sister go out in the backyard and you build a
spaceship. And on your 20th birthday, your twin sister hops in the spaceships and travels
off to a distant star. And she goes out there and she spends some time exploring that star,
and you wait, and you wait, and you wait, and eventually your twin sister returns, and
you find the time of her return is your 80th birthday. So she's been away for 60 years.
And here comes the spaceship, and it lands back in your backyard, and out hops your twin
sister, and she's a youthful 25. Five years have elapsed for her, 60 years have elapsed
for you. In some sense, she's time traveled into your future. And that is the first phrase
in the title of this lecture, time travel, tunneling, tennis, and tea. Because one of
the things that modern physics seems to make possible is time travel, at least into the
future, in the sense I've just described in the story of the two twins. Is this really
possible? Could it really happen? Is time so strange that two twins who start out at
age 20 together can find themselves later 55 years apart? The answer is yes. We've confirmed
this with subatomic particles. We've even confirmed it with real sized clocks, although
there the time difference was billions of a second instead of decades. But this happens,
it can happen, and it tells us something remarkable about the nature of time. Let me tell you
another seemingly impossible story that relates to the second phrase in my title. Again, the
title of this lecture, time travel, tunneling, tennis, and tea. This is the phrase tunneling.
Imagine that you're stuck in a prison. You have concrete walls on all sides, you're trapped
there, you're in for a long sentence. And so what do you do? Well, you have nothing to
do but you pace back and forth. And occasionally you lean up against those hard concrete walls
of your prison. Of course, you can't get out. And then one day when you're leaning against
the wall of the prison, you suddenly find yourself on the outside. You've somehow inexorably
penetrated a seemingly impenetrable barrier. Is this possible? It seems not. It's not
according to anything your common sense tells you. In fact, it's the phenomenon of quantum
tunneling. Again, we verified it again with subatomic particles. We believe in principle
it could happen in other circumstances, but we have not seen it happen. And it's very
unlikely that it would happen with a macroscopic sized object like a prisoner. But it definitely
happens with subatomic particles. In fact, we're alive today because protons in the core
of the sun tunnel through an insurmountable barrier analogous to that concrete wall of
the prison and are able to get together and fuse to make helium and in the process releasing
the energy, which tens of thousands of years later emerges from the surface of the sun
as sunlight and eight minutes after that reaches earth and is the energy that sustains life
on our planet. So this is a real phenomenon and it's one on which our lives directly depend.
Those are two stories of seemingly impossible events. And yet they're events that occur.
They could occur as I've described them, although are unlikely or difficult to make
happen. They do occur regularly in the subatomic realm. Their ideas that suggest to us that
our basic common sense notions of time, of space, and of what it means to be rigid and
solid and insurmountable are all in some way compromised or modified or extended or enriched
by the ideas of modern physics. So there are some stories and we'll come to understand
how both those things are possible in the course of these lecture series.
Let me pause now and say a little bit about what physics is. People have a lot of misconceptions
about physics. I often tell people, I'm a physics professor and they say, oh, physics.
And they kind of think that's something for a rarefied breed of people who occupy specialized
laboratories and think about things that have nothing to do with what's important to the common person.
Actually nothing could be further from the truth. Physics is the essence of the way the
physical universe works. We live in the physical universe like it or not. We walk. We drive cars.
We fly airplanes. We have weather happen to us. We swim. We turn on water. We cook. All these
basic everyday processes involve the fundamental laws of physics. Physics is the fundamental
science. The laws of physics underline everything that goes on in the physical universe. Physics
is not just for physicists. It's not just for people who occupy laboratories and invent
bizarre new devices or think about esoteric thoughts like time travel, for example. Physics
is for everyone because physics is the essence of what most of us do. In fact, what all of
us do all the time. In fact, I'm going to give you another example at the end of this
lecture which will convince you that you already know a lot more physics than you think. In
fact, you already know the theory of relativity and I'll get to that in just a few moments.
So physics is something that describes the entire physical universe from the smallest
subatomic particles, the quarks and the electrons to the grand scale of the entire universe
and how it seems to be evolving and whether it's going to have an ending and when it had
a beginning. All these questions are in the realm of physics. So it's a great big subject
and it's important to everyone, not just physicists.
Physics as a subject divides into two very, very broad classes and these are historically
based and they have names that can be slightly misleading. So I want to make a clarification
here about the names. One subject is classical physics. The other is modern physics. Classical
physics is basically the physics that was developed before the year 1900. And you might
say, well, that's old fashioned physics. That's ancient physics. We don't really want to know
about that. Well, you're going to need to know a little bit about classical physics to understand
how modern physics differs. Furthermore, classical physics, which is what we tend to teach primarily
in introductory physics courses at the college level and certainly in high school physics
and any earlier physics we teach, classical physics is very much relevant physics and it's even very
much contemporary physics. You can't do something like design a skyscraper that will stand up
or develop an anti-lock braking system for cars and understand how it works or build a heart monitor
or an electrocardiograph machine or engineer an electric power distribution system or build
a compact disc player. Many, many, many modern technologies depend very much on classical physics.
So that old fashioned physics that was developed before the 1900s, so-called classical physics, is really
very contemporary physics. It's important physics and it describes many of the things we do today.
Even launching a spacecraft to Jupiter or putting satellites in Earth orbit or sending people to the moon
or any high technology things like that that don't involve subatomic physics, semi-conductor
electronics and things like that, they're still in the realm of classical physics. So classical physics
is an important branch of physics. Next comes modern physics. Modern physics was developed
in the 20th century. It arose out of what seemed to be very slight discrepancies between
classical physics and the reality of the physical world that were noticed in the second half of
the 19th century. Those ideas grew into crises in physics and that's what we'll be exploring in this course
and those crises eventually led to the development of two key ideas in what are called modern physics.
Now before I go on with that, let me again distinguish, modern physics does not mean the physics of the last
decade or the last few decades. Modern physics has a distinct meaning. It means the key physical ideas
that were developed to explain physical reality in the 20th century. The main ideas were developed
early in this century, between 1905 and about 1930. We will explore those ideas in great depth in this course.
And we'll also look a little bit at some of the newer, more contemporary ideas or some of the observations
in say astrophysics that have been used to verify those early ideas. But this course is primarily about
the key ideas of 20th century physics, the big ideas, the two great big ideas. And what are those
big ideas? Well, the two big ideas are relativity, developed primarily by Albert Einstein, although
with help from others, and quantum physics which was developed by a whole slew of physicists.
Einstein first told us about relativity in 1905. He expanded on relativity in 1914.
And the rest of the 20th century constituted an exploration by physicists trying to verify that Einstein
was correct. And in the last ten years, and even in the last five years, we've had some remarkably dramatic
confirmations of Einstein's theories, although the essence of those theories was confirmed very early in the century.
What does relativity do? Well, in a nutshell, relativity is a great kind of equalizer, a democratizer.
Most people think of relativity and they think of strange things like the time travel twins story
I told you earlier. Or they think about E equals MC squared, and maybe they think about nuclear weapons
which really have nothing to do with relativity. They think about bizarre, esoteric things happening to space and time.
That's true. Relativity tells us about bizarre, esoteric things that happen to space and time.
But the essence of relativity is very different. The essence of relativity is that all of us are equal.
And we're going to explore and understand how that developed. But in a nutshell, let me just tell you what relativity says.
It says your point of view doesn't matter. It says everybody has equal access to the physical laws that govern the way the universe works.
And by everybody, I mean it doesn't matter where you are, what planet you're on, whether you're in interstellar space,
whether you're in some distant galaxy, physics looks the same to you as it does to me here on Earth.
It doesn't matter how you're moving. You could be in an airplane moving at 600 miles an hour, and physics acts just the same there.
You read a physics textbook, you learn the laws of physics, you do experiments, and they work just the same in that airplane as they do here on Earth.
You could be in a spacecraft whizzing by Earth at 90% of the speed of light, and the laws of physics would still work.
Relativity is in essence a great equalizer. It makes us all equal. It puts all places and all states of motion in the universe on an equal footing.
In the process, it leads to these bizarre notions like time travel, like stretching of space, squeezing of time, and so on.
It leads to E equals MC squared into the equivalence of matter and energy, but the basic idea of relativity is a simple one.
It says we're all equal. It says we all see physics the same. There's no special place. There's no special state of motion.
And in telling you that, I've told you the essence of relativity. You know relativity once you know that.
In a way, relativity has elaborated on the Copernican Revolution, the idea that Earth is no longer the center of the universe.
And relativity says there's no special place. Earth is not special as a place. It's not special as a state of motion.
And furthermore, there's no place or state of motion that is special.
The second of the enormous ideas of 20th century physics, the modern physics ideas, is quantum physics.
And quantum physics is a little bit harder to pin down in one basic idea.
But if I can try to do it, it's the notion that at the fundamental scales, the universe is grainy in a sense.
It's built up of little discrete parts. It isn't continuously subdividable.
Think about a glass of water. Pour off half of it. You're still left with half a glass of water.
Pour off half of that. You're left with a quarter of a glass of water.
Pour off half of that. You're left with an eighth. And keep doing that.
You've always got liquid water. Will you ever reach a point where you don't have liquid water?
Well, at some point in human history, that was an open question.
Today we know the answer. The answer is that eventually you get down to the point where there's one water molecule in there.
One H2O molecule consists of an oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms.
And once you've reached that point, you can't subdivide the water any further.
You've got one water molecule. You can take it apart. If you take it apart, you have different entities, oxygen and hydrogen.
So the universe is not continuously subdividable. That was known before the 20th century.
What's new about quantum physics is it quantizes or makes discrete.
Not only matter, which is broken up into molecules and atoms and subatomic particles,
but it also quantizes energy, the other essential stuff of the universe.
And as we'll see later, relativity makes matter and energy somewhat interchangeable.
So it's not surprising that this happens.
Quantum physics tells us that the world at the most fundamental level consists of discrete little bundles of stuff.
Bundles of matter, bundles of energy. It's like buying eggs in the store.
You can buy a dozen eggs. You could probably buy half a dozen eggs.
You might even convince the grocer to sell you one egg, but there's no way in the world you're going to buy half an egg or a quarter of an egg.
An egg is simply not further subdividable and still have it be an egg.
And that's the essence of quantum physics.
The universe, including the energy that makes it go, is not infinitely subdividable but comes into discrete little hunks.
And although that idea, like the idea of relativity, that no place or motion is special,
the idea of quantum physics, that the universe is fundamentally discrete,
that sounds like a very easy idea to grasp. That egg analogy is a good one.
But that leads to very bizarre consequences.
For example, the tunneling situation I described.
For example, the fact that at the fundamental level, the laws that govern the universe are not even deterministic.
They don't say this will happen if you do this.
They say this may happen with a 70% chance of this outcome and a 30% chance of this outcome or whatever.
The universe at the fundamental level, this discreteness of matter and energy tells us, is fundamentally statistical.
And we have a whole new way of looking at the universe and causality as a result of that.
So those are the two big ideas of 20th century physics.
And what this course is about, again, is to expose you to those ideas in a way that makes them understandable to people who have no particular scientific background.
Let me give you just the briefest hint of how we're going to do this.
The course is going to be divided into basically two big halves.
The first half is going to take us through the special theory of relativity.
This was the first of the two relativity theories, the one that Einstein developed and published in the year 1905.
And it has been very, very highly confirmed by all experiments that have been done since then.
We're going to spend a good deal of time on special relativity.
We'll take about four lectures of history, understanding classical physics, understanding the contradictions that rose from classical physics,
contradictions that will worry about both with relativity and quantum physics.
But after about four lectures, we'll begin to plunge into the essence of special relativity.
And we're going to spend through lecture 12 on special relativity.
And the reason for so much emphasis on this particular subject is special relativity is the most easily understandable of the modern physics ideas.
It requires almost no mathematics, and this is a course that's basically devoid of mathematics.
So I'm going to present all this material in a non-mathematical way.
But if you wanted to understand special relativity thoroughly and mathematically, high school algebra would suffice.
So special relativity is an easy to understand subject.
I can get you to understand thoroughly and logically why it has to be true.
I can get you to believe in that time travel.
I'm not just going to tell you that.
I'm going to make you believe that that has to be the case, and you'll understand the full logical progression.
After we do special relativity, we'll spend a few lectures on general relativity, which is Einstein's extension of special relativity.
Cover all states of motion, and it turns out to be a theory of gravity.
And it's the theory that predicts the existence of bizarre things like black holes and wormholes and white holes
and the kind of time travel that occurred in the movie Contact, if you've seen that,
where you go through a wormhole tunnel through space and time.
General relativity talks about very strange things like that.
It's harder to grasp mathematically.
It's harder for me to show you the full logical flow.
We aren't going to spend as much time on it, but you will get the essence of what general relativity is about.
And then the remaining lectures will be about quantum physics, most of them dealing with, again, the fundamental ideas that were developed
and why about the year 1930 when people realized just how strange the world at the subatomic level was.
And then we'll move on from there and look briefly at some very modern ideas that are outgross of quantum mechanics.
We'll look at some experiments that have been done in the last few decades that are still causing controversy
about the philosophical interpretation of quantum physics, because quantum physics is subject to interpretation,
which is still a matter of great philosophical debate.
And then in the very end, we'll look at very contemporary searches for a so-called theory of everything,
ideas in physics that would be able to explain everything from gravity to the structure of an electron and everything in between
with one theory of everything.
We aren't there yet, but there are some people who think we're close and we'll get a glimpse of what those theories are.
Now, I want to say a few more things about physics before I actually plunge into the material.
First of all, I want to say that physics is a human activity.
I want to remind you that although we're trying to talk here about the content of physics primarily,
there's the human touch behind it.
And I don't have a lot of time to bring that in, but I will mention it where possible.
It's very definitely a human activity.
There's been a great deal of controversy in the last few years, in fact, about just whether physics is another human activity
and the laws of physics are like texts that we human beings have made up,
or whether they reflect some underlying physical reality.
I happen to believe, and most of my fellow physicists believe,
that the laws of physics as we describe them are either fairly accurate reflections
or very good approximations of an underlying objective physical reality.
We happen to believe that.
I think it would be difficult to motivate doing physics if we didn't believe that.
That doesn't mean physics isn't influenced by human characteristics.
Relativity probably would have been discovered soon after 1905 by somebody other than Einstein.
But it was if he hadn't done it.
But Einstein's unique genius perhaps made it come out sooner.
It's also probably true that those subjects we choose to study in physics,
those problems we choose to investigate, are influenced by the kinds of people we are.
They're influenced by gender.
They're influenced by cultural backgrounds.
They're influenced by things like that.
So this is not to say that science, although it studies an objective reality,
isn't affected by human issues.
I don't think it is, but I think what it ultimately tries to study is something that is underlying objectively real.
I also want to dispel another notion about science and physics in particular.
There's this notion about the scientific method,
and it's actually, I think, enhanced by the way science is taught,
not necessarily always as creatively as it might be in the public schools.
We're given this notion of the scientist as somebody who sort of thinks up a hypothesis
and writes it down very carefully and then puts on the white lab coat and marches into the lab
and does all kinds of experiments and either verifies or throws out the hypothesis.
It's a very rigid, rigorous process, very carefully spelled out what you do.
Now some science has done that way,
and probably 99% of scientists are working in established areas of science
where that is an appropriate way to do things.
Does this drug kill cancer? I think it does.
So I invented an experiment.
I say I'm going to test this drug, I'm going to put it on cancer cells,
I'm going to see if they die, I go in the laboratory and I do that.
Can I make a smaller computer chip by using this quantum mechanical property of the electron
to build this particular device?
I think I can, so I make a hypothesis I put on my lab coat,
I go in and I try to build the device and I see if it works.
Those are manifestations of the sort of basic scientific method as it's taught in schools.
But I think the great science, the big science,
the science that takes us leaps ahead in our understanding of physical reality is very different.
I think that's a creative activity much more akin to art or composition of music
or other creative human endeavors than it is to the sort of dry sense people have of science
as this dull scientific method kind of thing.
Science is a very creative activity,
and it's most creative in particular when it's taking these big leaps forward.
Einstein didn't do experiments.
Einstein thought up relativity in his head.
He said this is the way the world has to be,
and he wrote it down and later the world proved to be that way when people did experiments.
Science is a very creative activity,
and I hope in this course you'll get a sense of that
because we'll see how some of the great minds of modern physics
struggled with these bizarre consequences of what they were studying.
So remember that this is a human activity,
and I'll try to emphasize that occasionally,
but I won't give it as much emphasis as perhaps it deserves
in a course of this relatively short length for this big a topic.
Now, to end this lecture,
I want to say one thing again to all of you who are sitting there saying,
well gee, this is not something I'm going to understand.
It is something you're going to understand.
My goal and my whole professional goal as a science teacher
is to make science, particularly physics,
comprehensible to the average person.
You need to be intelligent, you need to be open-minded,
but you do not need to know anything about science
to understand what I'm about to describe.
It doesn't take an Einstein to understand modern physics.
It may have taken an Einstein to come up with modern physics,
but once the genius of Einstein had done that,
all of us can understand what modern physics has to say,
and that's my goal.
So if you're an interested non-scientist, you've got to be interested,
but if you're interested, stay with me,
and you will understand this material.
And I'm going to end by giving you an example
that I think will convince you that you really know a lot more about modern physics
than you think you even know relativity.
Let me imagine that you're playing tennis.
And you're playing tennis on a cruise ship.
Now, if you're not into tennis,
make it ping-pong, make it soccer,
make it just tossing a ball back and forth with someone,
tossing a bone to your dog.
I don't care what you're doing,
but you're doing some kind of activity that involves maybe tossing a ball around.
And you're doing it on a cruise ship,
and we're going to put you below decks,
so there isn't a problem of wind from the motion of the ship,
and the ship is moving through calm water,
and it's moving at a steady rate of speed.
It's not turning, the water is not rocking it,
there aren't big waves, it's just plowing steadily along.
Now, since you know how to play tennis,
I assert that you already know a lot about the laws of physics in your muscles.
You know what a ball is going to do when it's hit with the racket,
where it's going to move.
Your muscles can judge the laws of physics that describe the motion of that ball,
and that's what makes you a decent tennis player.
So you know the laws of physics in your muscles,
even if you think you don't know them in your brain.
So now you go below decks into this enclosed tennis court,
the ship is plowing along through the water at 40 miles an hour or something,
and you proceed to play tennis.
Let me ask you some questions.
Does it matter to you whether you're the tennis player
that's facing the forward direction of the ship
or the backward direction of the ship?
Does it matter that the ship is moving?
Do you have to say to yourself,
if the ship is moving 50 miles an hour,
I've got to take that into account when I swing?
Of course not.
Does the ship's motion make any difference to you?
Of course not.
You play tennis on that steadily moving cruise ship
exactly like you would back home on solid earth.
It makes no difference at all.
If it did, you'd have a real problem,
because when you sat on an airplane, for example,
and tried to eat the little peanuts they bring you,
you'd have to worry about the fact that those peanuts
are 600 miles an hour with the airplane.
How am I going to get them to my mouth?
That doesn't matter, and it doesn't matter
playing tennis on the cruise ship.
Now you're done playing tennis,
and you want a nice hot cup of tea afterwards.
If you're not a tea drinker, have coffee,
but it's got to be instant,
because I want you to put it in the microwave
to heat the water.
Do you think that when you press the start button
on the microwave, you've got to worry,
oh, wait a minute, the microwaves in this oven
are going to be upset by the fact that the ship
is going to turn the microwave oven.
Maybe you've got to do something strange.
Do you worry about that? Of course not.
You stick the teacup in the microwave oven,
you press three minutes, and your teawater gets hot.
It doesn't make any difference about the motion of the ship.
I really want you to believe that,
and it's very obvious.
If that isn't obvious, let me give you two other examples
that I think will make it even more obvious,
the last of which is really only possible
to understand in the contemporary era.
For the second one, let's imagine we now have a base
on Venus. It's not hard to imagine 30, 50 years from now.
And you're in the recreational room of that base on Venus.
You're stationed there as one of the scientists working away
or something, or maybe you're one of the maintenance people,
or maybe you're one of the cooks doing anything there,
but you're going to go play some tennis in the Recreation Hall.
And the Recreation Hall consists of a big inflated dome
like you've seen some tennis courts in,
and inside it is an atmosphere exactly like the Earth
because Venus is atmosphere with a super runaway greenhouse effect
like we hope we don't get on Earth is way too hot and thick
and so on to nurture us or to play tennis in.
So inside this dome is an Earth-type atmosphere,
and Venus' gravity is essentially the same as Earth.
So you go in this way and you play tennis.
Does it matter to you that you're on Venus?
Oh, the tennis works just as it would on Earth.
Gravity is the same. The air is the same.
The tennis ball obeys the same laws of physics.
Works just the same.
However, you're on Venus tens of millions of miles from Earth,
and depending on where and when Earth and Venus are in their orbits,
they may be moving relative to each other
at speeds of 20, 30, 40, 50 miles per second.
Do you have to sit in that tennis court in Venus and say to yourself,
gee, I'm moving it 45 miles a second relative to Earth.
It's a lot faster than I can hit a tennis ball.
Do I have to worry about that fact in order to play this game?
Well, of course you don't.
If the tennis ball and Venus doesn't care what Earth is doing,
there's nothing special about Earth,
physics works the same on Venus as it does on Earth.
And then you get done with your tennis game on Venus,
and you step over to the microwave oven to heat your tea.
You put it in the microwave oven and you say to yourself, gee, Venus,
45 miles a second relative to Earth.
You've got to do something strange to the microwave oven.
Maybe it won't even work.
Maybe the microwaves will get left behind and they won't heat my tea.
Nonsense.
You press the start button.
You go for three minutes and you have boiling water.
Works just the same as on Earth.
Now the last example is not one I could have given you
in the earlier part of this century when people were first discovering modern physics.
But now I can.
Because now we know through astronomical observations,
particularly recent ones with the Hubble Space Telescopes,
that there are objects so distant from us,
and I'll explain later in the course why distance matters here,
so distant from us that they are moving away from us at speeds of 80%
or more of the speed of light.
That's fast.
The speed of light is about 200,000 miles a second.
So these things are moving away from us maybe 160,000 miles a second.
These are galaxies.
We don't see them as galaxies when we look at them in space
because we're seeing light from a long, long time ago.
But now they've presumably evolved into galaxies.
Maybe some of them have stars around them like the sun,
and maybe some of those have Earth-like planets around them.
So imagine there's yourself or some other creature on an Earth-like planet
around a star in a distant galaxy that's moving away from Earth
at 80% of the speed of light, and you're going to play tennis there.
And you get out your tennis balls, and you say to yourself,
gee, Earth 12 billion light years away matters a lot,
and I've got to figure out the fact that I'm going at 80% of the speed
of light relative to Earth in order to play this tennis right?
Nonsense.
The laws of physics are the same for everybody,
and you sit there on that distant planet,
and you play tennis just like you would normally,
and then you pop over to the microwave oven,
and you put your teacup in, and you press the button,
and you don't worry about the fact that the microwaves,
which move at the speed of light, are in an oven
which itself is being whisked along relative to Earth
at 80% of the speed of light.
Why don't you worry about that?
Because it all makes sense to us that the physics that happens,
the laws that govern the way the physical world works,
should be the same for everybody.
Does that idea make sense to you? It should.
Ask yourself, if you think it doesn't make sense,
are you some kind of closet Aristotelian
who believes the Earth is the center of everything?
Well, if you don't believe the Earth is the center of everything
and the only special place in the universe,
it follows pretty logically that the laws of physics
ought to be the same for everybody,
and that your motion relative to Earth ought not to matter.
If you believe that,
and I assert that you probably ought to believe that
if you accept these examples I've just given you,
if you believe that,
then you already believe in your gut and in your brain
the essence of Einstein's relativity,
because the essence of Einstein's relativity
is that Earth is not a special place,
and Earth's state of motion is not a special state of motion,
and that anyone out there, anywhere in the universe,
who chooses to do physics experiments,
playing tennis, is a physics experiment,
because it's an experiment with the laws of nature
and how they act on the tennis ball.
And heating tea in a microwave oven is a physics experiment,
because it's an experiment, in that case,
about the laws of electromagnetism,
which are behind the operation of the microwave oven,
and how they behave.
And if you do those physics experiments,
no matter where you choose to do them,
they will come out the same.
Now, at this point, you could shut off the tape
and walk away and tell all your friends,
I know everything there is to know about relativity,
because in essence you do.
Relativity is simply the statement
that the laws of physics are the same for everybody.
Why is it so hard to understand?
Because it has implications that are not obvious
and not easy to grasp
and seem to run counter to common sense.
And so it's going to take a while
to understand how humankind came to the idea
that the laws of physical reality are the same for everyone.
That's what our task is in the lectures to come.
But as we end this one, let me remind you
that you do in fact already know and believe
the essence of the theory of relativity,
that everybody has the same laws of physics,
that the universe behaves the same way for everyone.
