Okay, welcome everyone to my continuation of what are my favorite theorems, my very biased collection, of course.
Today not really a theorem, we will see because I'm going to talk about operas and operas are, well, more type of a philosophy or a certain type of approach to a lot of problems actually in modern mathematics, it's pretty beautiful,
very visually appealing, and we will see what it actually is. So it's subsense, it's, well, my subtitle here, it's subversion of doing algebra and topology at the same time.
So very nice form of algebra and some very nice form of topology.
So operas kind of grew out of, well, homotopy theory in the mid-1950s, 1960s, something like this, and have been found many, many applications about mathematics, mostly as an idea how to organize ideas, as an idea how to organize ideas, yes.
So as a way to organize ideas.
And yeah, so the point is kind of, you want to model multiplication and of course multiplication, well, multiplication, it's everywhere of course, and you model that in a topological fashion, and what you get is a definition which is very applicable.
So mathematics topology in particular, of course, because it was born from topology, but not just in topology, also in more general frameworks, and even beyond mathematics, in a certain way.
So the beyond mathematics is mostly still work in progress as far as I understand, but it's still already pretty impressive, at least in my opinion, I will briefly sketch what you can do, for example, at the very end of the video.
Okay, let me get started. So let's do some pictures, some mathematics, whatever you want to call it. And so the idea is following. And that's of course a very old idea, maybe not of course, but I think it's a very old idea I was never really able to track it back.
It's really, really old. And the idea is to draw multiplication. So multiplication, you want to multiply a and B and of course this is a times B. No, not very surprising.
And you model that by using this kind of tree like picture here right. So two inputs, and one output so reading now from bottom to top so he is in.
And he is out. Right. Okay, so this will be the same.
For all my three type pictures. Okay, so two inputs one output, you could think of this as a form of multiplication, kind of modeling multiplication in a more topological or graphical fashion by drawing this letter why or whatever you want to call it.
So this symbol here, instead of just plain multiplication.
And yeah, I mean, you can multiply not just a B but you could multiply a B and C and outcome would be ABC of course.
Okay, nice. So you can do this with three inputs, or with five inputs. What would it be ABC DE, I guess, whatever. And you can actually a little bit confusing but of course kind of trivial in some sense, you can also do this with one input.
So you just have a, and you don't multiply it all and you just output a so input a output a five. And of course you can do this with any finite number 512 inputs, you can multiply 512 numbers.
So today I would like to think of multiplication as some version of a tree. It's a little bit more than the tree I've decided that there's some input that there's some output.
And kind of all of these trees you're kind of the handle multiplication were there in some sense of generalization of, well, let's say the algebra behind multiplication.
So this tree obviously is not really multiplying it's not really telling you what three times five is, because you would need to label the output and then should I yeah I probably could, I probably can tell you what 3.5 is three times five is.
Well, it was not all that hard but anyway, so the tree itself of course does not encode three times five tree itself encodes idea of multiplication. So, right, it's not really multiplication it's kind of you're modeling the idea of multiplication.
Anyway, so the task that, as I said, grew out of homotopy type theory or homotopy theory actually is to describe this algebra of trees.
And as soon as we try to do that we end up with the definition of an operate, which is then way more general than just trees. So let's try to understand the algebra of trees.
Okay, so that's kind of the task now. So the algebra of trees, well, where's actually the algebra so where's some kind of multiplication type structure and trees.
Well, it's pretty nice and pretty simple and beautiful. So you can just take a tree and you could stack a tree on top of a tree. So here you have my tree F here with three outputs, sorry, three inputs, and G is the one was for so G is the blue one.
And of course you could take the red one down here and stack the blue one on top right here and you get a new, well, kind of legal configuration that you could still think of the, well, whatever you get here, the F times G as one of those multiplication type trees, right,
kind of the same type of object, and you obtained it by stacking two smaller objects together.
And the nice fact here is, or the nice point is, it is just, this is not the only way of composing. This is just one of many. So let's just label the inputs of F, let's say 123.
There's just some labeling to be sure which edge is which, and then you could have in this case for F, there would be three multiplication operations, you could stack blue on the first edge, you could stack blue on the second edge or can stack blue on the third edge.
You could have just additional labeling of the inputs, and you can just have a lot of operations now right and that would you have, if you would have now a tree with 512 inputs you would have 512 ways of multiplying other trees to it by just stacking on the corresponding outputs.
So it's pretty cool idea right so stacking gives us these, well, a lot of compositions for the same type of pictures.
And that's basically already what an operator is. I know you might wonder why I'm sticking to trees and that's not really any reason to stick to trees and that's kind of the power of operates.
So here are also operates. The first one is called the top one is usually called the little cube operate. I will explain in a second. The bottom one is very often called planar algebra planar algebra.
It's also type of an operator. And there are zillions of other examples. So as soon as we understand those two examples and we already have three example, you definitely can come up with your own example, very, very easily.
Or you can look at the links in the description where there's a huge list of what possible examples kind of the only thing you really need is this scaling similarity that I'm going to explain now along those examples.
So it's kind of the same setup. So I have an F here. So this is my F. This is my G. This is my G. And I will have compositions because there's something labeled in F.
So F is a little cube. So it's a cube with cubes inside, right? This is kind of the scaling property is it's a cube with cubes inside.
And the cubes are labeled. So as before, just these are the outputs of the three. So 12312. And you can stack little cubes and cubes. That's the whole point. This is where the scaling comes in.
So here is my input two. And if you think of these as being empty, right? So this is empty, then you can definitely stick this whole picture of the whole G picture inside of, well, in this case two, because I'm deciding to go operation two.
And you get this type of picture. The only thing you need to be careful about is that you didn't then relabel the inputs. That's just what you need to do. So one stays one.
Then two, three, right? This is two, it is three, and then the other one bumps up to four. But otherwise it's really just take a cube with little cubes and put it in a cube with little cubes.
And that's your operation. And of course, you could have put it in one or two. So you have the same amount of the same idea, having lots of compositions.
Same down here. So again, 123, the little star just tells you how to input the other disks into those disks.
So these disks are decorated disks with a few lines here and the shading. Well, right, so you could do that as well. The lines and shading and you could put the little disk with lines and shading into the big disk with lines and shading in exactly the same way.
Put it in here. The little star here tells you how to put it in. And if you do this, for example, this little arc here will close here. So you should get this circle.
And again, you produce more input disks or close input disks and it's huge system with a lot of operations.
And these are just two examples. And so in those examples, I personally find it's very clear that what really matters here is that you have this scaling similarity that you have something big, which is kind of repeated in itself and then you can stack the 10, the types of objects into one another.
And that's basically what defines an operate. But here now comes the formal definition and the meta theorem associated to operates. So as I said, there can't be really a theorem in that sense because it's more like a philosophy how to attack problems.
So operate then should model a lot of different nice structures in mathematics or the sciences or whatever.
Okay, enter the theorem or enter the philosophy or whatever.
So operate is just this collection of sets. So PI PI are the inputs. So for example, a disk or cubes with three inputs cubes with four inputs cubes with five inputs and so on.
And just a collection of all of them. There's a unit operation. Right. In the cube picture, this would be a cube with a little cube.
Putting this into any other cube will not change anything. And you have to composition operations.
A lot of them, depending on, well, kind of the situation you have. So we have inputs, and you can put in in different things. So one to end, and they themselves have K one to K and input so you get something with K one plus up to K and new inputs.
So you have to satisfy some axioms and the axioms are usually imposed are as a certainty in your neutrality. And if you think about it for a second, it's really just those pictures. So your neutrality you have this unit operation.
And whenever you do it, you just do nothing is to do nothing operation. And that's why in this case we had this funny A to A multiplication strand because here it is actually the unit operation.
So your neutrality is, well, if you stack green on one, after you've already stacked blue on two, that's the same as stacking blue on two, after you've already stacked green on one.
And if you formalize that for kind of generalize that and formalize it then you get what would be as a certificate.
So my major theorem or whatever is this quote from from Stasif, who describes operates really nicely in a what is paper, which is linked into the description.
So it is basically, whatever you have a good notion of homotopy or something like scaling or something, and they will play a key role.
That's basically what Stasif said, that's my read adaptation you can read the quote right here.
So Stasif only talks about something related to homotopy but nowadays it's kind of well understood that operates operates are more general, and because you're very, very general and turn around to turn up in the category theory and other instances.
So this is the world example of how operates turned up in order for me to these are useful. That's my main theorem that may just explain these are useful.
Again, which he has another operate or potential operate. So the genetic tree, if you want, the philogenic tree, the one from Darwin, basically.
I think it was some kind of note in the book or something. I think, and this is kind of a tree here. And as you can see this already has some scaling similarity.
So branches and each branch has a little branches and so on and so on. This should be nicely described by an operator and it's a little bit easier to see in this not hand drawing.
So branches and a lot of little branches so what else and what can I say here for example. So here would be dogs, I guess, these are kind of foxes and dogs and foxes were separated roughly here.
10 million years ago but of course then dogs itself separate several times and foxes separate blah blah blah blah blah.
And this I actually wasn't aware that the black beer and the values are actually pretty closely related. Okay, anyway, that was off topic.
So clearly this tree has some self similarity in the, in the same way as all the other examples we have seen from operates, and definitely people use operates to model those trees.
So I'm not sure about the actual status of that program, whether it then in the end was really useful in biology, but secretly I think biologists were already using ideas from operates, just not formalized in the language of
I mean, I think this is a pretty cool example because you can definitely see that using this self similarity and some version of formulating is an algebra could actually be very helpful to organize the food or genetic tree.
In this case because it really is just a really beautiful example of this self similarity right so as I said foxes split from dogs and then dogs but further and then wolves and dogs split and whatever.
Anyway, so my theory today was a little bit pathetic in some sense. It was more like selling the idea that oh this is cool.
But it's actually a pretty really cool idea and you can model a lot of things, not just the mathematics. Hopefully my last example was kind of kind of a hint why it should be useful more in more than mathematics or more generally than mathematics.
And operas turn out to be quite interesting and I've seen them around a lot. Sometimes people don't call them operas. So as I said, I suspect that or I kind of suspect I'm not an expert but I would suspect that biologists already played around with those ideas in the food or genetic tree way before it was formalized.
Just don't knowing the name and this also happens sometimes in mathematics. Sometimes people rediscover operas without really knowing the terminology or whatever. Another reason for me to try to promote this idea, which is certainly not my idea but as I said goes back to homotopy ideas from the 50s and 60s of the last century.
Anyway, I hope you enjoyed the video and I would hope to see you next time.
