Thanks for the invitation and thanks for coming.
So this is gonna be joint work with Thomas Lam
and there's two papers, very recent on the archive.
They almost, almost the same names,
but totally separate papers
and the talk is gonna involve a bunch of objects.
I'm gonna assume people are familiar with knots.
So I'm gonna start with the positive traits part
and please feel free to stop me if you have any questions.
So positive traits live inside the gross mining.
The gross mining is the gross mining Kn
over some field, let's say complex numbers,
is the set of all linear K dimensional subspaces
of C to the N.
And if you pick a basis,
then you're gonna get a K by N matrix, right?
So you can alternatively represented
by the set of full rank, full rank K by N matrices.
But if you choose a different basis,
you are gonna get a different matrix,
which is gonna be related by the original one
by row operations.
So that's some nice projective variety
and inside of it, there's gonna be the positroid variety,
which is gonna be the main geometric object of the stock.
So by the way, I'm gonna scroll the right-hand side quickly
and the left-hand side is gonna be,
it's gonna contain the same information,
but it's gonna be scrolled much slower.
So feel free to refer to the previous formulas on the left.
So here's the definition of the top dimensional open
positroid variety, which, so what you do is you just take,
you just take the sub, it's an open subset
of the gross mining, which consists of all,
such of all, you take all matrices,
such that certain maximal miners have to be nonzero.
Namely, the cyclically consecutive miners
have to be nonzero.
Delta one, two, all the way up to K of V is nonzero.
Delta two, three, up to K plus one of V is nonzero.
And et cetera, all the way up to Delta N,
one K minus one of V is nonzero.
So there is N inequalities.
And so you just remove these kind of hyper surfaces
and what you get is this open positroid variety.
And yeah, maybe I should give an example.
Let's say I give an example for K equals to two
and N equals to four.
So that's the smallest non-trivial one.
And in this case, what happens is,
well, so let's see what should I do.
I should take K by N matrices.
So I'm taking two by four matrices.
And then because the first K columns are gonna be nonzero,
that means I can apply my row operations uniquely
to kind of force the first K columns
to be the identity matrix.
And then the remaining entries are gonna be just
some numbers, A, B, C, D,
and the conditions on them are gonna,
conditions are gonna be given by the remaining miners
to be nonzero.
So for example, if I take the second and third column,
then the determinant is negative A.
So A has to be nonzero.
And if I take the last two columns,
then the determinant is AD minus BC has to be nonzero.
And then there's one more, which is kind of wraps around.
So D has to be nonzero.
And that's it, that's your space.
You know, it's always in a fine variety.
You have your move sample,
nominal hyper-services from it.
And the two questions that I'm gonna try to answer today,
well, in the first part of the talk are gonna be
about the algebra and geometry of such a space.
So the first question is,
well, this is defined on an arbitrary field.
So I can choose my field to be the finite field
with Q elements.
And then this whole thing becomes a finite set.
So the question is, how many points in that finite set?
That's the first question.
And the second one is, what is the Poincare polynomial
of this space when considered as a complex manifold?
Complex manifold.
So over C, it's a smooth manifold.
It's non-compact, but still I can talk about better numbers.
So what's the Poincare polynomial?
And yeah, so these are the two starting questions.
And by the way, for the Grasmagnon,
for the Grasmagnon,
if I take the Grasmagnon instead of the top
of the straight variety,
I can ask the same two questions.
And it turns out that they both have the same answer.
Both answers are given by what is called
the Q binomial coefficient, which, so by definition,
it is given in terms of some ratio of Q factorials.
Q factorial of N, Q factorial of K,
Q factorial of N minus K,
where the Q factorials are defined over here.
And if you want an actual combinatorial definition,
because here it's not clear that this is a,
the ratio is gonna be an actual polynomial.
But it is gonna, yeah, the numerator is divisible
by the denominator.
And the ratio turns out to be the combinatorial sum
over all the young diagrams that fit inside a K by N
minus K rectangle of Q to the number of boxes of lambda.
Which, so this whole stuff for the Grasmagnon
follows from the Schubert decomposition.
To me, I'm not gonna go into that
because there is no Schubert decomposition
of the posterior varieties.
But yeah, so now I'm gonna try to answer these questions
for the posterior variety.
And the, what's gonna happen is that I'm gonna have
to introduce Catalan numbers.
Definition, and I'm gonna go slightly more general.
I'm gonna talk about rational Catalan numbers,
which, so the setup is that you fix two integers,
A and B, two positive integers.
And you assume that they are co-prime.
Then, by definition, the rational Catalan number
is given by one over A plus B
times the binomial coefficient.
Which is divisible whenever the GCT is one.
And again, there is a combinatorial interpretation,
which comes in terms of lattice paths.
So it's the number of dick paths inside an A by B rectangle.
So what you do is you fix, you draw an A by B rectangle.
Maybe something like this.
And then you draw the main diagonal.
So you, the set of dick paths,
it contains all lattice paths that go up and right,
and never touch the diagonal.
And because of this GCT condition,
there's no lattice points on the diagonal.
So this is a well-defined notion.
All right, yeah, if you have any questions, let me know.
If not, I'm gonna state, start explaining the main result.
Well, the first incarnation of the main result.
So which answers the two questions above?
So the first, I'm gonna start with the point count.
Which is given by, so I'm gonna assume
that the GCT of K and N is equal to one.
For now, later, I'm gonna do this more generally.
But if the GCT is one, then the number of points
over a finite field is given by Q minus one
to the N minus one times,
let me denote it by C prime K and minus K,
where, so of Q.
So this guy is gonna be the Q analog
of the rational catalog number.
CAB of Q prime by definition is given by,
what I do is I, instead of taking the,
so here's the definition of the Q binomial coefficient,
and then I'm gonna, to get the definition
of the rational catalog number,
I would just replace every number by its Q analog.
So I would get something like one over the Q analog
of A plus B times the Q binomial coefficient A plus B,
choose A, and it's also gonna be divisible,
so it's all good, and turns out that that's the point count.
Just the Q analog of the rational catalog number.
And what about the Pancoray polynomial?
Well, so let me denote it by P of pi KN of Q.
It turns out that it's given by another Q analog
which is different from the first one.
So it's times C double prime KN minus K of Q,
where the second Q analog, C double prime AB of Q,
and here I'm gonna take the second,
the combinatorial definition and generalize it
to restricted to dick paths.
So it's gonna be some combinatorial sum
over all dick paths of Q to the area of P,
where area is some statistic.
It's like the area is like the number of boxes
which are fully contained between your dick path
and the diagonal.
So that's the answer to both of these questions.
And by the way, while I'm here,
let me mention a nice corollary
of the first of the point count result.
So corollary, which is obtained by basically,
you know how many points in the positron variety,
some Q analogs, and you know how many points
in the gross manian, also some Q analogs,
so you can divide one by the other.
And after you divide, you get everything cancels out,
and what you get is the nice probabilistic interpretation
that the probability that a uniformly random
k-dimensional subspace of C of FQ to the N
belongs to the top positroid variety
is just equal to Q minus one to the N
over Q to the N minus one.
And what is, okay, so what is weird about this corollary
is that the right hand side does not depend on k.
So k is the dimension of your vector,
of your k-dimensional subspace.
So it looks like the left hand side should depend on k,
but it turns out to not depend on k.
And we have no explanation for this.
I mean, we know the proof, it comes out of not theory,
but without not theory,
we don't know how to explain this statement.
Anyway, that's the kind of introductory part,
and what I want to try to do next
is to find a common generalization.
So these two results are sort of similar, but different.
So I want some result which specializes,
which implies both of these statements at the same time.
So the goal is to find a common generalization.
And so the way to do this is I'm gonna do it side by side.
So I start with the left hand side.
Left hand side, and well,
here there is something called the mixed hodge polynomial.
So if you take the, let's say you take a workover C
and you take the carmology of your open positoid variety,
then it is a, well, it is a graded,
it has a single graded vector space,
or even a ring, but definitely a vector space.
But actually, it is secretly a bi-graded vector space.
So if you take the ith carmology, then it splits.
There is a canonical splitting as a direct product
over all integers p, h i p comma p of pi k n.
That's called the deline splitting.
So I'm not gonna define it,
but it's some canonical construction.
It is functorial, if you have a long exact sequence,
then it's gonna respect your long exact sequence,
and et cetera.
So actually, this guy is not a graded,
but it's a bi-graded vector space.
In particular, you can write down the corresponding
like Poincare polynomial, which is gonna be in two variables.
And I'm gonna call this polynomial
the mixed hodge polynomial.
Mixed hodge polynomial,
which I'm gonna denote by the same letter p of pi k n,
but it's gonna depend now on q and t.
And it's gonna be not quite a polynomial,
it's gonna be a polynomial in q to the one half
and t to the one half.
There's some normalization.
And so the idea is that integer powers
are gonna correspond to even homology,
and half integer powers are gonna correspond to odd homology.
So if you get an honest polynomial,
that means the odd homology binoshes.
Okay, that's the left-hand side,
and the right-hand side is given by,
there's something called the qt Catalan number,
which comes from Macdonald theory.
So, well, rational, rational qt Catalan number,
which is, so it can be defined in several different ways.
And well, my favorite way is to do this combinatorially.
So it's just some very explicit sum over dickpads
of q to the area as before times t to the dinv of p.
And this dinv is the number of diagonal inversions.
It's sum, combinatorial statistic,
count some number of pairs of steps.
And it's unimportant for the stock.
What exactly is that?
It's just that you define such a qt polynomial.
And that's it.
That now I can state the common generalization.
So yeah, by the way, the qt Catalan numbers
were introduced by Garcia-Heiman 96
for the case of when b is equal to a plus one,
that's the usual Catalan,
usual, not the rational Catalan number.
And then the rational version was introduced
by Lauren Warrington in 2009.
And yeah, so, and this guy specializes
to both of the two q analogs I gave above.
So now here's the,
here is the actual first main result.
Assume that the GCD KNN is equal to one.
Then the claim is that the mixed hodge polynomial q and t
is equal up to a stupid factor.
It's equal to the qt KN-k to the qt Catalan number.
So yeah, that's the main result.
And before I go into details
on the proof and generalizations,
let me try to explain the consequences
from the combinatorial perspective,
which are very hard to do explicitly, combinatorially.
So the corollary for the qt Catalan numbers
is that the qt Catalan numbers are qt symmetric
and qt unimodal.
So some sequence of coefficients increases
and then decreases and is polyndromic.
And so the symmetry property is known.
So it follows from the rational shuffle conjecture.
But the unimodality part is a new result.
Doesn't follow from the literature.
And the reason it follows from this statement
is that for the left hand side,
there is something, there is more structure.
So there is something called the,
both of these properties follow
from the Curious Lapsheds property
for cluster varieties.
So cluster varieties come from cluster algebras.
And so the idea is that if you look
at these two papers over here,
alarm, spire, 2016, and our paper with Thomas from 2019,
then the first paper proves that if you have
a cluster variety, then there is
the Curious Lapsheds property.
So you get qt symmetric and unimodal polynomials.
But then you have to show that your
positive variety is a cluster variety.
And for the top of the chart, this was done by Scott in 2006.
But for arbitrary positive, this was done in this paper.
And definitely one of the applications we had in mind
was to have this qt symmetry and unimodality
for all positive traits.
So, yeah, that's the end of the first part.
I guess now I'm gonna talk about arbitrary.
Arbitrary, positive droid varieties.
If you have any questions, let me know.
Yeah, yeah, in the cluster algebra,
there is something called the GSV form.
So if you talk about dram-charmology,
then yeah, there is a two form which you write down.
It exists for any cluster algebra.
And just in terms of the quiver,
you can write it down in its mutation variant.
And this guy gives you the lapsheds operator.
Yeah, you can, well, we can write it in terms of
coordinates on the Grassmanian,
but you have to use the quiver, like the play big graphs.
You have to use them in some way.
I don't know if it can be written without
referring to any play big graph.
Yeah, thanks.
I'm not sure.
I mean, you can just subtract the,
you know the point count for the whole thing
and you can know the point count after you subtract.
So you can, yeah, anyways,
the short answer is I don't know.
But we do give point counts for all positive droid varieties
so you can sum them up.
All right, arbitrary positive droid varieties.
And so since this is a not theory seminar,
I'd like to actually, these are not usually defined in talks.
So I'd like to take this chance to explain the definition
because I think these are pretty nice objects.
So I'm working inside of the Grassmanian
with the matrix definition.
So let's say I have a matrix,
some K by N matrix M.
And it has, let me denote its columns by M1, M2,
all the way up to MN.
And then what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
extend this periodically to all,
so I want my columns to be labeled by integers.
And just in an N periodic way.
So I want M i plus N to be equal to M i for all integers i.
One, two, up to N, N plus one, two to N, et cetera.
So, and now to any such full rank K by N matrix,
I'm gonna associate a map,
which I'm gonna denote F sub M.
It's gonna be a map from bracket N to bracket N,
where by bracket N I just mean integers
between one and N.
So how do I define this map?
Well, let's see.
I want to define F sub M of i.
I'm gonna define it in terms of,
in terms of these columns of M.
And the definition is that I take the minimal
J, greater than or equal to i,
such that M i belongs to the span of M i plus one,
et cetera, up to M sub J.
So, maybe I should try some example.
Yeah, so maybe you choose some column M i,
and then you just scan to the right.
So, if the next column is parallel to M i,
then J is i plus one.
Or if it's not parallel, you can,
you keep scanning until you find some J,
such that these consecutive columns,
their span contains M i.
And then you set F sub M of i to be equal to J,
except that you have to,
I mean, I want the target to be bracket N,
so I just take it modular N.
Oops.
Modular.
Modular N.
And so that's it.
That's the definition of how I assign a map,
F sub M to every matrix M.
And it turns out, turns out that F sub M is a bijection.
So it's a permutation for any full-rank matrix M.
This is a permutation, which only,
this permutation only depends on the row span
of your matrix.
So if you take, if you apply row operations,
then these conditions don't really change anything.
So,
so you can now define a positoid variety,
given a permutation F in SN,
you can define the open positoid variety,
by just taking all elements in the gross monion,
such that the corresponding permutation is equal to F.
And so that's the,
that's the definition of an arbitrary open
positoid variety.
It is due to Knudsen-Lamm and Speyer.
And one thing I have to, one disclaimer I have to mention
is that this only works
if your permutation has no fixed points.
If it has fixed points,
then it's slightly more technical,
but the idea is still the same.
So if you take matrices,
you take matrices to define some rank conditions
on consecutive intervals of columns.
And in particular,
if you look at this definition closely
and try to,
try to relate it to what I said at the beginning,
I defined one top dimensional open positoid variety,
then you can see that the way to get there is to set
for a specific permutation,
FKN in SN,
given by
FKN of i
is equal to i plus K
modulo N.
For this permutation,
the condition you get is just that
any K cyclically consecutive columns
should be linearly independent.
So your open positoid variety FKN
is just equal to the one I defined previously.
So in particular,
what I'm gonna try to focus next
is I'm gonna try to generalize the original result
for the top positoid variety to arbitrary positoid varieties.
So next question is,
what is the mixed hodge polynomial
of an arbitrary positoid variety?
And well, the answer here is gonna be given
in terms of knots.
Knots and links associated to positoid varieties.
So let me try to explain
how to associate a positoid link,
how to associate a link to any permutation basically.
And the construction I'm gonna explain
is actually not written down anywhere so far,
but we think it works.
So, and it's very simple.
So I'd like to,
so let's say I'd like to define a map
which takes a permutation
and outputs a link,
a link beta hat sub F,
that's called the positoid link of F.
And the, so here's what you're gonna do.
You take a circle and you draw a bunch of,
you draw the numbers from one up to N on the circle.
And then you draw your strands.
So F is a permutation, maybe it sends one to four,
four to seven, seven to two, two to five,
five to six, six to one, maybe something like this.
And maybe it also sends three to itself,
even though that's not allowed.
Yeah, anyways, you get some diagram like this.
And this looks like a link diagram,
except that I have to tell you
which crossings are over crossings
and which are under crossings.
So the, and the recipe is very simple.
So if you have a strand from A to B,
if the strand crosses another strand C to D
then A to B is above
if and only if B is less than D.
So whichever strand has the smaller target
is above everybody else.
So in this picture,
the strand that terminates at one
has to be above everybody.
And then the strand that terminates at two
above everybody else and three and then four
and then five and that's it.
And you get a planar diagram of a link
and that's called the positroid link
associated to your permutation.
Very simple.
And the way to get this construction,
you can deduce it after some work from these two papers,
Flamin-Pilovsky-Schustin-Thurston
and Schender-Truman-Williams-Saslow
which associate links to play big graphs
which are some planar bipartite graphs.
And after some work, you can get to here.
And so now I guess one last piece
I have to discuss is the torus action.
No, this is not a positive knot.
Well, this one, this particular one is positive
but for some permutations you're gonna get,
you're not always gonna get positive knots.
Yeah.
Okay, so the torus, the torus action.
You have, let's say you take the group T of,
it's the group of diagonal,
of diagonal and by n matrices.
Invertible, determinant one.
Then this group acts on each open positron variety
by column rescaling.
And so I'd like to take the quotient.
Of course, I can, I'm only allowed to take the quotient
when the action is free.
So the simple lemma gives you a criterion
the following conditions are equivalent.
First one is that the T action is free
on the open positron variety.
The second condition is that the number of cycles
of your permutation is equal to one.
C is the number of cycles.
And the third condition is that,
well, which is very easy to see,
to be equivalent to the second one is that
the corresponding positroid link is a knot.
So yeah, in particular, in particular,
when you take the top dimensional open positron variety,
then the number of cycles of fkn is equal to the gcdkn.
So that's where the gcd condition comes
in the previous main results.
And also, so also if the torus acts freely
on your space, then you can take the quotient
and the mixed hodge polynomial behaves nicely.
So after you take the quotient qt,
well, let's say before you take the quotient,
they differ by a stupid factor.
N minus one times the mixed hodge polynomial
of the torus quotient.
So now I think I'm ready.
Well, okay, let me now talk about knot invariance.
So let me denote by pkr of a knot
or a link aqt be the triply graded Havanov-Rozansky
link invariant.
So that's the polynomial that encodes
the triply graded dimensions of the HHH.
HHH of the Rukia complex.
So now I can actually state the even more general results
result for arbitrary positrodes.
Well, I'm still gonna assume that the action is free.
So I assume that the number of cycles is equal to one.
Then the claim is that the mixed hodge polynomial of f,
torus quotient of the positroid variety
is equal to the, let me pkr top
of the positroid link qt
where pkr top
is the top a degree
of the Havanov-Rozansky.
Link invariant.
Well, top a degree coefficient, sorry.
Top a degree coefficient of this triply graded polynomial.
So that is yet another main result of this talk.
Each next one is more general than the previous one.
And so I'd like to, I guess, say a few words about the proof.
Okay, I'm probably gonna be out of time before.
Yeah, okay, let me mention the proof.
And for the proof I am gonna need even more general.
Let me mention the most general result
which I guess is gonna be not as accessible
as I previously did.
It's gonna, the most general result involves
Richardson varieties.
So what you do is you take any two permutations
or any two elements of a finite while group.
And then you can define the Richardson variety,
open Richardson variety as the intersection
of the on the Schubert cell for w
with the opposite Schubert cell for v
inside the flag variety.
And so that is some variety which is more general
than the positroid varieties.
Namely for any permutation F,
there exists a pair of permutations v and w in Sn
such that the positroid variety is isomorphic
to the corresponding Richardson variety
where the isomorphism comes from the projection
from the flag variety to the grass manion.
And the extra property here is that as a permutation
F factors as w times v inverse.
So by the way, this Richardson variety is non-empty,
non-empty if and on if v is less than or equal to w
in the Breua order.
So that's gonna be my running assumption.
And so these things generalize positroid varieties
and you can associate a Richardson,
what we call a Richardson grade
to each pair v comma w satisfying this assumption here.
So is the noted b beta vw and just by definition,
it is the positive braid lift of w
times the inverse on the positive braid lift for v.
So this guy is the positive braid lift.
And in particular, we claim that in the situation
where your Richardson variety is equal
to the positroid variety,
then what you get is that the positroid link
I described above is isotopic to the closure
of the Richardson link.
So the two definitions are,
even though they're different,
they actually give you the same result.
And so now the most general result
is actually of the following form.
So there's gonna be no more general results
than this one in this talk.
For any v, let's go to w inside some finite type
while group, while group,
the claim is that the HHH0
of the Rucchia complex of the corresponding braid
is isomorphic as a bi-graded R module
to the torus equivalent cohomology
of the Richardson variety with compact supports.
Where the fvw is, by definition,
you just take the usual Rucchia complex for w
and times the whatever dual or inverse one for v.
These are just Rucchia complexes
which were discussed by Eugene
in the first couple of lectures of the seminar.
So that's the main result.
And okay, let me, if you want to know the proof,
you can ask me later.
Now I'm gonna skip the proof.
There is a proof sketch over here,
which I'm gonna skip.
And instead I'm gonna go back to combinatorics
and discuss the q equals t equals one specialization.
Which was obtained in our very recent paper with Thomas.
Because we decided to just go back to combinatorics.
No q, no t, just a few.
So the assumption here is that I'm gonna start
with a permutation and I'm gonna assume
that the number of cycles is equal to one.
And any such object, any such long cycle
gives me a polynomial, right?
The mixed-touch polynomial on the torus quotient,
which depends on q and t.
In particular, I can set q and t to be equal to one
and I get a positive integer, which in the special case,
it gives me rational catalog numbers.
By the way, this result when for the top
of the trade variety, this knot here
is gonna be the torus knot, or in general the torus link.
And in this case, the HHH was computed by Melit
and Hagen-Camp Melit.
So that's where the q-t catalog numbers come from
in our proof.
And so in general, you get some,
in general you get a family of polynomials
labeled by permutations.
So it is natural to try and study them there,
let's say even the q equals t equals one specialization.
And so that's what I'm gonna try to explain now.
So first of all, any such permutation, as I said,
gives me an open-pository variety,
which lives inside gross money in k comma n.
And here n, which I'm gonna also denote by n of f,
is just the number of letters,
any other permutation on n letters.
But what is k?
If you give me a permutation, I'm supposed to,
it's not, there's not gonna be one in every gross money,
and there's just gonna be a single open-pository variety.
So k should be uniquely determined by f.
So the way this works is,
let me try to show you a picture.
A picture of how you determine k.
Well, first of all, let me,
I can write down the actual definition.
So k, k of f is, by definition,
is the number of indices i,
such that f of i is less than i.
But the definition I prefer is the following one.
You start with your permutation f on the left,
which sends zero to two, one to zero, et cetera.
The indices labeled from zero to n minus one.
Now, to that date, I'm gonna associate n,
map f tilde, which is gonna send integers to integers.
And the way it is defined is, first of all,
f tilde of i should be equal to f of i, module n.
And also it should be n periodic,
f of i plus n, and also it should be bounded.
F tilde of i should be between i and i plus n.
So let's see, f sends zero to two,
so f tilde sends zero to two.
Now, f sends one to zero, which is less than one.
So to satisfy this condition,
I have to send one to zero plus n.
And et cetera, two goes to three, two goes to three.
And three goes to, yeah, five goes to one,
five goes to one plus n.
So this object on the right is called
the bounded defined permutation.
It contains the same information,
but in a different sort of presentation.
Yes, thank you, yeah, that's actually, that is true.
Right, so in the matrix definition I had here,
when I define f sub m, I take it module n.
Without that module n, I would have constructed
the f tilde permutation, the bounded defined permutation.
So that's, and this is another presentation
and it's useful.
So first of all, k of f is now very easy to see
from this picture on the right.
Namely, it is just what I do is I can take,
I can draw any vertical line between two adjacent numbers
and I count how many strands intersect my vertical line.
And that's k.
No matter where you draw the vertical line,
the number of intersections is always gonna be
exactly the same.
So in this case, in this case, k of f is equal to three
because there is three intersections
and n of f is equal to seven because there's seven letters.
And let me also introduce gamma of f,
which by definition is a pair of integers.
So it's k of f comma n of f minus k of f.
So in this case, gamma of f is equal to three comma four.
So that's one information that's useful
from the picture on the right-hand side.
And another piece of information is the inversions.
So I'm gonna introduce a fine inversions
and the reason is that I want to explain
what is the dimension of the open position
of the stored variety.
And it turns out, well, because the dimension turns out
to be equal to the number of inversions.
So here's the definition.
You take a fine inversion,
we take inversions of f tilde to be just the length
in the Coxter group.
So in other words, it's the number of pairs i less than j
such that f tilde of i is bigger than f tilde of j.
And well, so far there's infinitely many such pairs
because it's all n periodic.
So I have to, I want to count the module n.
So the extra condition I can, for example,
ask that i belongs to bracket n.
So that's it.
These are the affine inversions.
And for the example I have here,
let's see if there's one, two, three, four,
five, and there should be, yeah, and six.
So the length of f tilde is equal to six.
Because I only count crossings modular n, modular n, yeah.
And the dimension of the corresponding
positride variety is the dimension of the gross monion
minus this affine number of affine inversions.
So, yeah, that's the, and what I'm gonna do now
is I'm gonna try to, the goal is I'm gonna try
to take my permutation, which is a single cycle.
And I want to associate a multiset, multiset denoted
by gamma of, it's a multiset of points inside of points
of lattice points inside the k by n minus k rectangle.
So the idea is that I, I take an inversion and yeah,
maybe I should, I should draw another picture.
Maybe I should draw another picture.
Here's another picture.
So you start with, you start with some f, right?
Or f tilde, down to the fine permutation.
And you look at the inversions.
Here I have two inversions.
So what I'm gonna do for each inversion,
I'm gonna uncross.
So I'm gonna resolve the corresponding crossing.
My original f was a single cycle.
If I resolve one crossing, I get,
so let's see, if I resolve this crossing,
I get something that has two cycles.
It's modular n, it's a product of two cycles.
And if my inversion was ij,
then one cycle is gonna go through i
and the other one is gonna go through j.
So I'm only gonna be interested in the cycle
that goes through i.
When it goes through i,
and I'm gonna denote it by f, f1, ij
is the cycle through i
when I swap the values f of i and f of j.
So I multiply it by John's position
and then I get two cycles
and I only take the one through i.
And then for that cycle, I take gamma of that cycle.
So because it uses five letters,
the sum of these numbers is equal to five.
And because if you draw any vertical line,
then it intersects exactly two strands, two red strands.
That's why the first coordinate is two.
And similarly, that's the first inversion.
And for the second inversion, I can do the same procedure
and I get the red cycle only uses two letters, one and five.
And if I draw any vertical line,
then the red strand intersects exactly once.
So gamma is one comma one.
And finally, the capital gamma of f is just the set of all,
it's the multi-set of all these points
that I get from all inversions.
So in this case, there was two inversions
and the two points I got was one, one and two, three,
where I'm using some sort of matrix notation.
So, and notice that in this case,
the two inversions gave me two different points.
In general, there could be repetitions in this multi-set.
So let me capture the situations,
situation where there is no repetitions.
F is called repetition free.
If the multi-set gamma of f has no repeated,
repeated elements.
So that's the, this sounds like a unnatural definition,
but it turns out to be very, very nice and very sort of,
it defines a very nice class of knots
and permutations and et cetera.
So if you try to think about it, like what, what do these,
let's say you take gamma that's repetition free, you know,
how does it look like?
If you try to picture that,
I mean some subset of the rectangle,
but how, what, what's the picture?
So here's the picture.
That's an example when k equals to four and n equals to eight.
And you can disregard the red area for now.
So each gamma, these are all possible gammas.
And each comes from many different repetition,
repetition free fs.
And so let me try to say, try to stay the final,
the final result of the second paper.
So let me say that gamma, let me say,
denote by gamma hat,
the union of gamma and zero, zero, k and minus k.
These are the two vertices of the rectangle.
And then let me say that gamma is convex.
If gamma hat contains all lattice points
of its convex hull,
just like in all these pictures here.
Then theorem,
theorem, which is in our most recent paper,
is that first of all, if f is repetition free,
then a gamma of f is convex
and centrally symmetric,
just like in all these pictures.
Centrally symmetric means if I rotate my rectangle
by 180 degrees, I get the same set.
The second claim is that any convex
centrally symmetric set,
gamma subset of the k by n rectangle arises this way.
So the repetition free condition
gives you precisely convex subsets.
And the third and final statement is that
if f is repetition free,
then the specialization of the mixed hodge polynomial,
q equals to t equals to one,
is counts the number of dick paths,
which avoid gamma of f.
So in other words,
that generalization of Ketlin numbers that we get is,
you kind of take any convex curve
and you take dick paths which are above that convex curve.
That just naturally,
this notion of repetition free permutations
naturally spits out this such dick paths.
And I guess I'm out of time.
So there is a conjecture,
there is a conjectural interpretation
for the whole polynomial without specializing
in this paper, g h s r s r 20,
where they define generalized Ketlin numbers
which come from coccitor links.
And so you can check on the computer
that the two polynomials appear to be the same.
And finally, there's one more paper,
b h m p s 21,
which sort of gives a symmetric function,
which includes these generalized Ketlin numbers
as just a single coefficient.
And they conjecture that their function is sure positive,
if and only if the shape is convex.
So they sort of arrive to exactly the same objects,
but from completely different set up.
And that's it.
So thank you very much for joining the talk.
Yes.
Not obvious.
No, in the diagram in the circle,
the inversions of f tilde correspond to alignments.
Which are pictures of the form of this type.
So whenever you have two arrows
which are sort of parallel in the circle,
then that would give you an affine inversion.
Sort of, yeah.
No, we don't know how to do that.
Well,
well, one comment is that if you draw your link,
not in the plane, but in a thick torus,
then there is something called the Fiedler invariant,
invariant, which actually sort of generalizes r set gamma of f.
So you can, there is some speculation
that maybe if this guy is repetition free
for an arbitrary link in the torus,
then probably the QT polynomial
is gonna, there's gonna be no odd homology, let's say.
But we don't know how to check this
because not homology is tricky to compute in general.
Well, it's, so, no, it's actually,
well, it's essentially a multi-set.
It's a formal combination of homology cycles in the torus,
which is the same thing as the multi-set
of pairs of integers.
Okay.
Okay.
For the characterization, it's not clear.
For the, there is,
they have some nice structure in terms of, let's say,
if you have a crossing, something like this,
and if the, between seven and zero, let's say,
and the two strands coming into seven and zero
don't cross, then you can move this crossing.
You can kind of, you can move crossings on the cylinder.
You can conjugate by simple just positions.
And it turns out that conjecturally,
gamma is basically the only invariant of that operation.
So if you apply, you can relate any two repetition free Fs.
To each other by, by just this simple operation.
And so that's one kind of start.
Yeah, they have some rigid structure.
And we also looked at the quivers.
And I don't remember what was the conclusion.
Yeah, you can have, you get lots of like, like exponents
or super exponentially, many different Fs.
You get very few gammas, but many, very many Fs.
And we couldn't even prove that they're all related
by these simple moves, but the computer says they are.
And the link, by the way, it conjecturally or not,
I don't remember, if you, you can take different K and N
and you get different gammas inside different rectangles,
but conjecturally, actual link depends only
on the young diagram.
Well, I mean, not even conjecturally,
that follows from the, from the interpretation
of the knots in terms of this paper here.
But yeah, anyways, the point is that the young diagram
above gamma gives you some invariant,
which is the same for positrons and different gross monions.
And somehow the properties of the positron variety
are captured by this young diagram here, surprisingly.
Okay.
All right, yeah, I forgot to mention, yes,
the gross monon is the disjoint union
of all positron varieties.
All right, if you sum, if you take the sum of all,
by the way, the point count, the point count in general
of any positron variety over FQ,
it is a specialization of the hopefully polynomial.
You don't have to take the full Havan-Frasansky homology,
you can combine the coefficient of the homophilic polynomial.
And so in particular, yes, if you sum all these things
together, you get the Q-binomial coefficient.
But we don't have, yeah, it's some identity, I don't know
if it,
yeah, yeah, that's a very interesting question.
I have no idea, even in terms of kinetics, I don't know,
but not theory, that's also, yeah,
I never thought of that interpretation.
Okay.
Oh, yeah, for the, so for the usual Catalan,
for the Q equals T equals to one specialization,
if F is the product of cycles, C1, C2, et cetera, up to CR,
then the QT, the Catalan number,
you know, the Catalan number for F is the product of the,
oh, maybe I should use a different letter for the cycles,
maybe G1, G2, GR, these are single cycles.
Then the Catalan number for F,
which by definition is the,
the Q equals T equals one specialization
is the product of the Catalan numbers of GI.
So if your, if your permutation factors
as a product of cycles,
then the corresponding QT-Catalan number factor
at Q equals T equals one,
it factors as a product of individual QT-Catalan numbers.
But even if, even if you just allow Q,
even if you set only T equals to one,
then we have no idea what's gonna happen.
Yeah, it does not factor for, for Q or QT, it does not factor.
Is that a question or?
Well, yeah, you get, right.
So you get some link invariant,
which fact the links could be tangled together.
So it's, right, but, and yet the number factors,
this is not known for Hohana-Prasonsky homology, right?
This is the analogous statement.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Why don't the gradings?
Which, which one?
The Q gradings, oh, oh, okay.
That's interesting.
That, that, your, your,
so what you're saying is the Poincare polynomial factors.
Okay.
All right.
All right.
Okay.
Well, that, that form, I guess, is the only interesting class.
I know there is, what was the, is there a paper?
Yeah, anyways, there are some papers
about the compactified Jacobian,
which have generators in them, like a block of, you know,
I think, and yeah, from the cluster perspective,
it's not clear.
Apart from the GSV form,
it's not clear what the generator should be.
There's also the Amplitahedron form,
which is like the top dimensional form,
but I mean, yeah, anyways,
my official answer is that I don't, I don't know.
