On August the 18th, 1931, in just one day, the Great Yangtze River of southern China
rose an astonishing 53 feet and 7 inches above its normal level, unleashing some of the most
destructive floodwaters ever seen anywhere in the world.
China's two great rivers have been susceptible to regular devastating floods for as long
as we can measure in the historical and geological record, but nothing in recent or historical
memory can compare to the apocalyptic inundation of August 1931.
These floods were a product of a perfect storm of climatic and geographic conditions, powerful
monsoon downpours in the mountains, a particularly heavy snow melt, and torrential rain that
fell in tremendous storms over hundreds of square miles of southern China.
As all this water poured into the Yangtze's tributaries, the river was jolted higher and
higher by massive infusions of water that gushed into the river system in huge tidal
waves up to 10 feet high.
Very quickly the Yangtze burst its banks for hundreds of miles.
The flooded areas were then rapidly and continuously immersed in a series of new tributary tidal
waves and this happened six times in succession.
The results were devastating.
By the time the floods had ended, more than 140,000 people had been drowned.
Up to 40 million people had been impacted by the flooding and somewhere between 12 and
24 million people were forced to leave their homes and relocate.
And at the worst point of the 1931 floods, 70,000 square miles of China were underwater.
That's about the size of Oklahoma.
Many cities were as much as 20 feet underwater and even the great southern capital city of
Nanjing was underwater for six weeks.
Much is the power of nature and its ability to effortlessly disrupt even the best laid
plans of mice and men.
The forced acceptance of the relative powerlessness of humans against the awesome power of nature
has profoundly influenced the Chinese psyche from the very beginning of the region's history.
Of course all people throughout history have been forced to acknowledge the power of nature
but in China the realization has been particularly influential because the rivers and other forces
of nature are also so beneficial, even essential to life and that both benefits and costs seem
to reoccur in climatic cycles.
The maxim has become heaven nourishes and heaven destroys.
Despite the best efforts of emperors over thousands of years to regulate alternating
episodes of environmental boom and bust, these natural and virtually uncontrollable cycles
have influenced the core philosophical and religious foundations of Chinese culture including
the concept of yin and yang.
The behavior of rivers has become a model for the constant flux of natural forces for
the balance between harmony and disharmony, between nature as creator and nature as destroyer.
This is just one example of the way in which the foundations of any civilization cannot
be explored without a clear understanding of the geography and climate in which that civilization
evolved.
And so today I want to look at the physical geography of China as a natural entree into
our study of the history and culture of East Asian civilization.
First, we'll explore the varied geographical regions of China and the role each of these
has played in the evolution of Chinese history and Chinese culture.
And then we'll take a look at China's two great river systems, each of which can justifiably
claim to be the cradle of Eastern civilization.
So let's begin with China's geographical regions.
One interesting observation we can make right off the bat is that China and the USA share
several geographical similarities.
They are similar in size.
They both reside in the middle latitudes of the northern hemisphere and both have extensive
coastlines and similarly diverse topographies.
As we will also see in this course, China and the USA also share a historical notion
of the Wild West, a literal and metaphorical frontier region within which some of the key
episodes of the histories of both nations have played out.
But China, of course, lies in the eastern part of Asia on the western rim of the Pacific
Ocean.
This same region is also home to the Korean Peninsula and the island nation of Japan,
both of which will figure very heavily in our course, although I will save a more detailed
account of their geographies until we introduce them into the course.
With a total land area of almost 10 million square kilometers, it's more than 3 million
square miles, China is the third largest country in the world after Russia and Canada.
There is some debate about this, however.
If we include the area of the Great Lakes, some geographers argue that the United States
is actually the third largest, but China is a huge country.
At its widest, the distance from eastern to western China is more than 3,200 miles and
from northern to southern, more than 3,300 miles.
China has a huge land border of 13,500 miles, although the precise length is dependent upon
whether or not some of China's territorial claims are accepted.
Today, China is bordered by 14 countries.
If we start in the northeast and then move counterclockwise, these neighbors are North
Korea of course, Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
parts of India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar or Burma, Laos and finally Vietnam.
China also has extensive neighboring seas and numerous islands and a coastline that extends
for more than 11,000 miles.
Across the east China Sea to the east and the south China Sea to the southeast lie Japan,
Taiwan, the Philippines and Indonesia and all these island groups played a critical role
in the dissemination of eastern civilization as we will see during the course.
More than 5,000 islands are actually scattered over China's vast territorial seas.
The largest is Taiwan and China's seas altogether constitute another 2.9 million square miles.
In a country the size of China it is hardly surprising to find a great variety of topography
of climate and of vegetation.
It's easiest to understand this variation I think if we consider China as consisting
of four general regions, the eastern alluvial plains, the northern grasslands, the southern
hill regions and the mountainous and very arid west.
Now the eastern regions along the shores of the Yellow Sea and the east China Sea are
densely populated alluvial plains that have been built up by China's great river systems.
This is the region that has been densely settled and farmed for many thousands of years and
as we will see this is the region in which much of China's long history has played out.
This is where the Long Shan and Yang Shao cultures first emerged where all the early
dynasties located their capitals and where great cities like Chang'an and later Beijing
were founded.
The northeast plains are covered in a fertile black soil that for thousands of years has
proven ideal for growing wild grasses like wheat, like millet, like sorghum and later
after it was introduced from the Americas corn.
This is the region then where untold millions of peasant farmers have labored for millennia
to grow the resources needed to support the emperors and their courts where great battles
were waged between warring states and where some of the densest populations ever seen
and world history were sustained.
To the north of these fertile plains along the edges of the Inner Mongolian Plateau
lie extensive grasslands, the home of the pastoral nomadic peoples who have interacted
with China's sedentary populations virtually from the beginning of history.
It was this interaction between nomads and the early farming cultures that provided much
of the dynamism to early Chinese history.
We will return many times in our course to this borderland region where militarized nomadic
arch-a-warriors traded and fought with wealthy sedentary agrarian kingdoms.
These steppe regions, these oceans of grassland have been home to Saka and UHR, to Zhongnu
and Hun, to Jurchen and to Mongol who at various times over thousands of years carved out their
own mighty empires of the steppe.
These were the nomads that the Great Walls were constructed to keep out.
From October to March every year winds blow from Siberia across the Mongolian Plateau
causing cold and dry winters over much of the northeastern part of the country.
The southern regions of China generally experience much more benign weather and topographically
are characterized by hill country and some low mountain ranges.
Parts of the south like the island of Hainan for example are positively tropical.
The south receives extensive rainfall up to 60 inches a year in parts and this has helped
make the region particularly suitable for rice cultivation.
Indeed rice grew naturally in the wild in the shallow waters of much of the south in
the shallow tributaries and the estuaries of the ancient Yangtze River Valley.
This early selection of different crop species to domesticate in the south and the north
based of course on the environmental conditions in which early farming emerged also resulted
in the emergence of two quite distinct cultural cuisines, a southern cuisine dominated by
rice and a northern cuisine dominated by noodles and grains.
Rice proved an incredibly versatile food plant to early farmers who began to harvest
and then domesticate it from around 8,000 BCE by the way and of course it eventually
became the staple diet all over east and southeast Asia as we will see in this course.
But China is also a mountainous country, some two-thirds of its total land area is covered
by mountains, by high hills and high plateaus and this is particularly obvious in the fourth
major geographical zone of China, the west.
The highest of these mountain ranges including the Himalaya, the Karakoram and the Tianshan
or heavenly mountains are all located in the west, China's fourth geographical region where
they have acted as a formidable barrier to communication from the very beginning of Chinese
history.
To make these topographical barriers even more formidable, the mountain ranges are interspersed
with harsh deserts like the Taklamakan and the Gobi, both of which will feature several
times in our course.
Geographers actually identify five major mountain systems in China which together with numerous
high plateaus, high basins and high plains are interwoven into the macro-landform complex
of this enormous region.
This is best understood I think if we think of the topography of China from west to east,
beginning with the mountain ranges and deserts in the west, the land descends eastwards in
four great steps, slowly coming down in altitude from the great mountains of Central Asia and
the high Qinghai, Tibetan Plateau, all the way to those alluvial coastal plains in the
east.
When we consider the west, we are of course talking about very high mountains indeed,
driven skywards by the slow-motion collision between the Indian tectonic plate and the Asian
plate which began about 100 million years ago and which drove these mountains skywards.
Of the world's 14 mountains that measure over 8,000 meters in altitude, seven are actually
located in China.
And this includes the highest peak in the world which the Chinese call Mount Chomo Longma,
loosely translated as the goddess mother of the snows, and the west calls Mount Everest,
located on the border between China and Nepal.
At 8,848 meters or 28,028 feet, Everest dominates the view to the south across the high Tibetan
Plateau.
Since incorporating Tibet into Chinese territory in 1951, the Chinese have cherished having
Mount Everest, Mount Chomo Longma as part of their territory.
Chinese mountaineers have made numerous ascents from the northern side since the 1960s, including
an earliest cent that was at first disbelieved by western mountaineers because of the lack
of photographic evidence.
And you might remember that the lofty summit even received a visit from the Olympic torch
in 2008.
So with much of China's west consisting of mountains, deserts and arid plateaus, this
has meant that there has never been much arable land there for agriculture.
The populations have been small and sparse, confined to oasis settlements or to pastoral
nomadic environments.
The result was that Chinese civilization naturally emerged in the more arable east and southeast.
But this also meant that from the very beginning of its history, China was isolated by the
wild west, cut off from much of the rest of Eurasia and from competing and perhaps expansionist
civilizations.
And today these formidable topographical barriers and the vast distances necessary to cross
western China make close connections with China's western neighbors more problematic.
Yet these barriers have had advantages too.
Chinese governments from the very earliest dynasties on have been forced to focus on overcoming
the challenges they faced internally.
That is, on connecting these geographically and culturally separate regions to the mainstream
of Chinese culture.
And this has led to a focus on internal cultural and ethnic integration rather than on external
expansion.
Visitors to China today can't help but be struck by the official government emphasis
on cultural integration.
The Chinese knot is ubiquitous, I'm sure like me you've seen it everywhere in China.
It's a complicated knotting of core that represents the unity of the 56 different ethnic groups
that make up modern China.
This is very much the product of millennia of intense focus on internal integration, internal
cultural melding that was forced upon the Chinese by this geographical isolation.
And we all consider the various ways in which philosophers, soldiers and emperors have worked
to achieve this.
But let's not forget that although the mountains and deserts of the West limited contact between
the early imperial dynasties and other centres of civilisation in inner Asia, also the Middle
East of course, South Asia and Europe, there were some and very important and notable exceptions
to this.
For example, during certain periods extraordinary levels of cultural and mercantile exchange
did take place between China and much of the rest of Eurasia, particularly along the
fabled Silk Roads.
It was trade routes such as the Silk Roads that allowed many of the ideas and technological
inventions of Eastern civilisation to begin to diffuse to the West.
Ideas like paper, printing, gunpowder, Confucianism and sophisticated ideas about bureaucratic
government and their impact on Western civilisation was of course profound.
We'll return to the Silk Roads in a series of lectures later in the course.
But now though, let's move from our discussion of geographic regions and next consider the
role that rivers have played in shaping Chinese history and Chinese culture.
The existence of two major rivers in particular, the Huanghe or Yellow River and the Yangtze
which the Chinese often call the Changjiang, have been responsible for dividing Chinese
culture into two quite distinct regions.
Both these mighty rivers have their sources in the high Tibetan plateau but both follow
quite a different path to the sea.
The Huanghe, China's second largest river, is called the Yellow because of huge amounts
of silt, actually yellow Loess soil that it carries out from the plains and into the
sea, into the Yellow Sea.
There is so much Loess suspended in the river that not only does it have a very yellow
appearance but often also the muddy consistency of soup.
The Huanghe rises in the mountains of Tibet and flows some 2,920 miles into the Yellow
Sea.
Its extraordinary journey crosses the high western plateau then flows through the arid
northern deserts before spilling out onto a broad northern alluvial plain.
About midway along its course, the river takes a sharp turn to the north, then east
and then south again before continuing its former path towards the sea.
This so-called Great Bend in the Huanghe, the Great Bend of the Yellow River, was perceived
for much of China's history as a metaphorical and literal frontier.
This was the very edge of the civilized world beyond which lay the endless and dangerous
steps.
Beyond the Great Bend, one entered the realm of the Nomads, the Barbarians, the home to
100,000 strong hordes of militarized pastoral nomads like the Shaonu and the Mongols, China's
most formidable enemies.
The Huanghe is also known as China's sorrow because of the misery its devastating floods
have caused the Chinese people.
The earliest settled communities and cultures of eastern civilization appeared along the
Huanghe, so here for millennia lived the largest populations and the greatest potential for
devastation by floods.
Emperors, numerous emperors and court officials tried so many schemes to control these floods
and even Sima Chun, the first great historian of China who wrote in the first century before
the common era was forced by the sheer devastation of Huanghe floods to dedicate a special section
of his great work, the Shujie, to the Yellow River.
We will discuss this wonderful historian Sima Chun often during the early part of our course
for he is indeed our great guide to ancient Chinese history.
The other major river valley of China is the Yangtze, the third longest river in the world
after the Nile and the Amazon.
The Yangtze flows nearly 4,000 miles down from the Tibetan Plateau until it empties
into the sea beside one of the great cities of the world, Shanghai.
The river's catchment area is about one-fifth the size of China and it is home to so many
people that, as the very fine English travel writer Simon Winchester points out, and I quote,
if the Yangtze Valley were to be a country it would be the second most populous in the
world.
Almost 500 million people, that's about one-twelfth of the population of earth live in the Yangtze
catchment.
The Yangtze also has its own great bender, this time again back to the north and arguably
this bend has been of even greater consequence to Chinese civilization than the bend in the
Yellow River.
In southwestern China all the mountainous valleys of Sichuan province are arranged concertina-like
in a north-south direction.
This configuration is of course one of the products of the twisting of the landscape
caused by the collision between the Indian and Asian tectonic plates.
Although the great rivers that flow through these valleys like the Abramaputra, like the
Mekong, all run from the Tibetan Plateau in the north towards the seas that lap southeast
Asia, as we'll see later in the course.
And the Yangtze River would have gone the same way, leaving China for good at this point
and depriving millions of Chinese people its life-giving water were it not for a singular
topographical feature called Cloud Mountain.
This is actually a massive wall of carboniferous limestone that is placed right across the
path of the onrushing Yangtze, forcing the river to abruptly interrupt its journey south
and turn sharply back to the north.
Now Chinese legends attribute the fortunate placement of Cloud Mountain to the work of
a legendary early emperor, Yu the Great, of the semi-legendary Sharp Dynasty, who as we
will see in our very next lecture labored mightily to keep the river in China.
Of course the geologist more prosaically, attribute Cloud Mountain to a particular quirk
in the twisting of the plate tectonic collision zone.
The Yangtze is also the site of one of the largest engineering projects in all of world
history, the famous Three Gorges Dam.
This dam first began operating in October 2003, although not without major national,
indeed international, controversy caused by the cost of construction, perhaps as much
as US$30 billion, by the loss of so many historical sites deep under water now, by the environmental
impact of the project and by the displacement of millions of people.
In this age of terrorism, the Chinese government is also said to be taking extraordinary measures
to prevent any sort of an attack on the Three Gorges Dam.
Can we imagine the devastation that would be caused by 400,000 cubic yards of water
surging downriver every second were this massive dam ever to be breached?
The Three Gorges Dam is another example of the determination of the Chinese and indeed
of all humans to attempt not only to utilize the titanic forces of nature, but even to subdue
them.
So let me begin to conclude this lecture now by considering a powerful and symbolic confrontation
between man and nature that perhaps some of you might remember.
Indeed nothing symbolizes the relationship between the Chinese people and the powerful
forces of nature that seem to toy with them better than Mao Zedong's two extraordinary
swims across the powerful Yangtze.
A Mao's first swim was in 1956, seven years after the founding of the People's Republic
of China, when enthusiasm for the Communist Revolution appeared to be waning.
Mao who had always loved swimming, always been a strong swimmer, decided to use the
physical display of his own battle against the brute strength of the powerful Yangtze
as a way to galvanize support for his leadership and for his fearlessness.
So Mao with 40 somewhat reluctant members of his entourage dove into the river and swam
across.
After about two hours of extraordinary effort, Mao reached the far bank.
In the celebration that followed, one of his advisors made the inevitable connection between
the power of nature and the power of their iconic leader.
And I quote, no one can match the strength of the chairman.
No other world leader looks down with such disdain on great mountains and powerful rivers.
But our chairman can.
No one in history can match him.
Ten years later, the now 73 year old chairman did it again, swimming powerfully across the
immensity of the river, a tiny bobbing head in the surging water, the very symbol of man's
ability to, if not conquer, at least compete with the power of nature.
This then is the physical stage upon which our investigation of Eastern civilization
will play out.
Let me leave you with a few questions about the relationship between historical processes
and the environment that I hope we might begin to answer as our course unfolds.
First, what were the particular geographical and biological advantages favoring certain
locations in different parts of East Asia that allowed for the establishment of villages
and towns there, some of which grew into great cities indeed, formidable cities?
Secondly, what role did climate and geography play in allowing for powerful civilizations
to appear in some regions while others remain better suited for foraging?
And thirdly, I think why is it that whilst some civilizations clearly abused their environments
and thus sowed the seeds of their own destruction, and don't we see this in so many areas of
history?
Organizers were able to more carefully husband the resources provided by geography, provided
by biology, and successfully sustain themselves for thousands and thousands of years.
I'm looking forward to exploring these and many other aspects of East Asian history and
culture, of course, over the duration of our course.
But let us conclude for now by noting that the history of East Asian civilization is
a 10,000 year long reminder that the story of humanity can only really be understood
by exploring the natural context in which it is so deeply embedded.
The environment is truly the great physical stage upon which our human drama continues
to unfold.
