Today I want to begin with a story about an extraordinary Swedish geologist by the name
of Johan Gunnar Andersson, who in 1914 was invited to visit China by the Chinese government
as a special mining advisor.
After helping train Chinese geologists and discovering some important iron ore deposits,
Andersson found himself drawn to an area just outside Beijing known as Jaukudian, where
several intriguing fossil finds were being made by local farmers.
In 1921 Andersson and his colleagues, including the American paleontologist Walter Granger,
were directed by local quarry workers to the Dragon Bone Hill.
Just immediately Andersson stumbled upon some pieces of quartz that were not native
to the region.
Believing this to be an ideal site for the discovery of early human remains, Andersson
turned to Granger and said, here is primitive man, now all we have to do is find him.
Andersson and his colleagues excavated the site for the next several years and discovered
numerous teeth.
In the publications that followed, the teeth were identified as belonging to a new hominid
species, but scholars around the world were skeptical and some even suspected a hoax.
Then in 1928 a lower jaw, skull fragments and several more teeth were discovered which
proved absolutely that these caves had once been the home of hominids.
By the time initial excavations came to an end in 1937 because of the Japanese invasion
of China, Chinese paleontologists had discovered more than 200 hominid specimens belonging
to some 40 individual hominids.
In 1941 the fossils were packed up in the Peking Union Medical School after the United
States government agreed to give them safe passage to the USA, but that is where all
trace of the fossils is lost.
The best theory about what happened to them is that near the end of the war the fossils
were packed into the hold of a Japanese hospital ship, the Awa Maru, which was sunk by a US
submarine on the night of April 1st, 1945.
Only one of the 2004 passengers and crew on board survived and her cargo still lies deep
down somewhere in the Taiwan Straits.
After the war excavations resumed and more fossils were discovered at Jaukudian.
The discoveries begun by Anderson and Granger in 1921 proved absolutely that hominids of
the Homo erectus genus had made an extraordinary migration from Africa to East Asia millions
of years ago, something that had been thought to be absolutely impossible before these discoveries.
But the Jaukudian caves were not the only site in China to yield extraordinary fossil
evidence.
In 1984, in a group of limestone hills on the south side of the Yangtze River, a farmer
stumbled upon a cave known as the Dragon Hill Cave.
Experts from Beijing soon discovered 20 different layers of bones in the cave and by 1990 they
had excavated tens of thousands of specimens.
These included mastodon skulls, the bones of a giant orangutan, numerous hyenas and deer,
evidence of saber toothed tigers, and the lower jaw of a hominid complete with two attached
molars.
Tests on these fossils revealed that the teeth were 1.8 million years old, much older than
anything found at Jaukudian.
The teeth and associated stone tools were also identified as belonging to the Homo erectus
or Homo agasta genus, the two are very similar.
This showed that groups of these hominid migrants had somehow made their way across the vast
distances of Asia, all the way from Africa to China, nearly two million years ago.
Is this where we should begin our search for the foundations of eastern civilization?
With these extraordinary hominid migrations that first brought human ancestors to East
Asia.
We know that our biological and psychological origins must be sought in the extraordinary
mix of traits and abilities that characterizes the evolution of our hominid ancestors.
But can we also discern our cultural and ideological origins from these hominids?
We know for example that Homo erectus was one of the last hominids before the appearance
of Homo sapiens, so I often asked my students to consider the question, were they human?
They were certainly as tall as us, up to five foot six, they used complex tools, their brains
were almost as large as ours, 1100 cubic centimetres compared to 1400 cubic centimetres, they undertook
these vast migrations out of Africa and they used fire in a very systematic way.
But they did not have the creative cognitive functions of humans, nor the ability to adapt
to the astonishing range of environments that humans have been able to.
Even the most intelligent of our hominid ancestors, Homo erectus and the antithales were no match
for Homo sapiens, who quickly became the only surviving hominid Homo sapiens.
Homo sapiens also emerged in Africa of course somewhere between 200 and 250,000 years ago.
By 100,000 years ago, humans had also made the same epic migration to China.
We know this because of a remarkable discovery in the Jiren Cave in southern China.
That's where paleontologists unearthed a human jawbone in 2007, thought to be at least 100,000
years old, this jawbone is the oldest modern human fossil found outside of Africa.
How then did these early human migrants to China live?
The first East Asian peoples formed communities that for roughly 90,000 years followed what
we call Paleolithic foraging life ways.
Paleolithic simply means the old stone age and foraging means gathering foodstuffs and
other needed materials from the environment.
Now foragers needed a large territory to support themselves, so populations who kept
small through infanticide and senilicide.
Foragers lived in small family size groups, maybe 10 to 50 people in size, sometimes splitting
into even smaller groups for specific tasks, sometimes meeting in larger groups to exchange
information and marriage partners.
All foragers lived very close to nature and thought of themselves as part of the natural
world.
Many believed that their spirits would return in the form of other animals or natural features
of the landscape.
In this belief in a world occupied by many different kinds of spirits, we see another
of the core foundations of Eastern civilization starting to emerge, the belief in a world
of spirits and specifically ancestor spirits and the need to venerate them.
From about 10,000 years ago, this life way started to change, 10,000 years ago humans
were living on every continent on earth except for Antarctica and every single one of these
human communities lived by foraging.
But humans had invented a huge range of different foraging technologies to survive in the different
environments in which they found themselves, the variety of environments we considered
in our last lecture, for example.
The fact that all these groups were small and that only occasional exchanges took place
between them meant that the pace of historical change was rather slow for the first 90,000
years.
But then from about 10,000 years ago, new technologies, new life ways began to appear
in China associated with farming.
And as we will see, these new life ways and the technologies associated with them gave
humans access to more energy and more resources.
With more food and more energy, humans began to multiply more rapidly and to live in larger
and denser communities.
And this led not only to an historical gear shift to a faster pace of change but also
to an entirely new level of complexity in the human condition, a level of complexity
that leads to the emergence of the first distinctive East Asian cultures.
One of the questions we will be addressing in the rest of this lecture, and in fact the
next, is what distinguishes these cultures as East Asian or Chinese?
And what unique foundational ideas do we see emerging in this transition?
Okay, so far we've seen that hominids migrated from Africa to China perhaps as many as two
million years ago.
We've also seen that humans, homo sapiens, made the same migration around 100,000 years
ago and for the next 90,000 years followed a foraging way of life.
Foraging is also interchangeable with hunter gathering, by the way.
The change that began to happen around 10,000 years ago was the transition from the Paleolithic
Age to the Neolithic or New Stone Age.
In China, the Neolithic Age lasted from roughly 8,000 to 3,000 BCE.
Archaeological evidence shows us that numerous Chinese communities had adopted agriculture
by at least 6,500 BCE before the Common Era and probably a thousand years earlier in some
places.
Now, as we noted in our last lecture, climate and geography largely dictated the different
crops that would be growing.
In the Huanghe or Yellow River Valley in the north, the staple crop was millet and other
wild grasses.
In the warmer, wetter Yangtze Valley in the south, the most important domesticated plant
species was rice.
These early farming communities also domesticated the horse, the pig, the chicken and the silkworm.
And we will have a lot more to say about the silkworm in future lectures.
Now there are two conflicting theories about how a distinctive Chinese culture emerged
in these early Neolithic sedentary communities following this important transition from foraging
to farming.
The first of these, the nuclear area thesis, argues that Chinese culture originated from
a single culture, probably that of the Yang Shao in the North China Plains.
This theory is based on evidence of the apparent spread of Yang Shao culture and by that I
mean Yang Shao pottery and other material evidence all across northern China from the
coast to the high Qinghai plateau in the west.
The second theory, the interactive steers theory, argues that Yang Shao was just one
amongst many Neolithic Chinese cultures that sprang up in various parts of China.
The most important evidence that supports this theory is that each of these cultures
produced their own distinctive pottery styles.
Some of these early cultures included Yang Shao and Daoan Cao in the North and Magia
Bang and Hemudu in the South.
It is the interactive steers theory that is more widely accepted today and it is hardly
surprising that in a region the vast size of China, numerous independent cultures should
have emerged.
The interactive steers theory goes on to suggest that around 4,000 BCE many of these cultures
began to trade with each other leading to convergence and ultimately to the emergence
of a distinctive Chinese culture by perhaps 3,000 BCE.
But critics argue that although there was some degree of convergence, distinctive material
culture differences continued to exist in China until really quite recently.
They point out for example that any notion of a unified Chinese civilization is actually
a very recent invention.
In this context we should note that really before the 19th century there was not a single
word in the Chinese language for China.
Until the early 20th century the land that has become known as modern China was known
by the name of the particular ruling dynasty, the land of the Qin, of the Han, of the Tang
and so on.
The region that became China was also occupied by a wide range of ethnically diverse peoples
who spoke many different languages from the Sino-Tibetan, Indo-European and Austro-Asianic
language families.
For all these reasons pinning down the origins of Chinese and East Asian civilization remains
highly problematic, but that of course is our task.
During the Neolithic era then it looks as though abundant harvest by successful early
farming communities allowed for the development of several different societies, different
cultures if you like, each with their own distinctive pottery styles.
In the north along the middle Huanghe it was the Yangxiao culture that became dominant
between roughly 5000 and 3000 BCE.
An entire Yangxiao village was unearthed by archaeologists in 1952 at Banpo near the modern
city of Xian and many more discoveries have since been made.
In fact Yangxiao remains have now been discovered at some 2000 sites across northern China.
These discoveries show us that Yangxiao people lived in communities with both underground
and above ground houses built of wood and earth.
Although they grew millet and domesticated pigs and chickens they also continued with
some hunting and fishing.
Although men held economic and political power in the community we can tell from the types
of grave goods found in male and female graves that women had relatively high social status.
The often ambiguous nature of early Chinese and indeed East Asian gender relations is
the theme we will explore continuously throughout this course.
By 3000 BCE a new culture had emerged in the Huanghe Valley, the Long Shan culture.
They coexisted in the north with other agrarian cultures, they lived in walled cities and
they interacted with their neighbours in various ways that seems to have included conflict.
Indeed a major difference between Yangxiao and Long Shan is that Long Shan towns were
surrounded with enclosures built of rammed earth, essentially early forms of city walls
which does indicate increasing conflict with hostile others.
The uneven distribution of wealth in Long Shan graves also suggests that this was a much
less equal society than its predecessors.
This seems to be a historical principle by the way that emerges in virtually all pre-bronze
age sites right around the world.
Farming, sedentism and an increasingly complex interconnected society almost always leads
to sharp social inequalities based on wealth and status and on gender.
The Long Shan cities were mostly located along river valleys and the walls may have
been constructed to provide protection from aggressive nomadic bands who were living in
the foothills to the north and who had learned to domesticate and use the horse as a means
of transport and probably also militarily.
Now the ongoing tension between these two groups becomes a powerful stimulus for innovation
in early China.
The town dwellers make technological advances.
The nomads perfect sophisticated weapons like the composite bow.
The independent nature of all these early cultures, Yangxiao and Long Shan, just two
of them, gave the region that would become China a sense of fragmentation and disunity
but this continual threat of nomadic invasion from the north became a shared one and as we
all see it remained a defining characteristic of the Chinese psyche for millennia.
As this mix of early cultures developed and interacted as conflict between groups increased
and as these social hierarchies emerged, the need for forms of governance and coordination
as well as the ambition to control and dominate other communities obviously increased.
Some of China's earliest historical records as well as admittedly ambiguous archaeological
evidence that is much debated and disputed seem to suggest that a truly powerful dynasty
emerged in approximately 2100 BCE which soon gained control of a large region of northern
China.
This dynasty came to be known as the Xia Dynasty but was it real or was it imagined?
Many historians do indeed believe that the first dynasty to gain widespread power in
China was the Xia who may have controlled part of the northern regions from roughly 2100
until sometime between 1760 and 1600 before the common era.
The dates are frankly very difficult to pin down here.
The Xia were followed by the mighty Shang dynasty who ruled until 1050 BCE as we will
see in the next pair of lectures.
It was under the Shang that many of the most important foundations of eastern civilization
were laid down.
Before we discuss the evidence for the Xia, let's pause for a quick note.
Let's ask a question here.
What exactly is a dynasty?
Now the term can have two different but connected meanings.
On the one hand, a dynasty is a succession of rulers who all come from who will belong
to the same family or the same extended family or clan for generations.
But as I'm sure you're aware, the term is also used to describe the chronological era
during which the family or clan reigned as well as all of the events, the developments,
the material culture, the artifacts that appeared during this period.
So we might talk about Zhou dynasty philosophies, for example, or the Han dynasty iron industry
or a Ming dynasty vase and so on.
Now to help you learn the succession of major dynasties in China, I'm going to embarrass
myself somewhat here and ask you to practice singing along this song to the tune of Freyro
Sheng Zhou Qin Han, Sheng Zhou Qin Han,
Sui Tang Song, Sui Tang Song, Yuan Ming Qing Republic,
Yuan Ming Qing Republic, Mao Zedong, Mao Zedong, excuse that slightly gravely singing voice.
Let's return to the Xia dynasty which is first described in various ancient Chinese documents
including the bamboo annals, a set of documents that were interred with a late Zhou dynasty
king we think in about the year 296 BCE and also the very important first century BCE records
of the grand historian by Sima Qian.
Although these written records are very old, like many of the great works of world literature,
the Old Testament for example, perhaps the works of Homer, they were based on much more
ancient stories and songs that had been handed down by oral tradition.
Both these accounts state that the Xia dynasty was founded when a local ruler named Xun gave
up his throne to his quote, perfect civil servant, his first minister, Yu.
Because Yu received his title at a place called Xia, that name was chosen for the dynasty.
This legend resonates of course with many of the arguments as we'll see that Confucius
would later make about the importance of ethical leadership and also with the role that Confucian
civil servants would play through thousands of years of future Chinese government.
Now certainly Yu ruled like a great Confucian leader constructing hydrological works to
help control the devastating floods of the Great Rivers.
It was Yu you might remember that is supposed to have placed Cloud Mountain in the way of
the Yangtze River, forcing it to turn sharply back to the north and flow on through China.
Just before his death however, Yu decided to pass power onto his son Qi rather than to
the best qualified of his ministers.
This obviously ignored the argument that power should be in the hands of the most qualified
and established the precedent for dynastic rule that placed family and clan in political
control of the state.
There after some 15 descendants of Qi occupied the throne in hereditary succession.
Now some were outstanding ethical rulers but others quite frankly were tyrants.
According to the historical records the Xia dynasty came to an end during the reign of
Ji whose wayward and dictatorial rule caused a popular revolt allowing for the Shang tribe
to overthrow the Xia and seize the throne.
The documents say in the year 1766 but as I say that's a much disputed date.
Until about 50 years ago these ancient literary accounts were dismissed out of hand by scholars.
The story of the Xia dynasty was thought to be a mythical and allegorical tale that ancient
Chinese bards and shamans had handed down as part of their creation story.
Indeed the Xia dynasty lived in these early histories only.
There was no archaeological evidence for them whatsoever.
Until that is, archaeological discoveries beginning in 1959 caused some scholars to think again.
For in that year of 1959 excavations in the city of Yanxu uncovered what some claimed
was the capital of the Xia dynasty, a site now known as Eulatowl.
Radiocarbon dates from the site indicate that the Eulatowl culture that ruled here existed
from roughly 2100 to perhaps 1800 BCE so clearly they were pretty nearly contemporaneous with
the historical dates that we have for the Xia.
So this proved at least that here was a substantial culture that had been a descendant of the
Long Shan and was clearly a predecessor to the Shang who are as I've mentioned perhaps
the most significant of all these early dynasties.
Through the 1960s and 70s more sites and artefacts were discovered including tombs that were in
locations similar to those that were outlined in the ancient texts.
Now obviously not all scholars accept these discoveries as evidence of the Xia but they
do at least demonstrate the existence of a powerful culture that functioned as some
sort of an intermediate political and military entity between the Neolithic cultures we
have been discussing and the Indisputable Shang dynasty.
The archaeological evidence shows that the Eulatowl Slas Xia were primarily an agrarian
people but they also built some pretty substantial villages even some urban centres and mastered
the use of bronze.
Within their urban centres major crafts like jade carving and the casting of quite superb
bronze vessels developed.
Some of these bronze vessels were even embellished with jade a very difficult technique.
The people devised a sophisticated calendar system that noted both the lunar and solar
movements.
Ruling families used elaborate and dramatic rituals to confirm their power to govern and
the rulers also often acted as shamans communicating with spirits for help and guidance.
All these developments were going to play a major role in an emerging eastern civilization.
As we will see bronze and jade working goes on to acquire almost mystical associations
with power and with the divine under almost all subsequent dynasties.
Bronze also becomes intimately related with power under the Shang and subsequent ruling
dynasties would use bronze as part of enormous elaborate stage rituals to help reinforce
their power.
And of course this idea of linking secular and sacred power through shaman kings who
could communicate with the spirit world look back to the ancient beliefs of Pallelithic
peoples but also forward to the emergence of powerful semi-divine rulers all over the
ancient world.
Now there is one interesting footnote before we conclude this lecture on early Chinese
cultures because of ongoing controversy over whether the Shah should be regarded as a real
dynasty or as historical ghosts perhaps invented by the Shang to perhaps to justify their own
seizure of power.
The Chinese government commissioned a special investigative project in 1996 to look very
carefully at the early periods the early dynasties of Chinese civilization.
Some historians felt that the Chinese were attempting to prove that the roots of eastern
civilization are just as deep and ancient as the roots of western civilization in Sumeria
and Egypt.
As part of what became known as the Sha Shang Zhou chronology project scholars from various
disciplines came together to investigate the literary and archaeological evidence for the
existence of the Shah.
They published their results four years later in the year 2000 and although they were very
careful with the language they used they did clearly conclude that the existence of the
Shah was proven and that they should be dated from 2070 to 1600 BCE.
This publication provoked a huge controversy and many western scholars suspicious of both
the motives and the methodologies of project members rejected its findings.
Professor David Niverson of Stanford University went so far as to claim that he would quote
tear the report into pieces.
Chinese media responses counted that these western critics were nothing more than modern
day imperialists determined to reject any idea that the foundations of eastern civilization
might be almost as ancient as those of western civilization.
Despite three subsequent academic conferences to debate the evidence and the findings the
controversy continues and the dates to be honest with you even the very existence of
the Shah continues to be one of the most vexed questions in ancient East Asian history.
What we have seen in this lecture is that from its origins in the Paleolithic the old
stone age era Chinese history followed a developmental trajectory very similar to that of western
and southern Eurasia.
That is following the transition to agriculture small villages appear in the river valleys
particularly and some of these gradually evolve into more substantial towns in which powerful
rulers begin to emerge.
But remember early Chinese history is also unfolding against this backdrop of continual
interactions between these sedentary farming communities and militarized horse riding step
nomads that tension is critical to their development.
Late in the third millennium before the common era a host of regional cultures were replaced
in northern China by a substantial culture which might well be the same as the Shah dynasty
of ancient Chinese historical record.
As we will see next time in fact in the next two lectures we are on much firmer footing
with the emergence of the powerful Shang dynasty sometime around 1600 BCE it is the
Shang who were responsible for the emergence of so many of the cultural foundations of
eastern civilization, ancestor worship, the patrimonial system of hereditary power, elaborate
burials and tombs, sophisticated metallurgy and the first organized system of writing
in East Asia.
See you next time.
