In 1899, in the final years of the Qing dynasty, which as we'll see much later in the course
was the last dynasty ever to rule China, a scholar and high ranking government official
Wang Yirong was very sick with malaria.
His friend and fellow scholar Liu I was visiting him helping to prepare Wang's medicine.
For years, practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine had been selling the so-called dragon
bones to help treat a variety of illnesses, as these two scholars well knew.
These bones had been unearthed by Chinese farmers for hundreds, perhaps even thousands
of years and sold to pharmacists.
Ground up turtle shell fragments in particular were thought to be the best treatment for
malaria, while the powdered bones of animals were used to treat open wounds.
The story goes that as Liu and Wang were about to grind some turtle shell into powder to
treat Wang's malaria, they noticed that the shell was covered in a series of strange markings.
These two scholars had spent much of their lives examining the inscriptions on ancient
Chinese bronze artifacts and they quickly noticed a striking similarity between the
turtle shell markings and the bronze inscriptions.
With mounting excitement or so we read, they realized that the symbols they could see on
the turtle shells must be some form of ancient Chinese writing.
Now this story might be somewhat exaggerated and it's not really known for sure how Wang
and Liu actually came across these dragon bones, but this is the story that has gone
into folklore.
Wang has received the credit from historians for being the first person to recognize the
significance of these symbols and his friend Liu Er was the first scholar to publish a
book on what has since been known as the Oracle Bones.
Word about the bones spread quickly amongst collectors of Chinese antiquities and the
market for the former dragon now Oracle Bones exploded.
Scholars and collectors tried to trace the bones and shells back to some source of origin.
Some antique dealers perhaps deliberately trying to mislead their rivals claimed that
the bones came from a place called Tangyin in Henan province.
Situations of uncontrolled digging followed at all sorts of sites across northern China
in particular and eventually many Oracle Bones did turn up in private collections in the
West.
By 1928 when the Institute of History and Philology was established at the Chinese Academy
the source of the Oracle Bones had been traced back to Anyang, the great city of Anyang.
The official archaeological excavations that followed and which continued up until the Japanese
invasion in 1937 uncovered some 20,000 Oracle Bone pieces all of which were then shipped
to Taiwan on the eve of the communist takeover of mainland China in 1949.
Once the inscriptions on the bone fragments were deciphered scholars realized that these
were the priceless records of the divinations performed for or by various ancient royal households
hence the name the Oracle Bones.
As we saw in our last lecture this became the first material evidence for the extraordinary
Shang dynasty whose existence had until then been doubted by many scholars.
This 1937 the discovery by archaeologists of the five great capital cities of the Shang
along with many superb royal tombs like that of Lady Hao has only confirmed, further confirmed
what the Oracle Bones first implied.
But the collection of Oracle Bones that survives as of last count I think close to 200,000
is still only a fraction of what must have existed before Chinese pharmacists began grinding
them up perhaps as far back as during the Han dynasty 2000 years ago to treat malaria
and other illnesses.
As Chinese scholar Xu Yahui put it so succinctly in 2002 no one can know how many Oracle Bones
prior to 1899 were ground up by traditional Chinese pharmacies and disappeared into people's
stomachs.
In this second lecture on the mighty Shang dynasty which ruled you might remember from
roughly 1600 to 1050 before the common era I want to outline for you three important
contributions the Shang made to East Asian civilization.
First let's continue with this discussion of the Oracle Bones and the insight they provide
particularly on the origins of Chinese writing.
Then let's consider some of the translations of the Oracle Bones in terms of the evidence
they provide for Shang religious practices and also for the organization of Shang society.
And finally I want to conclude this lecture by saying something about one of the core
cultural and philosophical beliefs, ideologies of Eastern civilization, the concept of Yin
and Yang.
First then what can we say about the origins of Chinese writing which as I mentioned in
the last lecture went on to become the writing system of virtually all of East Asia.
Unlike the beginning of most other writing systems for example those of ancient Mesopotamia
or Egypt the origins of Chinese writing are actually very difficult to trace.
Some Chinese scholars believe that incised or painted marks found on pre-dynastic Chinese
pottery might be evidence of early writing but none of these glyphic characters matches
those found on the Oracle Bones and therefore it's really impossible for scholars to make
a connection between these pottery markings and the fully worked out writing system that
we find on the Oracle Bones.
Other often Western scholars have argued that Chinese writing was important from outside
of China.
Here's another cultural diffusion model but really there is no evidence whatsoever to
support this argument.
The great majority of specialists in this field now agree that the Chinese script first
appeared sometime before 1200 BCE during the Shang dynasty.
In other words this was a purely Chinese invention and a tribute to the superb organizational
capacity of the Shang.
There are many incorrect ideas about Chinese writing that persist in the West.
For example many of you perhaps might believe that Chinese script consists solely of pictographs.
Pictographs are literally stylized representations, really pictures of the object being named
like the sun or the moon.
Some Chinese characters are indeed pictographic but they constitute only a very small percentage
of the total.
Now others believe that Chinese writing consists mostly of ideographs which are symbols that
represent more complex concepts, ideas really but both these symbol types although they
do exist in the Chinese writing system they actually do so in very small number.
In fact it is logographs that make up over 80% of all Chinese characters.
Now logographs are symbols formed of two elements.
The first the semantic element if you like suggests the meaning of the word.
The second the phonetic element gives some clue about how this word should sound, how
it should be pronounced.
For example the Chinese word for mother mu is expressed by the semantic element or character
for a woman followed by a second character that contains the phonetic element or character
for mu.
But the Chinese word for scald is also mu with a different tone sound as you can hear.
This is expressed by the semantic element or character for mouth followed by the same
phonetic character for mu.
The writing found on the oracle bones of the late Shang dynasty was already developed enough
to include complete sentences and it is this ancient script that evolved into the standard
logographic writing system still in use in China to this very day.
A system which also became the basis for many other East Asian writing systems including
Korean and Japanese although I do need to point out that the Koreans later replaced
the Chinese characters with their own unique system known as Hangul and will have a lot
more to say about that later in the course.
We'll also have much more to say about the influence of Chinese language and writing
on Korean and Japanese language and writing as this course unfolds.
The ancient origins and consistency of the Chinese writing system means that the Chinese
are thinking justly claim to have had more or less the same writing system in place for
at least 3,200 years.
Imagine for a moment if we were still using Mesopotamian cuneiform script today or Egyptian
hieroglyphs today such as the incredible durability of Chinese writing.
The beginning of most ancient writing system seems by the way to be bound up in list making
generally to create accounts or lists of resources that are being collected as tribute
by the state or perhaps being donated to a temple.
Now we don't have this sort of list making ancestor for Chinese writing.
It might be true that the Chinese writing system evolved from an earlier accounting system
but frankly we have absolutely no evidence of this.
In all these early systems whatever their original purpose it is really surprising how
quickly lists of things or accounting led on to attempts to write down much higher order
thinking even abstract and theoretical ideas.
Think about this for a moment within just a few centuries of the emergence of Sumerian
cuneiform writing for example the system proved capable of constructing a complex epic masterpiece
like the epic of Gilgamesh perhaps many of you have read that.
The same appears to be true in China where as we've seen the shun kings were able to
use their symbols to write complete sentences on the oracle bones and to ask complex abstract
symbolic questions of their gods.
The question of how ancient Chinese characters were pronounced remains a particularly vexed
one however.
It might be purely accidental that the Shang scribes developed this logographic script rather
than a phonetic one phonetic of course comes from the ancient Phoenician people who first
devised a phonetic alphabet actually millennia before we're talking about now but this logographic
system becomes dominant in most other ancient Eurasian writing systems but we can't state
that Chinese is entirely un-phonetic because as I've already noted the logographic characters
do contain this phonetic component that's supposed to indicate how the character should
sound.
The problem is for historians over the millennia these sounds have changed considerably so
that it is frankly virtually impossible today to know precisely how the ancient Chinese pronounced
many of these symbols.
So to be honest with you the pronunciations of many of the words, the titles, the names
I'm using in this course are based on the assumptions of specialists in classical Chinese
language but in reality these are little more than informed guesses.
In any case accidental or not the adoption of a logographic system had tremendous consequences
for Chinese and indeed all of Eastern civilization.
This script was so fiendishly difficult that it required many years of study to master and
this led to the emergence of a highly educated literary elite which went on to become the
scholar bureaucrat class as we'll see the great Confucian scholars who came to dominate
Chinese and East Asian governments and culture and the system really is complicated.
Even the oracle bones which as we know are the earliest and theoretically simplest form
of Chinese writing contain some 4,500 different characters.
A well educated Chinese reader today would have mastery of somewhere between 5,000 and
7,000 characters and knowledge of around 3,000 characters is necessary even to read a standard
mainland Chinese newspaper.
The government of the People's Republic of China defines literacy as mastery of 2,000
characters, compare that to our 26 letters in the alphabet by the way, but a large unabridged
dictionary of Chinese language like the great Kung Shi dictionary lists the meaning of
some 40,000 different characters.
Now one of the early scholars who learned to master this challenging system soon acquired
great respect and power in ancient Chinese society.
In some ways the scholar bureaucrats of Eastern civilization were similar to the powerful
scribal classes that appeared in Mesopotamia and Egypt but frankly the fiendish difficulty
of the Chinese written language was on another level altogether.
But this script also helped with the process of assimilation of the various peoples and
ethnicities who as we've discussed were dwelling all over ancient China.
Those elite members of these different ethnic groups simply had to learn Chinese, I mean
for all sorts of practical pragmatic reasons, to communicate with the authorities, to trade,
to study Chinese literature and Chinese philosophy and so on and a host of other reasons.
Because of that these alien people if you like were inevitably drawn deeper and deeper into
the rich culture of the Chinese.
As well as providing insights into the fascinating origins, well fascinating to me, of Chinese
writing, the oracle bones also offer compelling evidence of the type of government, the sort
of religion and the type of society constructed by the Shang dynasty.
Indeed despite the wealth of archaeological discoveries that we have discussed, the material
evidence by far the most important source for the Shang dynasty, particularly I think
a system of government, remains this great cache of oracle bones.
In essence the way the system worked is that the king would have a question written, chiseled
under the bone or the shell, addressed to his ancestor spirits.
The king's priests would then put a very hot bronze tool inside the shell or the bone and
together monarch and priest would interpret the answer by the way the bone cracked.
The oracle bone divination was a way of using ancestral spirits to communicate with the
deities and of course as you'd imagine was always part of a great ritual that included
music and bronze bells and human and animal sacrifice.
The oracle bone inscriptions along with other inscriptions found on thousands of Shang
bronzes by the way show us how deeply this notion of ancestor worship was embedded in
Shang religion and government.
The Shang kings believed that their ancestors played a hands on role in the daily life and
fortunes of the state.
This reminds me of an interesting parallel with the Inca kings of South America who had
a very similar belief but with the Inca the mummified body of the dead ancestors literally
had to be physically present in the royal chamber for the king to receive the advice
from his dead ancestors.
That was not the case with the Shang.
The Shang kings would ask their ancestor spirits to intercede with the supreme deity
Di the lord on high to ensure good harvests to avoid calamities and disasters in war for
example.
All this meant that the power and legitimacy of the Shang king depended to a certain extent
on the success of his ancestors at communicating with Di.
The critical role played by these spirits of dead ancestors in everyday life explains
why so much attention was paid to death and to burials.
Remember we saw in our last lecture all of the Shang elites from the king down to the
lesser members of the family were buried in tremendous style.
These tombs were enormous, again I say that from personal experience, very expensive to
construct and the royal burial chambers were connected to the surface by a large number
of long steeply angled ramps down which the burial materials and the sacrificial victims
were led.
And as we saw particularly with the fortunately unrobed tomb of Lady Howell the burial chambers
were filled with lavish objects, expensive objects of art.
The numbers of sacrificial victims found in the tombs up to several hundred individuals
both voluntary and involuntary individuals is further evidence of the importance of the
burial of the special dead whose spirits were expected to survive and remain in contact
with both the gods in heaven and their elite successors here on earth.
Now this is important I think, ancestor worship is one of the key foundational ideas of eastern
civilization.
From its first appearance in the Shang dynasty this notion that there is an obligation of
living family members to provide dead family members with comfort and well-being in the
afterlife has continued for more than 3,000 years.
As we'll see fairly soon in the series the practice soon gets bound up with confusion
notions of filial piety which is essentially respect and loyalty for parents and elders
and it becomes a way of demonstrating this respect even after the death of one's parents.
I'd have to say that the practice is declining today in many parts of modern China particularly
the huge cosmopolitan cities but it is still very much alive and well in rural areas and
in Taiwan.
Oracle bone records exist only for the last nine kings of the Shang by the way.
From roughly 1200 to 1050-1045 BCE they begin with the reign of Wu Ding and end with the
reign of the last Shang king Di Xin.
The practice was actually continued by the successors of the Shang the Zhou dynasty as
we'll see in our next lecture and many oracle bones actually date to the early years of
the Zhou reign.
While the oracle bones offer enormously important insights into Shang government, religion and
ancestor worship, they've also been tremendously useful for social historians, for historians
interested in the everyday life in Shang society.
From the bones we've learned for example about Shang farming techniques, their methods for
domesticating animals, how illnesses were treated, how the sophisticated legal system
operated, even how textile manufacturing specifically silk manufacturing was being organized.
We also learn though that this is a rigidly hierarchical society and that this hierarchy
of the Shang was a reflection or a parallel of a similar order, a similar hierarchy in
heaven.
So in the real world the king was at the pinnacle of this hierarchical social structure with
the lesser elite scribes and administrators arranged and a carefully worked out descending
status level below.
Actually the king and his priests through the intermediary of the dead ancestors of course
could communicate with the supreme deity Di.
At the bottom of the social structure were the peasants, this is such a common theme
in China's history, who had no mobility and few rights.
These were subsistence farmers, they're growing millet, wheat, rice in the south, barley,
they had learned to domesticate pigs, dogs, sheep, oxen and of course silkworms and they
did all this on very small plots of land with only primitive wooden or stone tools.
As we'll see in our next lecture, this social inequality was partly responsible from the
next big political revolution in Chinese history.
I mentioned that the heavenly world was a virtual mirror of Shang society.
So in the heavenly world Di is the supreme god, atop a similarly hierarchical social
structure.
Below Di then are the gods who control the rivers, the mountains, the lakes, indeed all
the aspects of nature that were home to spirits and connecting these two realms, these two
hierarchical worlds were the royal ancestor spirits.
The hereditary Shang king and his ancestral advisors were thus the sole link between the
people and the spirit world.
Now as was the case throughout the entire ancient and even really pre-modern world,
this mix of sacred and secular power gave the Shang kings enormous claims to legitimacy,
but it also came with a huge responsibility, particularly if the heavenly prophecies were
proven wrong and calamities ensued.
And this in turn leads me to the final aspect of Shang culture I want to talk with you about,
the emergence of the foundational eastern spiritual philosophy under the Shang dynasty,
one that I know you've all heard of, that of Yin and Yang.
It's the oracle bones again that provide us with the earliest evidence of the original
meaning of this defining cultural idea.
Indeed the earliest Chinese characters for Yin and Yang are found in inscriptions made
on some of the oracle bones.
In these prophetic inscriptions the symbols for Yin and Yang are used in a very practical
way.
They describe natural phenomena like weather conditions, particularly they describe the
movement of the sun.
So the Yang symbol is used to show sunlight during the day.
The Yin symbol suggests a lack of sunlight at night.
There's no real suggestion in the oracle bones that these two symbols had any deeper philosophical
or spiritual significance under the Shang.
But whatever their original function might have been, the concept of Yin and Yang became
deeply embedded in the sort of collective Chinese psyche and evolved into a complex philosophy
that persists and not just within the bounds of eastern civilization to this day.
Now the earliest comprehensive dictionary we have of the meaning of Chinese characters
is the Shuo Wen Jiu Tzu compiled during the early Han dynasty.
We'll have more to say about that in a couple of lectures from now.
The dictionary shows us that by 100 BCE then the Yin and Yang symbols have acquired a considerably
more complicated meaning since their first appearance 1100 years earlier.
Yin is now described as a closed door as darkness as the south bank of a river or the north
side of a mountain.
Yang is explained as height, as brightness, as the south side of a mountain, the side
that would catch the sun of course.
Now some scholars believe that these meanings of Yin and Yang must have originally come
from just the everyday life experiences of the Shang and Zhou dynasty people.
The peasants obviously depended on sunlight for their daily lives.
When the sun came out they left their homes and went to the fields to work.
When the sun went down they returned home to rest.
This way of life, this natural way of life based on the cycle of day and night might
have led to the idea that Yang, the sun, must be associated with movement and activity whereas
Yin must be associated with rest and passivity.
In their earliest use on the oracle bones Yin and Yang seemed to exist as independent
entities that were not necessarily connected as far as we can see.
But then we do find clear references to the two characters being used together in a verse
from a later Zhou dynasty classic, The Book of Songs.
It's used in this way, viewing the scenery at a hill looking for Yin Yang.
Now the two symbols are running together.
The implication here is that Yang is the sunny side of the hill and Yin the shady.
But the verse also suggests that this effect of the sun and lack of sun exists all over
the hill at the same time.
You can imagine the clouds moving and the sun and the shade coexisting on the hill.
By the late Zhou dynasty a philosophical school had emerged that actually bore the name of
Yin Yang.
As we'll see in our next lecture, the late Zhou dynasty is one of the most intellectually
creative eras in all of Chinese history when many of the great philosophies of eastern
civilization first emerged.
The fact that the great Han dynasty historian Sima Tan lists this Yin Yang school alongside
just five others, including the Confucian, Moist, Legalist, Fatalist and Dour schools.
This suggests that by the Han dynasty, by 100 BCE, Yin Yang had already become one of
the major philosophical concepts of Chinese civilization.
By the Han, we know that Yin Yang had become associated with an astrological philosophy
that attempted to work out a genuine cosmology in a metaphysical manner.
But I think the most enduring interpretation of Yin Yang relates to its association with
the concept of qi, which essentially translates to vital energy.
In this interpretation, both Yin and Yang are seen as qi energy that operates in a balanced
form, think of that light and shade on the hill at the same time, operates in a balanced
form everywhere in the universe, just like the possibility of sunlight and shade playing
a role on the same hillside at the same time.
And in another of the great Zhou dynasty classics, the book of history, we see the argument appear
that Yin and Yang need to exist in balance to ensure the harmony of the entire cosmos.
So it becomes critically important to maintain the perfect balance of these elements in the
cosmos, in earthly society and also, frankly, within our own human body.
As we'll see in a future lecture, this fascinating philosophy with its roots in the natural cycle
of day and night, described by symbols that first appear in a very simple form amongst
the earliest examples of Chinese writing, would go on to be used as an argument for
political legitimacy by various governments and also, frankly, as a means to justify the
subordination of women, the Yin, by men, the Yang.
We have so much more to explore in coming lectures about the extraordinary beliefs of
Eastern civilization and their continuing relevance to the modern world.
A perfect example of that, of course, is the fact that the Yin Yang symbol remains ubiquitous
all over the world now in both the East and the West in the 21st century.
I look forward to joining you again next time as we plunge into the troubled world of the
Zhou dynasty and explore the context in which the next major group of foundational ideas
would appear, including the three great philosophies of China, legalism, Taoism and of course, Confucianism.
