Many of the competitive states that had been dominant during the spring and autumn period
were crushed in the warring states period and formerly insignificant states became well
organized and powerful. The states of Qin and Zhu in particular fought wars on a scale
never seen before in human history until the Qin eventually defeated Zhu at the Battle
of Danyang in 312 BCE. But even then China had to wait for almost another century to
pass before it was reunited under the control of a single dynasty and leader. This was the
context in which great philosophers continued to debate their calamitous times. Looking for
the sort of answers Confucius had sought to the problems of a society torn apart by warfare
and ambitious unethical officials. During the century that followed Confucius' death,
the Confucian innovations we discussed last time had become standard features of late
Zhou society, particularly the idea of the professional teacher and a specialized curriculum
for the education of the Juntsa, the princelings. The text chosen by Confucius and his disciples
were copied and circulated in their thousands and great intellectuals offered interpretations
and commentary upon their meaning. So many great philosophical minds were active that
the entire later Zhou dynasty has come to be known as the period of the 100 schools.
Frederick Mott describes it as the golden age of Chinese philosophy. So isn't it ironic
that this period of brutal war is also recognized as perhaps the single most significant formative
period of Eastern intellectual history? A handful of these schools and the text they
produced went on to become the foundational philosophies of the Eastern tradition, the
product of the best of these great thinkers who grappled with the political chaos of their
times. In this course with so much fascinating material to cover, we must have necessity
focus on the most influential of the 100 schools, the big three of Chinese philosophy if you'll
permit me to be so cliched, Taoism, Legalism and Confucianism. Sadly, this means that we
have almost no time to devote to another fascinating philosophy of the late Zhou, Moism, the intellectual
invention of a skilled carpenter from Shandong province named Motsi. I can tell you briefly
though that Moism was strongly opposed to both Confucianism and Taoism, which is what
we'll be talking about in our next lecture. But like the key figures of both these ideologies,
Motsi also spent much of his life wandering from kingdom to kingdom during the warring
states era trying to dissuade rulers from waging their bloody campaigns. Motsi differed
from the Confucians by emphasizing self-reflection and personal authenticity rather than obedience
to ritual as being the key to moral cultivation. In the midst of the challenging context of
the warring states, Motsi argued that humans learn best about the world through adversity
and their responses to personal setbacks. His approach thus demarded continual self-reflection
on both one's successes and one's failures in life because it is only through this continuous
honest reflection that humans can attain true self-knowledge, something denied to those
who only know how to conform to ritual. In the key text of the philosophy of Moism,
much of which was lost over the centuries, particularly during a period of book burning
during the Qin dynasty, an event that we will be discussing in a lecture pretty soon, Motsi
argued that the people of the late Zhou need to lead a life of asceticism and self-restraint.
They need to renounce any form of material or spiritual extravagance.
Now despite dying sometime around 390 BC, Motsi is still remembered today in modern Chinese
children's culture because of a famous story known as the Thousand Character Classic. In
this tale, which uses a thousand Chinese characters, we read that Motsi was saddened
when he saw pure white silk being dyed with vibrant colors because to him the pure white
silk was the perfect embodiment of his conception of authenticity, austerity and simplicity.
As influential as Motsi's ideas were during the late Zhou era, no other philosopher had
attained the stature of the master, Kong Fuci, nor come to dominate any of the hundred schools
the way that Confucius had. His disciples, lacking his breadth of vision, seized upon
different narrower aspects of Confucian philosophy and explored these at the expense of the whole.
So a series of separate traditions or sub-schools of Confucianism emerged, one focused on the
idea of filial piety and the quasi-spiritual nature of Confucius' thinking.
Another of these sub-schools preferred to investigate the nature of ritual and started
to see formal ceremonies as a quasi-religious observance, much more so than Confucius himself
had ever intended. The third school of Confucians was more pragmatic, more practical, concerned
with the applications of their philosophy to the art of politics and government. And
a fourth group of Confucians became known in late Zhou intellectual circles for their
exploration of the metaphysical implications of Confucianism, what the Anilex might have
to say about the very meaning of existence. These various avenues that were pursued by
brilliant scholars after the master's death demonstrate the extraordinary capacity for
growth that Confucianism clearly possessed. The wide variety of schools that emerged were
an undoubted testament to the quality of the intellectuals who lived, but also of course
to the particular environment of the warring states period.
In this context and without wanting to distract us from our main purpose here, it is interesting
to compare the philosophical schools that emerged in culturally isolated China with
those that appeared in the far more culturally diverse and interconnected environment of
Hellenistic Western Eurasia. Now we spoke about this in our very first lecture because
of geography and the role of the nomads, China remained isolated from the rest of Eurasia
for the first couple of millennia of its history. This means that as far as we know, the Chinese
were unaware of the existence of any other complex civilization on the planet until the
early Han dynasty, 2nd century BCE, when as we will see in a lecture quite soon, China
came into contact with the rest of Eurasia for the first time with monumental consequences
for trade and exchange. So in the isolated but intellectually vibrant
late Zhou world, the diverse schools of Chinese philosophy evolved in this isolation. They
intermingled, they debated, they competed with each other for superiority. But the confusions
in their pursuit of several distinct aspects of Confucian teaching lost sight of the bigger
picture of the ethical and proactive heart of Confucianism. Later Confucians seemed content
in the explorations of these various strands of the master's philosophy in a manner frankly
also common to the followers of many other great intellectual innovators. One thinks
of the followers of Aristotle, for example, the various schools that he created, or much
later of Hegel, the radical Hegelians such as Karl Marx. But one individual, an itinerant
wandering scholar, much like the master had been, rediscovered the ability to conceive
of the whole and it is he who must be credited with saving Confucianism from potentially
permanent fragmentation and possible obscurity. This wandering scholar whose name was Mencius
is the second most important intellectual in the history of Confucianism. Mencius and
his successor Sunca, who violently disagreed with Mencius on many of the precepts of Confucianism
are the subjects of the rest of this lecture. Let's first turn to Mencius who live from
as far as we can tell approximately 371 to 289 BCE. A century after the death of Confucius,
an infant named Mencu, later Latinized to Mencius, was born in the state of Zu in modern
Shandong province, coincidentally or not less than 20 miles south of the birthplace of Confucius.
In many ways, his life mirrored that of his self-professed though by now long dead mentor,
Confucius. Like Confucius, he was frustrated by his inability to ever gain an influential
position as a political advisor and he too spent much of his life traveling from court
to court seeking employment. And like Confucius, he is best known today because of a book called
The Mencius, which he did not actually write. Mencius has gone down in history as the second
great philosopher of the Confucian tradition, partly because he epitomized the itinerant
scholar-teacher model that the master had created. As wandering scholars like Mencius
turned up in the courts of all the ruling families of the warring states, their reputations
preceded them. From everything we read, it becomes clear that Mencius was recognized
as the most learned man of his day and was also acknowledged by the Confucians as the
spokesman for the entire philosophy. Because of this, he was able to restore to Confucianism
the cohesion that had threatened to dissolve during the preceding century. But despite
this reputation, Mencius was deeply frustrated throughout his life by his inability to obtain
any sort of high office. He believed that he had the knowledge and ability to reform
the world of the warring states period, but no court offered him the opportunity to demonstrate
this. So like Confucius, he was forced to take on students to survive and with the exception
of his students, most of his philosophical innovations were largely ignored during his
lifetime. But recognition steadily followed during all the subsequent dynasties that followed.
And by the Song dynasty, some 1200 years later, his theories about government and human nature
were recognized as some of the towering achievements of Confucian philosophy. Mencius made major
contributions to Confucian philosophy in, I think, two distinct areas. Actually, we
could say in two incomplete aspects of the master's own ideas that had become sources
of great contention amongst later Confucian thinkers. The solutions he came up with seemed
to go beyond any record we have of Confucius' own thinking, but they also seemed like very
logical extensions of Confucian views. The two areas that most interested Mencius were
human nature and political theory. Let's consider this latter interest first. Confucius and
his disciples had recognized the existence of the state as a logical extension of the
need for humans to associate with each other in some form of society. This implied that
some form of a state must exist to facilitate this social association. Because Confucius
and indeed all of the China of that time had only ever known one type of state, the monarchy,
it was, I guess, tacitly assumed that this was the only type of state that could actually
exist. But Mencius saw other possibilities now because two types of states existed in
the warring states period. The monarchy was certainly still in place, but now also the
more nakedly ambitious military state ruled by someone we would call a warlord today.
Mencius, acutely aware of the chaos and the suffering of his times, was bitterly opposed
to the second type of state. In a radical declaration, he argued that when a ruler stops
acting like a king, he has lost the right to rule. The people then have the right to
rebel against and even murder the tyrannical leader who no longer deserved to be king.
At the heart of this argument was the assumption that the state exists for the people, not
the other way around. The most important people in the state therefore are the people, not
the rulers. And the so-called mandate of heaven was essentially the people giving legitimacy
to the rulers, not some abstract notion of heavenly endorsement. Now this was clearly
something of a radical redefinition of the mandate of heaven, which we discussed in an
earlier lecture, which is one of the key foundations of Eastern civilization that will keep reoccurring
throughout this course. The early Joe, you will remember, had claimed that the mandate
to govern had been bestowed upon them by an impartial heaven. And now Mencius was arguing
that it was in fact the people, not the gods who gave legitimacy to rulers, so that the
people also had the right to withdraw the mandate in the case of tyrannical rule.
Here's how Mencius expressed some of his political thinking, certainly both in his own actions,
and paraphrased somewhat from the great work of his name, the Mencius. Firstly, he anticipated
that a new order would arise to replace the warring states, and that this would be founded
by a new type of king. He told many of the current kings to their faces that the common
people in their state were more important than they were. Certainly he did justify the
right of kings to rule, but he also urged these kings to sack their relatives if they
were not doing their jobs properly. And finally, Mencius explicitly approved of rebellion
and tyrannicide if that was what a ruler and his failed state deserved. Now as radical
as Mencius's political theories were, he's perhaps even better known today for his theory
on human nature. Confucius did have something to say about the basic quality of humans,
you'll remember, urging the junsa to concentrate on developing their goodness and benevolence,
ignoring the superficial attractions of profit or personal gain. You remember from the Analex,
the nobleman does what is right, the lesser man does what is profitable. In the century
that followed the death of Confucius, all sorts of theories of human nature had emerged
that humans were essentially good or bad or somewhat neutral. Mencius argued that all
humans were inherently born good, but that they were often corrupted by life experiences
and thus developed bad tendencies. But he had absolutely no doubt that all humans were
born with the inherent and innate seeds of goodness within them, including the four Confucian
virtues. It was therefore the duty of humans to let these moral virtues germinate and flourish
within for although they might be obscured by life experiences, they could never be entirely
extinguished. Furthermore, every single human had birth as the potential to be a great sage
and ultimately this should be the lifelong quest of every man, woman and child on the
planet. That's something else I constantly remind my university students by the way.
As Mencius put it, the sage too is the same in kind as other men. The only real difference
between a sage and ordinary men is that the sage has put in the hard work of study and
reflection necessary to develop their ethical and intellectual facilities. That's another
very good reminder for students right there. All of us have this potential, but only through
effective education and let's not forget that Confucianism is at its very heart an argument
strongly advocating the transformative potential of education. So only through education and
dedication can we develop the four primary virtues we are born with and achieve the level
of a sage. This profound argument alone helped maintain Confucianism as the most essentially
humanistic, dignified and indeed optimistic of all China's ancient philosophies. It is
still at the core of Confucianism today or what we might more properly call Neo-Confucianism,
New Confucianism as demonstrated by the pronouncements made by intellectuals that I mentioned earlier
and even by television drama producers in the 21st century who want to espouse a Confucian
message in the hope of improving both individual behavior and that of the society at large.
But these essentially optimistic political and social theories articulated by scholar
teachers like Confucius and Mencius who let's not forget had no practical experience in
politics seemed naive and unworkable to many others including the last great Confucianist
of the late Joe period Suntsa who will turn to now.
Suntsa lived again approximately from 312 to 221 BCE. That means he was born about 20
years before the death of Mencius and although his first 50 years are shrouded in mystery
his life also shared some similarities with the lives of Confucius and Mencius. Like both
of them he was born in northern China and he was also acknowledged as one of the greatest
minds of his times and like his predecessors Suntsa also left behind a series of reflections
that were put together in a book known since as the Suntsa but unlike the two earlier masters
Suntsa may actually have written his own book. The Suntsa is also a far more systematic body
of Confucian reflection than either Confucius or Mencius or their scholars their students
ever produced. Suntsa was the third great intellectual who helped ensure the continuing relevance
of Confucian philosophy to all succeeding generations of Chinese and indeed East Asian
peoples. Despite these similarities there is one very big difference between Suntsa
and his predecessors. For Suntsa was actually successful in attaining a prestigious and influential
political position and thus gained a sort of practical experience in statecraft that
the others never had. Now to be honest this gave him a somewhat more jaundiced view of
human nature and his interpretation of the master's philosophy was at times so diametrically
opposed to that of Mencius that it's difficult sometimes to see them as members of the same
school. By way of orientation I could perhaps say Mencius is sometimes described as being
on the left wing of Confucianism and Suntsa on the right. After the obscure first half
of Suntsa's life we have many more solid biographical details about the second. We know that Suntsa
moved to the powerful state of Qi one of the seven megastates of the warring states period
where he taught at the the great state sponsored Jishya Academy. This was the intellectual
center for the entire warring states period. This position brought Suntsa into contact with
many of the great and powerful men of his times. We know for example that he was respected
and liked by King Qian of the state of Qi. We know that he debated politics and philosophy
with Lord Linwu in the court of the Zhou King. But Suntsa was later slandered in the Qi
court and was forced to move to the southern state of Chu which despite having been defeated
by the Qin at that bloody battle of Danyang in 312 the same year about that Suntsa had
been born was still a powerful state. In Chu he was employed as the magistrate of the region
of Lanling in today's Shandong province a very senior political appointment. But after
his employer Lord Junsen was assassinated in 238 BCE Suntsa lost his position although
according to most accounts he remained in that region for the rest of his life.
As a teacher Suntsa is best known for the impact two of his students had on the next
great political change in China's history. One of these students is the famous legalist
philosopher and advisor to the Han court Han Faitzu who we will meet in a later lecture.
The other was Li Si who went on to become a notorious advisor and first minister to
the great king of the state of the Qin who in turn became the first emperor of China
Qin Shuo Huanglin. I can promise you that we will definitely meet this extraordinary
ruler and his army of terracotta warriors in a lecture very soon. Because of his influence
on these two famous legalist students Suntsa has sometimes been seen as a sort of traitor
to Confucianism even as a proto legalist. But Suntsa remained absolutely faithful to
the Confucian ideals of ethical government and he shared Menchus' optimism about the
potential of all humans to improve themselves. His experience in statecraft, in practical
statecraft did lead him to advocate for the necessity of strong centralized government.
But like Mencius he also believed that rulers and governments existed to serve the good
of the people and that if they failed in this they could and should be deposed. Suntsa made
himself famous notorious even by declaring that human nature was essentially evil or
to be precise, greedy, lazy and lustful. Some scholars believe he did this deliberately
to try and distance himself from Mencius but also to try and catch his reader's attention
and win an independent name for himself. He also disagreed with Mencius that humans were
essentially born good arguing instead that if humans were left to their own devices human
society would descend into chaos and conflict. In the midst of the chaotic warring states
period such an opinion would seem eminently justified. But Suntsa did agree with Mencius
that humans have the capacity to improve. We can rectify these inherent flaws of our
nature through the construction of culture and civil society he argued. Indeed Suntsa
saw human culture as the noblest and clearest evidence of our ability to triumph over our
lamentable essential base nature. And like a good Confucianist he argued that personal
cultivation and formal education were the keys to this triumph of culture over our animal
instincts. It might also be worth noting here Suntsa's essential agnosticism. He did
not believe in life after death describing the dead as and I quote those without consciousnesses.
He believed that heaven or nature was completely oblivious to humans and simply went its own
way impervious to any calls, cries, prayers or rituals made by humans. It will reign or
not whatever sacrifices the people make he famously argued. Leaders should give up trying
to interpret natural phenomena as somehow instructive. Heaven pursues its course no
matter who sits on the throne. So Suntsa's version of Confucianism is clearly a product
of its particular pessimistic times. He lived in a period of great and often violent social
political change. So it was the destructive and negative aspects of human nature that
seemed most real to him. But having said that he never forgot the essential optimism of
Confucianism. The idea that everyone can change and improve through education and self-reflection
and also that all humans can overcome their base instincts through the construction of
a cultured civil society. Over the centuries that followed, the ideas and texts produced
by these three great early Confucians were destined to have a profound impact on the
evolution of Confucian philosophy. We will see that as Confucianism grew and proved
itself adaptable to dramatic changes in social, economic and political culture. So it became
ever more deeply entrenched at the intellectual heart of Chinese and Eastern civilization.
The fundamental optimism at the core of Confucianism explains why its adherence plays such a high
value on education, politics and direct intervention in public affairs. So as we've seen to that
end, Confucians actively sought government positions in which they could use their education,
use their skills to solve the very real political and social problems of their times. But for
many of their contemporaries, this optimism, this activist sense of being on a mission
somehow to transform society was seen as a waste of time and energy. So in the next
two lectures, we need to explore two radically different alternatives to this proactive Confucianist
approach, Taoism and Legalism, both of which were also destined to become foundational
principles of Eastern civilization.
