Several years ago, Chinese archaeologists uncovered the tomb of a high-ranking official
of the Qing dynasty who had died in the year 217 BCE.
Since the artifacts and grave goods discovered was a complete copy of the law codes of the
Qin who, as we will see very shortly, unified China under their banner at the end of the
warring states period and imposed a system of government and administration known as
legalism.
As we have repeatedly seen over the last several lectures, the warring states period
was a time of constant war, war on a scale never before seen in human history.
So when the Qin unified the states and ended this period, it was a landmark moment in Chinese
history and, frankly, in the history of Eastern civilization more broadly.
But what was behind legalism?
What was it about its codes that helped it succeed in governing and organizing where
everything else had failed?
The codes listed the punishments that were imposed for crimes and included a statement
that no one who broke the law would be immune to these punishments, including the ruler.
These punishments offer a gory catalogue of tortuous consequences that were meted out
for a wide range of infractions ranging from petty to serious, from the use of non-standard
weights and measures, for example, through to theft and violence.
Some of the punishments imposed by the Qin included enslavement, exile to the frontier
regions of Central Asia, where we'll be spending quite a bit of time in this course shortly,
mutilation, branding of the offender's face, amputation of hands or feet, castration, execution
by strangling, beheading, or something that was called slow slicing, sometimes also known
as the death of a thousand cuts where people were executed by slowly removing parts of
their body with a knife, and death by various other forms of torture followed by mutilation
of the corpse.
The Qin law codes also articulated a notion that most of us might find unusual or surprising,
that of collective punishment.
This meant that the responsibility for misconduct was wider than just the individual.
Entire communities, which might include the offender's family, neighbors, village, village
elders, could also be found guilty by association.
The justification for this was that because no individual ever acted in isolation, no man
is an island, remember, his or her actions must be representative of the community in
which they lived.
This also meant that members of the community who reported their neighbors' crimes would
be rewarded while those who didn't would receive the same punishment as the violator.
Welcome to the world of the Qin who use these strict law codes and harsh, legalist punishments
to first enforce order within their own state and then to crush their rival warring states.
This is what it took to establish the first unified Chinese Empire.
Ultimately, neither Taoism nor Confucianism were able to solve the problems of a bitterly
divided late Zhou dynasty China, but legalism was that philosophy of government that worked.
In 360 and 250 BCE, conflict between the megastates intensified as the warring states reached
its violent climax.
The major states of Qin, Wei, Zhao, Han and Qi fought stupendous battles in which entire
armies were destroyed, capital cities taken and alliances forged and broken.
An allied force of Han and Wei attacked the Qin in 298 and after three years of fighting
the Qin were forced to surrender the strategic Hangu Pass, but four years later the Han-Wei
partnership collapsed and a new alliance between Qin and Qi saw the rulers of these states
assume the titles of Emperor of the West and Emperor of the East.
But before long, Qi's power became so intimidating to the other states that an alliance of most
of these states was forged against them that in the end reduced their state to just two
cities.
By 278 BCE, the remaining great powers of the Zhou were Qin in the West and Zhao in the
North and Center.
By 265, all diplomatic relations between Qin and Zhao had broken down and war erupted between
Qin.
These two enormous well-armed armies reached the stalemate that lasted for three years but
eventually Zhao forces were surrounded.
Near starvation, they surrendered in September 260 BCE to the brutal Qin general Bai Qi
who annihilated the entire Zhao force.
This battle alone, we read, may have cost the lives of 400,000 men.
This was the political and military context in which the third influential body of late
Zhou dynasty thought emerged, legalism or the School of Law.
Now like Confucianism, like Taoism, legalism also saw its stability in an age of turmoil
but by focusing on strengthening the power of the King and the power of the state rather
than trying to create a more harmonious society.
These philosophers and statesmen, the most important of whom found employment in the
Qin court, argued that only through strict laws and through harsh punishments would it
be possible to achieve an orderly society.
They believed that humans were born evil and would only act virtually if they were forced
to by the state.
In the end, it was their arguments that prevailed and it was legalism that brought order back
to China.
But where did this highly pragmatic philosophy come from, who were its principal architects
and how did it become one of the great foundations of Eastern civilization?
To answer this, we need to consider the emergence and evolution of the entire concept of law
which in China dates back to those very first organized societies we discussed earlier in
the course.
In classical Chinese, the word for law is far which can be translated as fair or just.
Some scholars argue that far in its original usage was associated with notions of social
justice rather than with criminality.
Obviously a quite different understanding to the rationale behind the origins of law
in Western culture which always, right from the beginning, had to do with taboo and the
banning of certain behaviors.
A separate and quite different Chinese word, sing, emerged later to describe a system of
laws and punishments.
Now sing originally referred specifically to one punishment, the punishment of decapitation.
But the concept evolved to describe the general system of laws, the criminal code if you like
which included the punishment component.
Even as early as the Shang dynasty in the mid-second millennium BCE, we have some idea
of what these criminal punishments were.
Five classic penalties are outlined in the history of the Shang, the Shang Shun.
They are tattooing a symbol for prisoner on a criminal's face, disfigurement of various
types, castration, mutilation and death by various measures.
As written law started to appear in China, the meaning of sing expanded to include not
only criminal punishments but also eventually the entire system of state prohibitions whose
violation would result in these punishments.
Not surprisingly perhaps, the Confucians rejected the very idea of sing and advocated
instead for a system based not on formal law but on ethical cooperative behavior as a way
of achieving social cohesion.
The Confucians believed instead of the virtue of Li you remember which they understood as
a set of culturally and socially valued norms or understandings that would provide guidance
to proper behavior.
It was these behaviors that needed to be mutually agreed upon as acceptable or unacceptable
by all members of the community.
But this would lead ultimately to a successful and harmonious society.
So this in turn means that unlike written laws promulgated by a state, the norms of
Li are not fixed but rather change over time as a reflection of what society finds acceptable
in its own time and its own place.
Whatever the time and place however, when conflicts arise the Li have to be applied
and interpreted to produce a just result and restore the harmony of that society.
Opponents of Confucianism pointed out that in the absence of any systematic safeguard
provided by codified laws this wide and loose interpretation of Li would surely be subject
to abuse.
And that's one of the reasons I noted in a previous lecture that certain modern Chinese
scholars reject the idea that Confucian systems of ethics can take the place of Western laws
or other less ambiguous systems of control in 21st century China.
In the last centuries of the warring states period a new group of scholars, the legalists
began to articulate a very different solution to the problems of social cohesion and acceptable
behavior.
Like those Confucians who under the influence of Mencius believed that humans were inherently
born good, legalists agreed with Sun Tzu that humans were born evil.
So the only way to achieve and maintain social order was to publicly promulgate clear laws
that carried with them the threat of severe punishment.
The legalists even borrowed from the Taoist concept of Wu Wei or disengagement by arguing
that the system of laws needs to be run objectively by the state itself and not by the ruler.
In this way the law would be impartial and beyond the influence or personal interference
of the ruler which also meant that no one would be above the law.
This experiment in achieving social order, the third of the great hundred schools we
are considering in this part of the course was tried out first in the most powerful of
all the late Zhou kingdoms, the Qin state, the Qin kingdom.
And because the Qin were eventually able to conquer their rivals and reunify China under
their hegemony, the laws and the system of legalism they put in place became a major
influence on subsequent Chinese and indeed more broadly Eastern civilization.
Even today of course a number of East Asian states, Singapore as a very good example here,
use quasi-legalist principles to maintain orderly societies.
Evidence I think of this long legacy and this continuing relevance of these legalist ideas
and their deep penetration into Eastern civilization.
So if you've been to Singapore you'll know this.
In Singapore today, caning is still used as corporal punishment for a range of offences
including serious offences, hostage taking, robbery, drug use, vandalism and rioting.
My point here of course is not to be critical of Singapore or any other state in which harsh
punishment is sanctioned by the legal codes, particularly as it could be argued and as
many of my students point out that many Western countries including the United States have
also embraced legalist systems of crime and punishment.
Speaking about this in another context it's worth noting that each of these influential
philosophies are evidence of the importance that Eastern civilization has always attached
to perfecting methods and mechanisms of government.
Confucius, Mencius, Suntsa, Laozi and Zhuangzi were all essentially offering theories which
they believed would create a more harmonious state under the direction of wise and benevolent
governments.
So legalism was just another of these experiments in improving the quality of statecraft and
social cohesion although it has never been as popular as Confucius or Taoism.
And this lack of popularity has meant that the influence of legalism on Chinese history
has often been downplayed because few subsequent scholars wanted to be seen publicly as advocates
of such a harsh and brutal system.
But despite all this, legalism was the experiment that worked.
Now its success was very much due to the brilliant thinking of two individuals who had the ability
and the opportunity to put the system into practice.
I'm talking about Shang Yang and Han Faitzu.
Legalism emerged from the insights of men like this who were actively involved in Chinese
political affairs between the 4th and 3rd centuries, BCE of course.
Both Shang Yang and Han Faitzu were political advisors in the court of the state of Qin
which gave them the opportunity to put their ideas into practice.
Shang Yang who lived approximately 390 to 338 was chief minister of the state of Qin
for more than 20 years between roughly 361 and 338 BCE.
His policies were so successful that he is credited by historians as being personally
responsible for launching the Qin on a course towards wealth and military power.
His ideas are found in a surviving text called The Book of Lord Shang.
The first really synthesized articulation of ideas that later came together under the
label of legalism.
This focused on the practical problems of organizing and maintaining an effective state
through political control rather than on the sort of ethical issues that concern the confusions
or concerns about living in harmony with nature that so fascinated the Taoists.
Indirect opposition to Mencius who frowned upon notions of power, profit and political
control.
The Book of Lord Shang embraces methods whereby rulers could increase their wealth, increase
their power including through the use of slave or coerced labor and by war.
Legalists returned to the ancient notion of far but for Lord Shang this meant putting
in place clear rules and clear inescapable punishments for infractions.
But a strong state required more than just clear laws for its subjects.
It also needed strict regulations for bureaucrats and the bureaucracy which the legalists called
Xu.
S-H-U.
Xu.
A third element was also seen as necessary to the successful functioning of a state.
That is the application of Xu S-H-I-H which can be loosely defined as force or power.
Discussions of Xu revolved around the most effective way to bring force to bear in the
context of competing power both within a state and between states.
Shang Yang was a clever and efficient administrator but he was despised and feared by the nobility
because of his power and ruthlessness.
Upon the death of his patron, Lord Xiao Jing of Qin, the incoming Duke Hui Wen, ordered
Shang Yang's execution.
His head and limbs were fastened to five chariots which tore his body to pieces.
A century after the death of Lord Shang, a young scholar named Han Fai Tzu which means
master fi of the Han found employment in the relatively weak state of Han.
Han Fai Tzu who probably lived between 280 and 233 BCE was destined to become the most
famous and systematic of all the legalists theorists.
But the beginning of his career was anything but illustrious.
Even in the small state of Han he found it difficult to get a political job because according
to the historian Sima Qian he suffered from a stammer which in an age of brilliant orators
was no small impediment.
Early in his career Han Fai Tzu became a student of the great Confucian Sun Tzu where
he befriended another student destined for fame and very high office Li Su.
As Han Fai Tzu began to write down his views on statecraft and to synthesize some of the
ideas he adopted from both Sun Tzu and the book of Lord Shang his former classmate Li
Su realized just how brilliant these ideas were.
Now Li Su was employed as first minister in the powerful Qin court and he brought Han
Fai Tzu's writings to the attention of his employer the young Qin Qin who was destined
to become the first emperor of China.
Like his mentor Sun Tzu Han Fai Tzu thought that left to their own devices humans would
always act in their own self-interest rather than for the good of the state.
To prove his case Han Fai Tzu pointed to the many examples from history where ministers
had betrayed their lords out of self-interest.
Now the situation in the warring states era was so critical he argued that desperate measures
were now called for.
Rulers had to abandon any illusions about a humane or ethical system of government and
instead base their rule upon the principle that everybody, everyone within the state
is acting out of self-interest.
So rulers should not trust ministers, members of their own family or their children.
Everyone will attempt to deceive them even their favourites.
As Han Fai Tzu put it and I quote, the ruler is easily beguiled by lovely women and charming
boys by all those who can fawn and play at love.
Far better then for the leader not to promote family or lovers but to place only the capable
and worthy in high government positions.
The more the ruler can govern his state in an impartial manner the longer his state will
survive.
Over the millennia that have followed history has judged Han Fai Tzu harshly condemning him
as the architect of royal tyranny and harsh punishments as someone who placed brutal pragmatism
above ethics.
He has even been compared to the great renaissance Florentine thinker Machiavelli in his cynical
political practicality.
But like Machiavelli more recent historians prefer to see Han Fai Tzu as a product of
his particular historical place and time as someone who genuinely wanted to see political
order restored to China after 500 years of bloody violence.
Some scholars now call Han Fai Tzu a genius and one of the most impressive political thinkers
of all time.
As I mentioned a moment ago it was Han Fai Tzu's former classmate Li Tzu the chief minister
of the powerful state of Qin who brought his colleagues' writing to the attention of his
lord.
But once the king of Qin became impressed with Han Fai Tzu's ideas Li Tzu apparently
out of jealousy planted suspicion in the king's mind about his former classmate's trustworthiness.
Li Tzu imprisoned Han Fai Tzu and sent him poison to drink, locked in prison with no
way of communicating or defending himself Han Fai Tzu drank the poison and died.
And so the legalist state the legalist ideology itself destroyed the two foremost architects
of the legalist doctrine Shang Yang and Han Fai Tzu.
But they left us with the enduring legacy of legalism a philosophy of statecraft very
much focused on law and punishment considered by some to be a doctrine of tyranny by others
to be the only hope for peace after centuries of war.
Where the confusions relied on custom on education on ethics as we've seen on social norms where
the Taoists relied on meditation on Wu Wei disengagement on living in harmony with nature
legalists put their faith in the law.
Both Shang Yang and Han Fai Tzu had been clear on this the only way to persuade individuals
to subordinate their interests to those of the collective the state was through strictly
enforced laws and harsh punishments again and understandably legalist principles of
government have never been popular in East Asia and you'd be hard pressed to find many
Chinese thinkers who have openly associated themselves with the legalist school yet the
practical principles of legalist government quickly produced remarkable results in the
state of Qin.
They found particular acceptance in this kingdom which by the third century was by all accounts
law abiding and well organized.
We have excellent eyewitness verification of this fact no less than the great Confucian
Sun Tzu who personally visited the Qin state in more or less the year 264 BCE and he commented
upon the awe the people felt for their officials on the serious and sincere way in which these
officials carried out their business.
Now when the nine year old King Zheng came to power in 247 came to the throne of the
state of Qin with the advice of his key minister Li Sur he led the Qin to victory after victory
in the final decade of the warring states period and really the final decade of the
Zhou dynasty the Qin crushed all their rivals to claim absolute power over China.
As we'll see actually in our very next lecture although the Qin dynasty survived for a very
few number of years its extraordinary achievements paved the way for the succeeding Han dynasty
which for 400 years emulated the Qin by governing China through a centralized and well organized
imperial administration.
These last four lectures have explored the later Zhou dynastic era this 500 year long
period of disunity and conflict that led to the emergence of at least a hundred different
philosophical schools each of which attempted in its own way to address the great problem
of their time by creating more effective government and a more harmonious society.
Of the hundred schools the great ideologies of Confucianism, Daoism and Legalism each
offered very clear alternatives about the proper role of the state the relationship of individuals
to government and the structure of a harmonious society.
The conception that emerged of what a well ordered well run state should look like has
frankly defined the Chinese national character and indeed virtually all eastern societies
through to the present day.
These are in my opinion amongst the greatest legacies of eastern civilization to the world
and represent the triumph of philosophers over the tragedy of the warring states.
In future lectures we will follow the continuing relevance of these ideas on the subsequent
2000 years of Chinese, of Korean, Japanese and Southeast Asian history and we will also
see the galvanizing impact these philosophies had on western civilization and that was discovered
by Jesuit missionaries to China and exported back to Europe during the age of enlightenment.
European scholars and philosophers were astonished when they learned about this vast well ordered
Chinese state which for thousands of years had been governed by complex bureaucratic institutions
and sophisticated political structures based on carefully worked out philosophies.
But it's also worth noting here a fundamental difference between these three Chinese philosophies
and western ideology.
In essence Confucianism, Daoism and Legalism are all promoting a collectivist mindset in
which the rights of the individual are to be subordinated to the rights of the state.
That is the necessity to create a harmonious successful society is more important than
the right of any individual to pursue his or her own self-interested destiny.
Is it going too far to suggest that this notion is fundamentally at odds with the opening
lines of the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America?
You know these lines, let me quote them.
We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal, that they're endowed
by the creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness.
Even today does this explain why the West continues to place so much importance on the
notion of individual human rights whereas many in East Asia value the success of the
collective over that of the individual.
I look forward to seeing you next time.
We will explore the extraordinary achievements of the great first emperor of China, Qin Shi
Huangdi.
I think frankly one of the most extraordinary men in all of world history and the first
emperor of a truly united China.
See you then.
