For thousands of years before this first Silk Roads era, most of the civilizations of ancient
Afro-Eurasia, those of the Indus Valley, of Persia, Mesopotamia, Egypt and the Mediterranean,
had all been interacting through trade and warfare.
Now the great civilization that had been missing from all this was, of course, China and Eastern
civilization more generally, sealed off from the beginning of its history behind those
formidable geographic barriers we've discussed and with only very limited contact with pastoral
nomadic communities.
Last time we followed the adventures of Han envoy Zhang Chan, whose expedition and subsequent
report to the Chinese Emperor Wu Di led directly to the dispatching of many subsequent Chinese
diplomatic and trade missions into Central Asia.
I meant to say last time that Zhang Chan is actually a national hero in China, even though
his I think largely unknown in the West, I've been to many fine museums in China where there
are tremendous displays on Zhang Chan, his statue is all over Northern China and I've
even seen superb map displays where children can push buttons and follow in lights his
journey through the heartland of Central Asia.
Following his expedition, this was the moment early in the first century BCE that Silk Roads
exchanges began in earnest and the ramifications for world history in general and for Eastern
civilization in particular were to be profound.
The thousands of years of isolation experienced by humans in East Asia had meant that many
of the distinctive qualities and beliefs of Eastern civilization that we've been considering
in this course developed in a sort of cultural vacuum in a part of the world that was tightly
sealed off from the rest of the civilized world.
Of course this also explains why these unique inventions of China and Eastern civilization
were so unique because they emerged in this isolated vacuum, nor had there been any sort
of Chinese empire before this moment in history.
Just a series of isolated and relatively small regional Chinese states ruled by a variety
of impressive though localized dynasties.
But as we've seen, all this changed during the 400 year long rule of the mighty Han dynasty.
The Han now found themselves in control of a genuine empire, a vast agrarian civilization
that expanded in all directions until it stretched from Vietnam to Korea and from the LAC deep
into the heart of Central Asia.
And this ushered in one of the great ages of Eastern civilization, a period of internal
unity, strong centralized bureaucratic government, but also a dynamic imperial expansion that
allowed Eastern civilization to join the existing Afro-Eurasian trading and exchange system
for the first time.
So now it was Chinese goods, Chinese technologies, even Chinese germs and ideas about the world
that began to spread out of the East and across the vast Afro-Eurasian world zone.
But at the same time, foreign ideas about religion, food, music, philosophy and art
also began to make their way eastwards for the first time to radically redefine many
of the cultural foundations of Eastern civilization.
And as we have seen, these extraordinary developments would you largely to two men,
Han Emperor Wu Di and his grand messenger, Zhang Jian.
In Wu Di's clearly enthusiastic response to Zhang Jian's detailed report, we see clearly
articulated, I think, a link between commercial profit or the possibility of commercial profit
and imperial glory, surely the major twin motivations behind the construction of all
the great empires in world history, certainly from the Han and the Romans right through
to the European colonial empires of the early modern period, who are destined to have such
an impact on Eastern civilization as we'll see later in the course.
It's hardly surprising then that soon after Zhang Jian's expedition, state support and
patronage of trade led quite quickly to the export of great quantities of raw Chinese silk
which made its way out of China and onto the silk roads destined for the patrician women
of far away Rome.
Before continuing our story of the silk roads, however, I should tell you that the term silk
roads is actually a relatively recent one.
We really have no idea whether the Romans or the Indians or Kushans or Chinese had any
particular generic name for this complex network of trade routes.
The term was actually coined in the late 19th century by a wonderful German geographer
and historian Baron Ferdinand von Richthofen, who was, here's a random fact for you, who
was coincidentally the uncle of the famous World War I flying ace Manfred von Richthofen,
the red baron.
It was Ferdinand von Richthofen who first used the German phrase die Seidenstraße,
the silk roads, to describe on the historical maps that he was drawing the trade routes
that had linked India, China, and the Mediterranean world through Central Asia.
Von Richthofen was a great adventurer, a great Chinese explorer, and he made seven journeys
to China between 1868 and 1872.
The term he chose for these trade routes seemed so appropriate that it has stuck ever since.
OK, let's turn to some of the seriously daunting geographical challenges that silk roads merchants
were faced with as they made their way out of China into Central Asia.
As I said in an earlier lecture, I think, limited migration and trade had been taking
place along these same routes, or parts of these routes at least, for millennia.
Given that the geography of Central Asia makes only a few paths through the mountains and
around the deserts viable, the hominids and the early human migrants that we met much
earlier in this course must have followed these same tracks as they migrated out of
Africa and headed thousands of miles to the east.
But the routes themselves did not get any easier.
So Chinese traders would have commenced their journey at the great early Han dynasty capital
of Chang'an, frankly one of the great imperial cities in world history.
By the way, this is very interesting I think, Chang'an translates as perpetual peace in
classical Chinese.
The name of the city was changed to Xi'an, which means Western peace, by the Ming dynasty
I think in the early 15th century.
Because the Ming rule from the relatively new capital of Beijing, which means Northern
capital, the decision to change the name of Chang'an probably reflects their attempts
to remove the claims of longevity I guess, of a great rival perpetual city, the capital
for 12 dynasties and therefore increase the validity of their own new capital of Beijing.
So now the city is just Xi'an, Western peace, but what an extraordinary city it still is.
We'll return to Chang'an several times before this course is finished.
The Chinese silk traders, having passed out of one of the great gates of Chang'an, now
followed the Great Wall of China westwards.
Remember the wall had been extended by Wu Di through the narrow Gansu corridor until
they reached the frontier oasis town of Dunhuang, which now became the staging post for the
Chinese caravans.
I have visited Dunhuang and it still has the feel and excitement of a frontier merchant's
town.
Although today the great herds of Bactrian camels that would have been tied up in the
main streets have been replaced by parking lots full of mopeds.
During the Han, this was also the most westerly military garrison town in China, a lush and
important oasis in an otherwise hostile desert environment, providing water, fresh food and
accommodation for merchants and soldiers.
Throughout the entire Silk Road's era, the great sand dune fringe city of Dunhuang provided
the only access both westward and eastward for traders and also, of course, for religious
pilgrims.
Today, if you get a chance to visit, go to the Macau caves just outside of the city
or the nearby Yulid grottoes, where you will find striking evidence of the role that the
region played not just in the transport of material goods, but in the dissemination of
religious and intellectual ideas.
These caves contain some of the greatest religious art galleries of the ancient world, thousands
of magnificently realized and vividly colored Buddhist and Taoist wall paintings.
Now from Dunhuang, the caravans were faced with two alternative routes, both long, both
challenging and both circumnavigating the formidable Taklamakan Desert.
No surprise, Central Asia contains some of the most inhospitable deserts in the world,
little water, little vegetation, little wildlife.
Frequent sandstorms whipped the loose and fragile surface into a frenzy, burying anything
in their path.
I've experienced some of these storms myself and frankly the best thing you can do is just
put your head down and hang onto your camel.
The Taklamakan Desert is referred to by many local names, including the land of irrevocable
death.
I often wonder, is there any other kind of death?
Or if you go in, you will never come out.
But the name Taklamakan, it's hard to pin down the word.
It might be of yuiga origin, meaning to leave alone, to abandon.
Or it might be a Turkic word, meaning the place of ruins.
We really don't know for sure.
But any one of these definitions gives you some sense of the forbidding nature of this,
the 17th largest desert on earth, and help explain why the Taklamakan functioned for
so long as a natural barrier between east and west.
Venturing into the interior of the desert was virtually impossible.
Even today you can only do so with the proper equipment and supplies.
The traders did have a viable way around this barrier, and that was to follow ancient
pathways to the north or south, which skirted the edges of this great oval-shaped desert.
The Taklamakan is surrounded by enormous snow-covered mountain ranges, the mighty Kunlun Massif in
the south, the Parmias to the west, and the Tianshan, or heavenly mountains, to the north.
Living snows and rainfall from these mountains help sustain thriving oasis towns like Yaqan,
Khotan, and Tuofan, which survive at the fringes of the desert.
And it was these oasis towns that provided resources and accommodation for the Silk Roads
caravans, making large-scale trade possible.
Now, a caravan having set off from Dunhuang, and chosen, depending on the season, either
the northern or southern route around the desert, would rest each night in one of these
oasis towns as they skirted the desert, until eventually both routes come back together
again 1300 miles later at the town of Kashgar, at the far western end of the Taklamakan.
At this point, the Chinese traders had finished their outward journey.
At this point, they would hand their goods over to middlemen, to Kushan merchants or
Sogdians or Indians, who for a fee, a pretty hefty fee, would move the Chinese exports further
westwards towards their ultimate destination of Rome.
At the same time, the Chinese merchants would pick up a range of western and central Asian
goods and begin to take these back to Chang'an.
These middlemen now also had a range of different route options available as they moved the
Chinese silk westwards.
One way headed through Bactria and Samarkand, up onto the high Iranian plateau, where the
goods would be passed on again to either Persian or Greek merchants for transportation
through Persia and down to the shores of the Mediterranean.
Another route went south, following, frankly, the route of the modern Karakorum highway
of today, to eventually end up in port cities in northwest India, from where these goods
could be sent by ship to Roman Egypt via the Red Sea.
At each of the Oasis towns along the land routes, traders would have stayed in what
later became known as a caravan sarai.
Caravan sarai is actually a Persian compound word describing a home or shelter for caravans.
So the word caravan means a group of travelers on a long journey and sarai means a building
with an enclosed courtyard.
Essentially these were roadside inns where travelers could rest and recover from the
days no doubt arduous journey.
These were the origin of the modern motel that has become so ubiquitous around the world.
These establishments were very sturdily built and well run, typically quite large.
Single buildings with a square walled exterior and a single portal wide enough to permit
large or heavily laden beasts such as the camels to enter.
The courtyard would be open to the sky, it doesn't rain very much in the deserts of Central
Asia and alongside the inside walls were stalls, bays, niches or chambers to accommodate the
merchants and their servants, their animals and their merchandise.
Here the traders and their animals would rest and recover from the rigors of the day
before setting out next morning on a new stage of the journey.
This is the accommodation if you like and refuelling infrastructure that made the silk roads possible.
Trying to imagine the atmosphere in a caravan sarai, I often get my students to do this.
The babble of different languages, the discussions around the campfires on everything from the
price of silk or pepper to the different religious and philosophical beliefs of the merchants.
Is this where Confucianism and Taoism first met Buddhism?
Is this where early Christianity first met classical Vedic religions of India that later
evolved into Hinduism?
Or in later silk roads era, is this where Islam first encountered the whole idea of
ancestor spirits of the Chinese?
These exchanges took place in these caravan sarais between thousands of merchants for
many, many centuries.
These ends made possible not only the transmission of huge quantities of valuable goods but also
the dissemination of the great ideas of ancient civilization, Greek ideas, Roman, Persian,
Indian and of course Chinese.
But more prosaically, the most frequent topic of conversation must have been the physical
challenges of the route.
How to pass around the deserts this year, how to find a way through the great mountain
ranges which blocked the way forward, whether the snow on the passes was deep or negotiable.
Surrounding the Taklamakan Desert in all directions is equally hostile terrain, particularly
the Gobi Desert and the highest mountain ranges on earth.
The mountains of Central Asia are of course all products of plate tectonics, driven skywards
by the slow motion and ongoing collision between the Indo-Australian and the Eurasian
plates.
It is the great Himalaya and her outliers, the Karakoram, the Hindu Kush, the Pamirs,
the Kunlun and the Tianshan that helped to isolate East Asia from Central Asia and India.
A particularly challenging barrier that separates far western China from Bactria is the so-called
Pamir Knot, a conglomeration of several mountain ranges that have been forced by plate movements
into a twisted knot of blind valleys and high passes.
Travelers heading to the west or the south had no option other than to somehow make their
way across icy passes through the Knot if they wanted to head west or through the equally
formidable Karakoram Range if their intention was to head south to the port cities of modern
Pakistan and India.
Indeed the modern Karakoram Highway, which since 1986 has joined China and Pakistan along
the highest paved road in the world, follows the major southern branch route of the ancient
Silk Roads.
This road was jointly constructed by Pakistani and Chinese engineers between 1959 and 1986
at the cost of some 900 workers' lives.
As travelers on the highway today negotiate the 15,500 feet high Kunjarab Pass, they get
some sense of the challenges that merchants on the Silk Roads 2,000 years before must
also have faced as they also had to cross this same mighty mountain barrier.
And we actually have, fortunately, a superb glimpse at the challenging environment of
the Kunjarab Pass and other passes in the region as it was during this first Silk Roads
era.
We have 2,000 year old references in Bangu's wonderful history of the early hand to what
was then called sometimes the hanging pass, sometimes the suspended crossing.
We learned something about the inhabitants of this high mountain region.
So let me quote Bangu, they live in the mountains, they work the land that lies between the rocks,
they pile up stones on one another to make their dwellings.
The inhabitants drink by joining their hands together.
What an intriguing reference.
I mean, clearly, this is a description of a small settlement located high up in the mountains
where the inhabitants live in stone huts and eke out a precarious agricultural existence
on terraces built up by stone walls upon these steep hillsides.
I've seen many villages like this and many terraced fields in the high Himalayas.
The intriguing reference to joining hands together to drink might suggest the necessity
of literally linking arms into a human chain to even reach a water supply tumbling down
some steep rocky gorge in the region.
Later in the handshoe, a hand envoy named Tu Jin gives an eyewitness account of his
personal crossing of the hanging pass.
Let me quote from the text again because this is really quite compelling evidence of just
one of the many challenges faced by Silk Road's merchants.
The barrier formed by the suspended crossing is such that it cannot be easily traversed.
There is a path that is 20 inches wide that leads forward for a length of 12 miles overlooking
a precipice whose depth is unfathomed.
Precipices passing on horse or foot hold onto each other and pull each other along
with ropes.
When animals fall, before they have dropped halfway down the chasm, they are shattered
in pieces.
And when men fall, the situation is such that they are unable to rescue one another.
The danger of these precipices is beyond description.
And this is the same pass, or one very close to it, across which Chinese and Pakistani
engineers laid the highest paved highway in the world.
Is it any surprise today that some travelers refer to the Karakorum Highway as the ninth
wonder of the world?
Now as well as the tenacious merchants who are making their way repeatedly through this
inhospitable terrain, there is another key player in our story that needs to be considered
and that is the mighty Bactrian Camel.
The Bactrian Camel is native to the steppes of Central Asia and it quickly became the
preferred beast of burden for traders because it was so perfectly adapted to this unforgiving
environment.
The Bactrian has two humps on its back in contrast to the dromedary or Arabian Camel,
which has one, and as I'm sure you're aware these humps are composed of fat, not water.
Its face is long and triangular with a split upper lip, long eyelashes and sealable nostrils.
These help to keep out the dust and debris that flies at ferocious speed in the frequent
sandstorms which occur in the region.
The Camel has a long woolly winter coat.
It's cold out there in the winter.
It's sort of a dark brown to sandy beige color, but it sheds this rapidly once the freezing
cold winters give way to the spring and then the very hot summers.
Each section sort of peel off its back at once, but perhaps the most significant environmental
adaptation that this Camel has is two broad toes on each foot with an undivided sort of
webbed sole between each.
Now the Camel spread their toes widely and they use the webbing between as a perfect
evolutionary adaptation to walking on sand and to climbing the huge sand dunes of the
region.
I'm speaking from personal experience here when I tell you I've never been on a more
sure footed animal as I made my way across some of the highest sand dunes in the world
in the Gobi Desert.
This unflappable Camel was born to carry great bales of heavy silk through the deserts and
mountains of Central Asia.
Sadly the Bactrian Camel, its existence in the wild is seriously threatened today.
There's only an estimated 1000 or so of these magnificent animals remaining at least in
the wilds of Northwest China and Mongolia and these quite rightly have been placed on
the critically endangered species list.
But I can vouch for the fact that they are thriving in captivity.
The Camel drivers of Dunhuang alone seem to have thousands of healthy individuals under
their care.
So again it's no exaggeration I think to suggest that if there had been no Bactrian
Camel, silk roads trade would have been on a much smaller and perhaps barely sustainable
scale.
So what about the goods that these camel caravans were carrying on their backs?
What about the silk that eventually gave this route its name?
Although the hand iron we discussed in a previous lecture was also a highly valuable
export by far the most important commodity being carried out of China by the caravans
was silk, a light and sensual textile that was so greatly prized by the aristocrats of
the Roman Empire.
The origins of the silk industry or sericulture as it's called are somewhat mysterious.
According to Chinese legend it was the lady Ceiling, wife of the mythical yellow emperor
said to have ruled China in about 3000 BCE who first discovered the secrets of silk.
As early as 1927 archaeologists discovered a segment of an ancient silk worm cocoon
preserved in the lowest soil along the banks of the Huanghe that was later dated to somewhere
between 26 and 2300 BCE.
But a more recent archaeological find including a small ivory cup carved with a silk worm
design accompanied by silk spinning tools has been dated to a much earlier period perhaps
as far back as 5000 BCE.
This suggests that silk worms were being domesticated almost from the beginning of agriculture in
China.
Many of the Zhou dynasty classics that we have discussed often in the course contain practical
information about sericulture particularly the book of history and the book of rites.
From these great texts we learn that the reeling and spinning of silk were household duties
for women who carried out these tasks in specialized workshops as well as in their homes.
We read that in silk producing regions all the women of the extended family worked long
hours each day for as long as six months a year feeding, tending and supervising silk
worms and unraveling, spinning, weaving, dying and embroidering silk.
Sericulture became so deeply ingrained in Chinese women's culture that each spring the
Empress herself symbolically inaugurated the silk raising season.
So clearly this is another foundational practice if you like of Eastern civilization.
But once silk roads trade began the Chinese immediately realized they possessed the secrets
to the production of a highly valuable commodity which meant that the technique of sericulture
needed to be kept a closely guarded secret controlled by the authorities so that the
exporters and the government did not lose their monopoly.
So during the first silk roads era Han border guards in Dunhuang searched the caravans of
bactrian camels to ensure that no silk worms were on board.
Someone who revealed the secrets of sericulture or tried to smuggle the silk worm eggs or
cocoons outside of China would be punished by death.
I visited some of these ancient Han border posts deep in the Gobi Desert and I can just
imagine the guards there searching these caravans as they all pulled up in the center of this
fortress.
Now most Romans by the way the principal customers for Chinese silk as you know had no idea that
the fabric derived from the cocoon of a small worm instead they thought it grew on trees.
We know this because of several references to the origins of silk in the works of great
Roman authors like Seneca and Virgil.
In our next lecture we're going to pick up the story of the silk roads from the Roman
perspective and in order to do this we need to consider the advent of a very important
man indeed Augustus the prinkeps or first man in Rome some would call him the first
emperor who restored peace to a state that had been fractured by more than a century
of civil war.
It was in this new climate after the advent of Augustus the Pax Romana or the Roman peace
this great age of optimism and cultural achievement that the demand for silk and many other Asian
luxuries began to flourish and this led ultimately to the connection of all the civilizations
and most of the peoples of Afro Eurasia into a single silk roads network.
See you next time as we enter the very messy world of late Republican Rome.
