Hello and welcome again to our course on the Foundations of Eastern Civilization.
For the past five lectures we've been focused on the Silk Roads, the great network of trade
and exchange routes along which many of the foundational technologies and ideologies of
eastern civilization began to diffuse westwards for the first time.
But as I also noted on several occasions, this cultural exchange was not one-way traffic.
Core technologies, agricultural products, animals and of course religions and philosophies
from other parts of Eurasia also began to enter China and East Asia for the first time
in world history.
And chief amongst these in terms of the subsequent impact it would have on eastern civilization
was the Indian spiritual philosophy of Buddhism.
However, although we have noted that the Silk Roads and also Kushan patronage were responsible
for its diffusion into China, we've actually said almost nothing yet about what the core
beliefs of Buddhism are.
So in this lecture I want to rectify that, but it will mean taking us on another excursion
far away from East Asia, thousands of miles to the southwest of China across the high
Himalayan passes into ancient India.
In this lecture we will explore the Indian origins of Buddhism and then follow up next
time with a more detailed account of its spread into China and on into the rest of East Asia
in the centuries following the collapse of the Han dynasty, another bitterly fragmented
and violent period that has been called the Age of Disunity.
To really understand the impact Buddhism was to have on eastern civilization, we need to
go back to the traditional religious beliefs and practices that had been established in
India centuries, even millennia before the Buddha was even born.
Then we will be able to see the revolutionary impact the emergence of Buddhism had on the
Indian people, a similar impact to that experienced in China during the Age of Disunity.
Let's pick up the story in around the year 2300 before the common era, when the very
sophisticated Indus civilization, frankly one of the great civilizations of ancient
Eurasia, emerged in the Indus Valley.
The Indus civilization reached its peak in roughly 2000 BCE, at about the same time that
ziggurats were being built in Samaria, palaces were being constructed by the Minoans on
Crete and the Sha or Erletao culture was flourishing in China.
Indus civilization and religion particularly remains somewhat mysterious mostly because
we have yet to decipher the script of the Indus civilization, but we can be sure I think
that like other agricultural societies, the people of the Indus venerated gods and goddesses
associated with procreation including a mother goddess and a horned fertility god.
Many scholars believe that these gods of the early Indus were later transformed into the
mighty Hindu pantheon in which fertility and procreation are also prominent.
By 1700 BCE Indus civilization had largely disappeared most probably as a result of environmental
problems caused by deforestation along the valley and also earthquakes which changed the
course of the Indus river and left many of those mighty cities literally high and dry.
But then two centuries later from about 1500 BCE newcomers appear on the scene, bands of
Indo-European speaking migrants from the Iranian plateau to the north who begin to filter
slowly down into the Indus valley.
These migrants are known as the Indo-Aryans today and they rapidly became the dominant
cultural group in all of modern Pakistan and northern India.
The culture and religion that these migrants brought with them assimilated with the older
Indus civilization practices and the syncretic mix that emerged became the foundation for
the subsequent political, social and certainly spiritual organization of India.
Under the leadership of their priests who were called the Brahmins, the Indo-Aryans
worshipped their deities through sacrificial rituals accompanied by the singing of hymns
called Rig-R-I-G which were composed by the Brahmins in an attempt to directly communicate
with the gods.
Between 1400 and 900 BCE the Brahmins gathered together more than 1000 of these hymns into
a famous collection called the Rig Veda, the hymns of knowledge.
The most important gods featured in the Rig Vedas are Indra, the storm god of warriors,
Agni, the benevolent god of fire, Varuna, the sky god and king of the gods and Mitra,
the sun god who was later worshiped as Mitra by the Persians and indeed the Romans.
We also read in the Rig Vedas that an important component of the religious practices of the
Aryans was the division of the population into a hereditary, unchangeable social class
structure known to the world as the caste system.
Actually the word caste is European, the Indians call this the Varna system but when
the Portuguese arrived in India in the 16th century of the common era they immediately
noticed these sharp social distinctions and gave them the name Castes.
By about 1000 BCE the Aryans recognized four main social classes, Brahmins who were the
elites and the priests, Kshatriyas who made up the nobility and the warrior class, Vaisyas,
the commoners, the artisans, the merchants and Shudras, the landless peasants and the
serfs.
Later a fifth caste was added, the untouchables, those who handled dead meat or animal products
and whose touch would therefore make anyone else unclean.
All these developments culminated in the golden age of the Vedic religion between roughly
1000 and 600 BCE.
The Rig Vedas were now set to music using sophisticated ragas, spectacular sacrifices
to the gods took place and sacred rituals and formulas emerged that, if properly uttered,
would solve all of life's problems.
The Brahmins of course exercised enormous power through all this because their chanting
of a Veda, now called a mantra, was so crucial that even the kings had to depend on them
to keep the world functioning.
And because only the Brahmins possessed the knowledge to perform the essential rituals,
they enjoyed enormous status and privilege while of course the rest of Indian society
remained divided into the rigid categories of caste.
This then was the context, the rigidly hierarchical context in which a number of alternative religions
began to emerge in the 6th century including of course Buddhism.
But the first reaction came from within the Vedic religion itself when around 600 BCE a
radical Brahmins sect emerged that embraced extreme mysticism, spiritual discipline and
yogic meditation.
Their new approaches were written down in a new collection called the Upanishads.
The central idea outlined in the Upanishads is that the light of consciousness within
each individual came from an eternal, sacred energy at the heart of the universe, not unlike
the Dao perhaps.
The Upanishads claimed that the soul had the ability to transmigrate but the nature of
this migration was dependent upon the accumulation of karma, that is a person's deeds in life
would stay with them in the form of an unseen power called karma.
Good deeds would mean the accumulation of good karma and the migration of the soul to
heaven but bad deeds which resulted in bad karma would lead to reincarnation into a lower
caste or even subhuman life form.
This continuous birth and rebirth of the soul into a new body was an endless and tedious
process but there was a way to avoid it and that was to adopt the ascetic life of meditation.
And this in turn led to the appearance of thousands, perhaps tens of thousands of gurus
who now wandered the country as meditating ascetics.
If you've had the chance to read Herman Hesse's wonderful novel, Siddhartha, this is a superb
evocation of the atmosphere that prevailed in India during this period when so many wandering
ascetics hoped to discover the key to escaping the tedium of endless reincarnation.
Despite these new ideas, Vedic religion remained essentially agricultural in nature.
It was focused on ritual sacrifices offered by the Brahmin priests in the hope that the
gods would reward their loyal servants with good harvests.
But Indian society was becoming a lot more urbanized so these rituals seemed less and
less appropriate to the merchants and the artisans living in the towns and very large
cities that were now proliferating all across India.
And at the same time the fact that the Brahmins remained exempt from taxation and received
generous fees and gifts for their services led to a growing resentment amongst the middle
and lower castes against Brahmatic pretensions and superiority.
The upshot of all this was that during the 6th and 5th centuries BCE alternative religions
and philosophies emerged that rejected the traditional Vedic religion and appealed directly
to the new social classes.
The most important of these new philosophies, Jainism and Buddhism, both turned to intense
spirituality as an alternative to the mechanical rituals of the Brahmins.
Now the Jainists, it's a fascinating ideology, Jainists believe that virtually everything
that exists in the universe has a soul, humans, animals, plants, but also the air, bodies
of water, even rocks.
Although devout Jainist monks went to extremes to avoid harming the millions of souls that
they inevitably encountered every day.
They swept the ground before them as they walked to avoid harm to invisible insects.
They strained their drinking water through cloth filters to remove tiny organisms they
might unwittingly consume.
They followed a strict vegetarian diet and they wore masks and avoided the sort of sudden
movements I'm making now so they would not bruise the tiny souls inhabiting the surrounding
air.
It goes without saying these Jainist ethics were incredibly demanding.
A few people other than devout monks could observe them closely.
So for most people Jainism was not a practical alternative to the religion of the Brahmins.
But Jainism was attractive to members of the lower castes because it pointed out if all
creatures in the universe possess souls it makes little sense to draw sharp distinctions
between different classes of humans.
So the Jains rejected social hierarchies based on caste and their beliefs became popular
amongst members of the lower castes who received no respect in traditional religion.
But Jainism, no surprise, has remained a small minority faith.
It's just way too difficult for most people to observe and this is just as true today
because estimates are that only maybe five to six million or so of India's vast population
of around one billion right now are practicing Jains.
A more practical alternative to the cult of the Brahmins came in the form of Buddhism
which shares some beliefs with Jainism.
Both philosophies are derived from the teachings of a great man.
Both stress the humanity of their teacher rather than his divinity.
Both are premised on non-violence and both developed monastic traditions of celibacy
and asceticism.
But Buddhism was able to offer a more general appeal and this is still true today I think.
Buddhism remains one of the fastest growing religions in the Western world today.
So let's turn now to the life of the founder of Buddhism although like all the great spiritual
leaders including many we've already explored in this course, it's often fiendishly difficult
to separate biographical fact from fiction.
We do know that the founder of Buddhism, Siddhartha Gautama, was born in about the year 563 before
the common era into a wealthier Kshatriya family, remember the caste of rulers and warriors
in a small northern state in the foothills of the Himalayas.
His wealthy father was governor of the state and he raised his son in a life of sheltered
luxury determined that he would never know misery.
Siddhartha married his cousin, excelled in his studies and was being groomed to succeed
his father when he suddenly became dissatisfied with his comfortable life and started making
short journeys in disguise outside the walls of the palace.
He quickly became aware of the frailty, the mortality of humans and that for most people
life seemed to include a great deal of suffering.
As he witnessed more and more misery amongst ordinary people he heard of these wandering
ascetics who had withdrawn from the world to lead holy lives in an attempt to perfect
their souls.
Siddhartha decided to take up the ascetic light himself and wander the land in the hope
it would give him insight into suffering.
So sometime around the year 524 he left his wife, he left his family and his luxurious
home to lead the life of a holy man.
He wandered the Ganges Valley for years in his search for enlightenment living the life
of an extreme ascetic practicing starvation and intense meditation but none of these tactics
gave him the answers he was seeking.
Eventually he abandoned asceticism as leading nowhere and according to legend he sat down
finally under a huge banyan tree to meditate upon a better path.
He was determined to stay there either until he died or until he gained insight into the
problem of human suffering.
For 49 days he sat under the tree in meditation tempted by demons and with the pleasures of
the flesh and then just before dawn on the 50th day he gained the insights he saw at
that moment of enlightenment he became the Buddha which means the awakened one.
The Buddha announced his new doctrine in a public address near the holy city of Badaris
a foundational sermon referred to ever since as the turning of the wheel of law because
this was the beginning of his quest to promulgate his philosophy of compassion.
The Buddha quickly attracted disciples from all over the Ganges Valley which he organized
into a monastic order that wore yellow robes and traveled the land preaching his message
living off donations.
For more than 40 years the Buddha personally led his disciples all over northern India before
his death at the age of 80 in probably the year 483 BCE.
Such are the somewhat sketchy details of the life of the Buddha.
What we need to turn to now is to offer some sort of outline of the essential beliefs of
this great spiritual philosophy that the Buddha first unveiled in this turning of the wheel
of law sermon particularly because Buddhism was about to become another of the core foundational
components of all of Eastern civilization.
Buddhism is often called I'm sure you've heard this the middle way because it resides
somewhere between normal human life and the extremes of asceticism that is Buddhism demands
only a moderate amount of renunciation and deviation from living a normal life.
Buddhist philosophy is also called Dharma which stems from the ancient Upanishad notion
that spiritual good deeds will lead to a good afterlife.
Dharma is actually based on a doctrine known as the Four Noble Truths.
The first of these truths is that suffering dominates the human experience.
The second argues that the cause of all this suffering is desire rampant ambition.
The third noble truth suggests that suffering can be extinguished if we can learn how to
extinguish or at least control this desire and this would make it possible to attain
the state of nirvana really a state in which the fire of desire has been extinguished.
And the fourth truth outlines an eight fold path that leads out of the suffering caused
by excessive desire eventually into the state of nirvana.
So we can think of the noble eight fold path as something like a blueprint to help humans
achieve nirvana.
In essence, adherents of Buddhism need to pursue right views, right resolve, right speech,
right conduct, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration.
That is to essentially lead a decent ethical meditative life.
If humans pursue the right path of personal effort and redemption, every individual, every
individual, whatever their social or economic status can escape the cycle of reincarnation
and achieve nirvana, which might also be understood as a state of perfect spiritual independence.
Now let's be clear here, Buddhism was never intended to be a religion.
The Buddha himself was asked about gods and he was actually critical of all early religions.
He claimed to be an agnostic who had no knowledge and frankly not much belief in a world of
gods or spirits.
Buddhism quickly became an incredibly popular, I think the best phrase would be spiritual
philosophy or spiritual ideology in India.
And the reasons it caught on there are precisely the same as the reasons that as we'll see
that it became so attracted to people in China, in Korea, in Japan, in Southeast Asia.
Buddhism explicitly rejected any notion of a social hierarchy.
So this was a message that strongly appealed, like Jainism, to members of the lower classes
in India initially and later as we'll see in China.
So merchants deemed to be lesser members of society by the elites in both South and East
Asia quickly became prominent in the ranks of early Buddhists.
And as they travelled all over the Ganges Basin and later of course along the long silk
roads through Central Asia, they took to using Buddhist monasteries as inns.
Buddhists were also very clever, I don't mean this in a cynical way, very clever at spreading
their ideas amongst the masses of ancient Indian society.
And again, as we will see actually in our very next lecture, they took these same techniques
into China and later again into Korea, Japan and Vietnam.
The Buddhist monks paid particular attention to language, for example.
In their sermons, both the Buddha and his disciples avoided using Sanskrit.
This was the literary language used by the Brahmins and their rituals, sort of like the
Latin of its day.
Instead, the Buddhists used vernacular local tongues that reached a much larger audience.
And the same would be true when Buddhism begins to filter into East Asia also.
And Buddhists recognised the power of holy sites which soon became focal points for the
exercise of devotion.
So pilgrims flocked to sites associated with the Buddha's life, for example.
Places where he had preached during his lifetime.
Before long, buildings called stupas were being erected at many of these sites.
These are enormous domed shrines that were said to house relics of the Buddha and his
first disciples.
As we'll see, Buddhist monasteries and stupas were soon to be constructed all over East
Asia.
I have visited many of the oldest Buddhist monasteries in China in particular, notably
one that claims to be housing the Buddha's finger bone to this day, the great ancient
enormous far-men temple outside of Xian.
You can visit the temple and see way off under a sort of crystal case what certainly looks
like a finger bone and it's claimed to be one of the finger bones of Siddhartha himself.
And from the beginning, the Buddhists were also incredibly well organised.
The monastic organisation that the Buddha himself founded during his lifetime proved
extremely efficient at spreading the Buddha's message and gaining converts.
And the same was true, of course, when monasteries started appearing all over East Asia.
These monasteries were supported by gifts from pious lay supporters and before long also
by entire government structures in China, in Korea and Japan.
Many of these Buddhist monasteries were actually set up right there in the heart of the capital
cities beside the government buildings of these great states.
Buddhist monasteries also had no problem accepting gifts from wealthy benefactors.
They regarded these bequest as acts of generosity that merited spiritual merit, if you like,
if not salvation.
And of course, by making these donations, wealthy benefactors could continue to enjoy the comforts
of the world, avoid the sacrifices demanded by early Buddhism and still potentially achieve
salvation.
So eventually with the support of wealthy patrons, huge and elaborate Buddhist monastery
complexes and parklands and gardens began to be constructed all over South Asia, Central
Asia, East Asia, complete with multi-storey buildings, stupor complexes, elaborate teaching
facilities and libraries.
In India, Buddhism was also given an incredible boost through the patronage of the Mauryan
dynasty, the first dynasty that was able to unite India into a unified imperial structure.
Appearance of the Mauryans is actually an interesting byproduct of the conquest of Alexander
the Great, Alexander of Macedon, whose defeat of the powerful Indus Valley King Porus in
323 BCE created a substantial power vacuum in Northern India.
Now this facilitated the conquest of the region by a young adventurer named Chandragupta,
who came striding into the region and went on to found the mighty Mauryan dynasty, which
at its height controlled most of India using a professional army, so we read in the sources
that included 700,000 soldiers, 10,000 chariots and 9,000 war elephants.
Chandragupta's grandson Ashoka remains one of the most revered of all Indian rulers and
his reign is crucial to the spread of Buddhism.
Because although a mighty warrior, Ashoka adopted Buddhism sometime around 260 BCE after,
so he tells us being sickened by the violent wars of conquest, he had waged to complete
the subjugation and unification of India.
Was there a political motive also in his adoption and official sanctioning of Buddhism?
Will we see something similar in the adoption of Buddhism by governments and regional dynasties
in China, in Korea and Japan, who might have also seen this ideology as a way of culturally
uniting the diverse populations of their multicultural states?
So Ashoka gave up hunting, he banned animal sacrifices, he eliminated most meat dishes
from his table, he built monasteries and stupas throughout the empire, including most importantly
along paths that would later become the Silk Road Roots out of India.
He made personal pilgrimages to the holy sites of Buddhism, he sent missionaries north into
Bactria, south to Sri Lanka, all of which had a powerful impact on increasing the popularity
of Buddhism.
Like all great spiritual ideologies, Buddhism had to deal with major doctrinal struggles
that resulted ultimately in the emergence of an even more accessible and popular version
of the ideology and this is the version that moved out of India eventually and into East
Asia.
In its purest form Buddhism still involved a lot of sacrifice.
One had to give up personal property and the desire for social standing and embrace a certain
detachment from family and the world.
But developments in Buddhist theology opened new, less demanding avenues for salvation and
this I think was the final contributing factor in the explosion in popularity for the faith
that followed, both in India and then in the East.
The first of these developments was the deification of the Buddha himself, effectively turning
the man into a god.
Although as I said earlier the Buddha certainly did not consider himself a god, some of his
later followers did and by deifying their master this helped converts channel their energies
and identify more closely with the faith.
A second important development was the appearance of the Bodhisattva which means an enlightened
being.
Bodhisattvas were individuals who had already reached spiritual perfection and who thus
merited the rewards of nirvana but who had intentionally delayed their entry into nirvana
to help others who were still struggling.
Like Christian saints perhaps Bodhisattvas served as examples of spiritual excellence
and inspiration.
These developments some centuries after the Buddha's death opened up what had now become
a genuine faith to millions of people in India and before long millions of people in China
too.
This new reformed more accessible version Mahayana Buddhism or the greater vehicle Buddhism
spread rapidly throughout India and into Central Asia in the centuries either side of the common
era divide supported as we've seen by Kushan monarchs like Kanishka the Great.
It was Mahayana Buddhism that travelled along the Silk Roads as monks and merchants carried
the faith into China and then on to Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia.
Next time I hope you'll join me as we follow these monks into China which after the fall
of the Han dynasty had entered another centuries long period of fragmentation and in this new
age of disunity Buddhism now seemed to millions to be the only faith that could give the suffering
people of China some hope for salvation.
