Hello and welcome again to our ongoing exploration of these continuously evolving concepts of
eastern civilization.
Last time we traced the origins of Buddhism in 6th century India and we saw how it was
gradually transformed from a philosophy into a religion.
During the first two centuries of the common era, Buddhist monks and merchants took their
new Mahayana version, remember great vehicle version, of the faith with them as they moved
into Central and then East Asia along the Silk Roads.
Now I concluded that lecture by noting that in our next lecture we would follow the spread
of Buddhism into China, which after the fall of the Han dynasty had entered another cycle
of fragmentation and internal conflict.
In this new age of disunity, Buddhism emerged as a genuine alternative to Confucianism and
Taoism because it offered the people of China new hope for salvation.
In this lecture we'll look at this age of disunity and its political and cultural implications
which were ultimately so transformative for eastern civilization as we'll see many of
the long standing foundations of eastern civilization were tested during the period, but they learned
to adapt and survive to a new geopolitical reality.
But we will also see that new foundations were introduced during this period, foundational
elements that will stay with us for the rest of the course, shaping and reshaping eastern
civilization all the way through to the present.
In this context, of course, we will continue to explore the rise and spread of Buddhism.
So we've traveled a long way, very, very far, we've seen a lot since we last left the
traveled Han dynasty and traced the Silk Roads all the way to Rome, to India and back again.
But even though we've been away from China for a while, I'm sure you remember that the
last few years of the Han dynasty were blighted by corruption and by political infighting
between three powerful groups, the eunuchs, the clans of the empresses and the Confucian
officials.
Let's briefly pick up that story now where we left it several lectures ago.
None of these groups, quite frankly, could improve the harsh lives of the peasants and
late in the last decades of the Han, peasant insurgents of the brutal Yellow Turban Rebellion
swarmed destructively all across the North China Plain.
Power now fell into the hands of local governors, local warlords, like the ruthless and ambitious
poet general Cao Cao and his son, Cao Pi.
The last figurehead emperor of the Han, Emperor Xian, reigned until 220 CE when Cao Pi finally
forced his abdication and brought to an end the Han dynastic era of Chinese history.
The three and a half centuries that followed were marked by political division and a series
of complicated, smaller regional governments, none of which was able to reunite China.
Interestingly, some historians like to make comparisons between China after the fall of
the Han and Europe after the so-called decline and fall of the Roman Empire, particularly
as both regions were overrun by militarized nomads at almost exactly the same time.
Certainly with the collapse of Roman power, Western Europe went through many centuries
of fragmentation in a period that is sometimes still called the Dark Ages, although frankly
historians today have largely rejected that term.
And the Age of Disunity in China was also dominated by weak regional governments that
were unable to restore political or social order.
But the big difference, and this is a critical difference between West and East, is that
while Europe was never effectively reunified again after the decline of Rome, China was
successfully reunified under strong central government three and a half centuries after
the collapse of the Han.
It was the generals assigned by the Han to put down the yellow turbine uprising that
emerged as the new powers of China.
In the north, Cao Cao focused on supplying his armies by settling landless peasants
and captured rebels on huge state farms.
Cao Cao also recruited skilled Zhongnu horsemen to be the backbone of his cavalry and extraordinarily
settled many of them in Shanxi province.
After his father's death in 220, Cao Pi forced the abdication of the last Han emperor and
established a new dynasty in the north, the Wei dynasty.
With its capital in the great city of Liang, Cao Pi hoped to reunify China now under Wei
dynastic control, but his attempt was thwarted by rival warlords.
A year after the Wei dynasty was declared in the north, another warlord named Liu Bei
was crowned as emperor of the kingdom of Xu in the west.
And eight years later in 229, a third warlord, Sun Quan, declared himself emperor of the
kingdom of Wu in the south.
So three rival powers now divided China between them during an era known not surprisingly
as the three kingdoms.
This lasted for about 50 years between 230 and 280 of the common era.
To make matters even more confusing, in 265 a rebel Wei dynasty leader forced the emperor
to abdicate and then declared a new dynasty, the Jin dynasty, which over the next 15 years
gradually defeated the other two kingdoms and then attempted to rule a unified China under
its own dynastic name.
By the way, the three kingdoms period is the setting for one of China's most famous most
loved novels, the romance of the three kingdoms.
The novel ultimately came together some centuries later, actually during the early Ming dynasty,
but it beautifully synthesizes and captures the great battles and dramas of the age of
disunity in a flowing epic that has made it an indelible part of China's long cultural
history.
This novel is definitely part of the foundational literary legacy of eastern civilization.
Now this political story is messy.
The Jin dynasty is further divided now into two periods.
The so-called Western Jin from 265 to 316 where the capital was at Loiang and then the
Eastern Jin between 316 and 420 with the great southern city of Nanjing as the capital.
The Jin actually did not succeed in unifying the country.
Well they did briefly but only temporarily because they were really never able to establish
any sort of durable political structure based on the supreme authority of an emperor.
Instead conflict and intrigue between members of the royal family and the civil service
debilitated the government and centralized power was further undermined through the parceling
out of enormous tracts of land to imperial princes.
As these princes sought to increase their power, civil war broke out again and raged
in the regions around Loiang for more than 20 years between 281 and 305 CE.
This chaotic situation gave the Zhongnu, you know China's ancient nomadic enemies who'd
been settled in the north now for about a century, the opportunity they had been waiting
for.
In the year 311, Zhongnu forces sacked the Jin capital at Loiang and five years later
they sacked the great ancient imperial capital of Chang'an, the city of perpetual peace.
For more than a century after these events, China was a battleground between Zhongnu and
ethnic Han Chinese during yet another chaotic period known as the era of the 16 kingdoms
that last through to the year 439 of the common era.
During this chaos and this violence, millions of refugees fled south across the Yangtze
River and the Chinese economy more or less collapsed.
The southern city of Nanjing now became the capital for a series of local power groups
collectively known as the southern dynasties which ruled until 589.
Each of these southern courts had to deal with powerful hereditary aristocratic families
and also repeated outbreaks of violence.
But ironically it was the same intractable hereditary aristocratic extended families
that effectively saved Chinese culture during this time of chaos when the very foundations
of eastern civilization threatened to unravel.
Unwilling to respect the authority of this series of upstart emperors in the south, the
old aristocratic families began to see themselves as upholders of the best of Chinese cultural
traditions.
And of course this was crucial for the preservation of eastern civilization.
As the wonderful historian of China, Patricia Buckley-Ebrey puts it and I'll quote Professor
Ebrey, the solidarity of these cultivated families provided a center around which Chinese
culture could adhere during a period when no state could serve that function.
And all these developments actually had a positive impact on southern China along a
marginalized and culturally inferior region compared to the more dynamic, more sophisticated
north which now became the critical hub for the preservation of Chinese and therefore
eastern culture.
The population in the south increased dramatically because of an expanded agricultural sector
based on rice production and the city of Nanjing now emerged as a splendid capital and cultural
center, a stronghold for traditional Chinese culture.
In the north, meanwhile, rival warlords from all sorts of different ethnic groups continued
to do battle across the plains.
The most successful of these groups were known as the Shanbei, peoples originally from southern
Manchuria to the northeast of Han China.
They had moved out of northern Shanxi province in a series of successful raids until they
were strong enough to establish the northern Wei dynasty which ruled much of northern China
now for almost a century between 439 and 534.
In experience in statecraft, the northern Wei rulers wisely turned to Chinese administrators,
Confucian bureaucrats really, to govern their realm.
In the year 485, these conscientious administrators well versed of course in the Confucian tradition
that by this stage, let me remind you, was already a thousand years old.
Overhaul the taxation system by reintroducing an equal field system based on the premise
that it was the state that ultimately owned all the land and thus the state that had the
right to parcel it out fairly to all the families.
This equitable system went on to outlast the Wei dynasty by more than 350 years.
As we'll see, it not only became central to the later Tang dynasty in China but also
to various Japanese governments after the idea moved to that island state in the centuries
that followed.
Meanwhile, with only 2 million Shanbei living in the midst of at least 30 million Chinese,
it was inevitable that the Shanbei elites would become more and more influenced by Chinese
cultural traditions.
So during the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, 471-499, the Wei relocated to the ruined ancient capital
of Luoyang which was now rebuilt again as a magnificent city.
Xiaowen promoted the learning of Han culture.
He ordered his men to dress like the Han Chinese, to learn to speak the Chinese language and
even to adopt Han surnames.
He encouraged intermarriage between the Shanbei and the Han and employed many Han officials
in his court, all of which contributed to the successful amalgamation of the various nationalities
now living in northern China.
But these reforms were looked upon with disgust by the tough Shanbei soldiers who were living
along the harsh northern frontiers.
They came to detest the Shanbei aristocrats in Luoyang for their soft, sanatose lives,
excessively influenced as they were by Chinese cultural tradition.
Civil war broke out again in 524.
Luoyang was sacked and 2,000 of these soft officials were slaughtered.
I told you this is a complicated and messy story.
In quick succession, a series of dynasties tried to re-establish control of the north.
The northern Qi in 552.
The northern Zhou five years later.
In 575, the Zhou formed an alliance with the southern state of Chen to invade Qi, which
was destroyed in 577.
But the Zhou were in turn usurped by one of their own generals in 581.
You'd be pleased to hear that this was the moment that General Yang Jian, who would become
later known as Emperor Wen, seized power and declared the foundation of the Sui dynasty,
which successfully reunified China and paved the way for the mighty Tang dynasty to follow.
And of course more on the Tang in our next two lectures.
So let's explore the fascinating achievements now of this Sui dynasty, which are even more
remarkable given how brief their reign was.
Eventually these achievements were military and political, although the Sui dynasty lasted
for only two generations, that is to be precise for 36 years, they were able to successfully
reunify much of China.
After seizing power in the north, Emperor Wen used land and naval forces to conquer
the south.
Thousands of ships took part in stupendous naval battles up and down the Yangtze River
until the southern capital of Nanjing was taken and razed to the ground.
These extraordinary warships were five stories high, we read, each housing around 800 men.
In something of a parallel with the earlier Qin dynasty, the Sui then ambitiously set
about to reform the political, economic and military structures of China.
As a further example of the inroads Buddhism had made during the age of disunity, Wendy
and his family were actually committed Buddhists and the emperor now sought to legitimize his
rule by declaring himself a Buddhist king.
But the Sui also used Taoist and Confucian traditions, including importantly reinstating
the state examination system to help unify the country.
So Wendy built a new capital not far from Chang'an, he reformed China's military system
to bring it more firmly under civilian control and he also introduced a new law code that
actually eliminated many of the cruel punishments that had persisted since the introduction
of legalism more than 800 years earlier.
This law code, as we'll see later in the course, becomes incredibly influential all over East
Asia in the centuries following after it's exported out of China and on into Korea and
Japan.
By the time the emperor died in the year 604, Wendy had succeeded in transforming a bitterly
divided China into a much more productive, unified and less chaotic state.
Wendy's second son Yangguang succeeded to the throne and declared himself to be Yangdi,
the flaming emperor.
His 14 year reign is also marked by extraordinarily ambitious undertakings, some successful, others
less so.
For example, his disastrous attempted invasion of the Koguyo Kingdom in Korea, an event will
certainly be talking about later in the course, may have cost the lives of one million men.
But he was also an avid collector of manuscripts and he amassed one of the great literary
collections in world history to this point in a library he had especially built in Luoyang.
This elaborate building utilized the latest technology in library services.
When the emperor visited, a maid servant would step on a mechanical device that raised all
the curtains and opened all the doors through the building, revealing shelves laden with
some 90,000 scrolled manuscripts.
But by far the most elaborate project undertaken by Yangdi was the construction of the Grand
Canal, one of the world's largest pre-modern hydrological projects.
With the aid of millions of conscripted laborers, Yangdi first linked together many pre-existing
smaller canals that connected the Huanghe, the Yellow River in the north, with the Yangtze
in the south into an extensive network.
The second phase of construction, which required the conscription of both female and male laborers,
saw the system extended to the northeast all the way to Beijing.
And the third stage of construction led the Yangtze Valley to Hangzhou, far to the south.
So this incredible system of canals facilitated internal trade and also made the abundant
supplies of food that were being grown along the Yangtze Valley now available for northern
populations.
Can you imagine what this extraordinary canal must have looked like to a Chinese peasant
as it cut its way through the farm fields of central China, a vast waterway stretching
for 1500 miles.
And to add to the spectacle, Yangdi celebrated his achievement by sailing his entire imperial
flotilla of 5,235 vessels all the way down the canal.
Yangdi's massive construction projects were good for China in the long term.
These canals are still in use to this day, but they also depended on higher taxes and
massive conscriptions of forced labor, which not surprisingly led to considerable peasant
resentment.
Peasant revolts broke out in north and central China, but no one dared to tell the emperor
the truth because he had previously beaten to death an official who had brought him bad
news.
But finally, in 618 of the common era, a disgruntled general assassinated the emperor and his bathhouse,
bringing to an end the reign of emperor Yangdi, the flaming emperor, and the Sui dynasty.
Let me begin to conclude this lecture now by returning to the great spiritual philosophy
of Buddhism and to the remarkable and transformative inroads it made into China during this age
of disunity.
Now, as we've seen, Buddhism arrived in China during the first century of the common era,
carried by missionary monks along the Silk Road's trade routes.
The ideology faced so many linguistic and cultural barriers that it might very well
have remained just another exotic cult had it not been for the chaos we've just been
describing during China's own dark ages.
When it first appeared, Buddhism was regarded by the Chinese as just another exotic foreign
religion followed by foreign merchants.
But in this three and a half centuries long age of disunity, the Chinese people became
more and more disillusioned about the ability of the core philosophies of their civilization
to solve their problems, and they became increasingly receptive to Buddhism.
By that I mean that Confucianism, Taoism, even legalism seem to be powerless in the
face of yet another bitterly divisive warring states period, and at the same time Buddhist
authorities focused their energies on winning converts amongst the disillusioned Chinese
at all levels of the social spectrum.
In the North, Buddhist missionaries focused in on gaining political patronage amongst
the rival warlords, often using elaborate magical tricks to convince these tribal leaders
that Buddhism was more powerful than traditional Chinese faiths.
But the warlords were also attracted to Buddhism for another reason.
Because of its universalizing creed, these foreign and relatively uneducated rulers
were not automatically relegated to the lowest strata of Chinese culture in the way that
Confucianism dismissively did.
By the late third century, Confucian elites of the Western Jin Dynasty also found themselves
attracted to Buddhism, and by the early fourth century Buddhist ideas were increasingly being
discussed in aristocratic circles.
But elite and aristocratic patronage was just the first step for Buddhism to really gain
a hold in China the faith needed to win converts amongst the people.
The first challenge to this endeavor was to translate the Buddhist texts, which were
full of foreign ideas and foreign names into Chinese linguistic, Chinese cultural terms.
An early solution was to try and adapt as many core Buddhist concepts as possible to
pre-existing Taoist ideas.
So the Buddhist idea of nirvana was soon translated as Wuwei, the Taoist notion of disengagement.
And the word Tao itself, which of course you remember means the way, was now used to translate
the Buddhist idea of Dharma or divine law.
This meant that for many lower class Chinese, Buddhism was initially seen as a variant of
Taoism.
But more accurate translations of Buddhist literature started to become widely available
in China by the late fourth century, partly due to the work of an eminent Central Asian
monk named Kumura Jiva, who lived between 350 and 410.
Kumura Jiva established a huge translation school in Chang'an that employed, we read,
several thousand monks to accurately translate many of the major and very lengthy Buddhist
texts into Chinese.
Now Chinese pilgrims also began to make the long and arduous journey to India to more
deeply investigate the origins and core beliefs of the faith.
The most famous of these during this age of disunity was the scholar pilgrim Phak Chian,
whose 15 year journey between 399 and 414 is recorded in his own beautifully written
account.
But even as these more accurate and thus culturally distinctive versions of Buddhism began to
appear, the Buddhists continued to work hard to make their faith compatible with the core
ideals of Eastern civilization and to play down areas of possible conflict.
Numerous attempts were made, for example, to fuse Buddhism with Confucian notions of
filial piety, so donations to a Buddhist temple or expressions of Buddhist faith were now
seen or argued to be seen as demonstrations of filial piety.
But of course, contentious issues remained and these were played up by Daoists and others
who resented the wealth and growing influence of Buddhism on Chinese elites and communists
alike.
The celibacy of Buddhist monks was decried as an unfilial act, for example, because it
failed to provide one's ancestors with an heir.
So Confucians and Daoists instigated persecutions of Buddhists during the reign of Northern
Wei Emperor Taiwu between 424 and 452.
Orders were issued to close the monasteries and to force Buddhist monks and nuns to return
to everyday life.
A second round of persecutions broke out between 574 and 578 with a concerted effort
to destroy the wealthy and increasingly influential Buddhist religious establishment.
But neither round of persecutions did permanent harm and because no attempt was made to suppress
private Buddhist beliefs, the faith remained strong.
This was particularly so after the Sui Emperor Wendy re-unified the country and claimed to
be a Buddhist king.
The physical landscape of China was also transformed by Buddhism during the age of disunity.
Records indicate that by the first decades of the 6th century, the Buddhist Church had
built more than 9,000 temples across China and had more than 150,000 monks and nuns.
Magnificent Buddhist art and architecture now decorated lavish temples and monastic
complexes throughout the country, particularly pagoda-style stupas which now proliferated
in the great cities of Chang'an, Liyang and Nanjing.
Liyang itself was said to have been home to 1,000 Buddhist temples and monasteries.
Visitors to that city today can still admire the magnificent Buddhist art carved into
soft limestone cliffs at Longmen as I've done myself and I'm sure so have many of you.
Buddhism responded to the growing Buddhist threat by also transforming itself into a
religion.
Taoist celestial masters established their own well-run inns offering travelers free
meals and they became renowned for their ability to heal the sick and for their attempts to
achieve immortality.
The Taoists also argued a vision of a heavenly bureaucracy which mirrored the earthly bureaucracy
so central to Chinese government.
Emperor Tai Wu of the northern way, one of the persecutors of Buddhism, conceived cosmic
legitimacy from his Taoist supporters as the head of both the heavenly and earthly hierarchy.
Throughout the age of disunity, Taoist and Buddhist temples directly competed with each
other for political patronage and popular support.
And the Taoists were also responsible for their own magnificent religious art which appeared
as sculpture carved into cliffs or as superbly colored images painted onto the walls of caves.
As we've seen at the end of this age of disunity, North and South China were reunited in 581
CE under the short-lived but very effective Sui dynasty.
We have also seen that despite these centuries of turmoil, the core foundations of Chinese
civilization remained largely intact.
Confucianism had been preserved amongst the conservative aristocratic families particularly
in the South and notions of filial piety were as strong as ever.
And Taoism had transformed itself into a religion that now competed with the upstart newcomer
Buddhism for political patronage and popular support.
It remains to be seen how the powerful emperors of the mighty Tang dynasty which succeeded
the Sui and turned China into indisputably the strongest, wealthiest and most powerful
state on the planet would handle these conflicting cultural and spiritual claims for political
and popular support.
So in the next two lectures, we will explore the fascinating world of the Tang, their politics,
their extraordinary rulers including Empress Wu, the only woman ever to rule China to
this day, their culture and the superb treasure house of magnificent poetry they left to
the world, truly one of the great legacies of Eastern civilization.
And these will be our last lectures on China for some time.
Should we leave the Tang, we will journey on to Korea, on to Japan and the countries
of Southeast Asia to find out just how powerfully these regions, these peoples were being influenced
by all the foundational ideas of Chinese civilization we have explored thus far in the course.
So see you next time as we enter the amazing world of the Tang.
