We concluded our last lecture by noting that with the arrival in Japan of the Yayoi people
during the first millennium before the common era, who brought with them from Korea wet
rice agriculture, more complex technologies, larger villages and bronze metallurgy, Japanese
history and culture entered a new stage.
This next phase would be marked by the creation of resource surpluses, by increasing social
complexity, by the emergence of elites and the appearance of powerful individuals like
chiefs until eventually a fully fledged imperial state was in place in Japan or the land of
Nippon as it would now be called.
In this lecture and the next we will investigate these important stages in the cultural development
of Japan, the Bronze Age of the Yayoi people, the tomb period that followed, the rules of
the powerful Yamato kings, ongoing interaction between Japan, Korea and China of course,
the almost inevitable arrival of Buddhism in the islands, the development of the first
law codes in Japan and the culmination of all this in the glorious Nara period.
So let's begin this next lecture on our journey through the foundations of Eastern civilization
by picking up the story of the Yayoi people and the sophisticated cultural and technological
innovations that they introduced to the Japanese archipelago.
As was the case wherever agriculture appeared in various regions of the world, the intensive
rice farming techniques introduced to Japan by the Yayoi quite quickly led to a greater
availability of food, increasing population densities and the associated problems of
organizing these larger concentrations of people.
And this in turn led to a clearer division of labor and to the appearance of distinct
social hierarchies of power and of increased competition for resources between different
communities.
So inevitable are all these processes.
Is it any wonder that the transition from foraging to farming is often called the most
important revolution in all of world history?
As I mentioned last time, there is little evidence of actual conflict between the Jomon
and Yayoi communities, but there are certainly stark differences between their life ways.
Jomon communities appear to have been relatively egalitarian, communal in structure and nature
and peaceful.
Yayoi communities, on the other hand, were often located on hilltops surrounded by defensive
stockades and moats.
Archaeologists have found numerous caches of weapons in these sites and many human skeletons
that show clear evidence of violent attack.
Yayoi burials are also clearly distinguished from Jomon by the value of the grave goods
found in the much more lavish funerary structures that appear, and also by the fact that elite
graves are now located in special cemetery sections.
All this is clear evidence to archaeologists of the emergence of sharp hierarchies in
Yayoi communities.
These based on wealth and, therefore, on status, something that is frankly not found
in any of the archaeological record left behind by Jomon communities.
But I don't want to give the impression that Yayoi culture was homogenous or uniform throughout
the archipelago.
There are, in fact, marked regional differences.
Most Yayoi communities had access to bronze metallurgy, for example, but the tools and
weapons they made are quite different.
Many bronze weapons were imported presumably from Korea, but for some reason these were
often melted down and recast.
Differences in bronze usage might also reflect the fact that there was a wide range of cultural
influences now coming in from China as well as from Korea.
Some communities specialized in bronze weapons, most of which have been found inside the elite
tombs, suggesting individual ownership by these powerful elites.
Because of this, other Yayoi communities used their bronze not for weapons, but to make
bells that appear to have been the possession of the entire community and were probably
employed in agricultural rituals.
So distinct differences in bronze usage there.
Along with all this archaeological evidence of powerful Yayoi elites emerging, we also
have literary evidence from the first century of the common era onwards in the form of Han
dynasty Chinese records.
I should note that early Japanese and Korean cultures left very little in the way of official
histories or other literary records behind.
The oldest book actually written in Japan, in fact, was not written until the eighth
century of the common era.
But in China, of course, where the writing of literature and history already had a long
tradition by this stage, thousands of years of writing, we have superb records of the
observations of Chinese government officials and Chinese historians on events occurring
all over East Asia, which of course is most fortunate for our students of Eastern civilization.
And so we're able to read in the Chinese, whole hand shoe.
This is the annals of the later Han dynasty.
We're able to read that Kings of the Wa people, WA Wa people, which was the Chinese name for
the residence of the Japanese archipelago, had entered into a tributary relationship
with the Han and first sent envoys to the Han court through their Korean commandery,
you remember, of Lolang in the year 57 of the common era.
And then again, we read 50 years later in 107 CE.
These envoys brought tribute to the Han in the form of cloth, pearls, bows and arrows
and also slaves.
And in return, they received silk, gold, swords and jade from the Chinese Han court.
But even more striking evidence of political developments in Japan comes from references
in the the Wei dynasty annals composed during the third century of the common era, during
China's age of disunity.
The sources describe the Wa people as having divided now into more than a hundred small
states with several under the hegemonic control of a country called Yamatai.
Yamatai.
Despite centuries of investigation, it seems impossible to know where exactly in Japan this
Yamatai kingdom was located.
Was it divided between Kaushu or other regions, including the Kinai region?
The Chinese sources also contain several references to a powerful woman who ruled the Yamatai
state as queen.
This is the extraordinary and enigmatic Himiko, who's described as having employed shamanistic,
almost magical skills to secure and control the throne.
So we read in the Chinese sources that Himiko lived in a stockade protected by guard towers
that she had 1,000 servants, all of whom were female, although the only person that ever
saw her in person was her brother.
In the year 238, the Wei sources tell us that Himiko sent tribute to the Wei court in northern
China seeking a tributary relationship.
The request was accepted and Himiko was named as, quote, ruler of the Wa, friendly to the
Wei.
This is a powerful validation of her claims to leadership in Yamatai.
Part of her tribute from the Wei included a gold seal and 100 bronze mirrors.
These important Wei dynasty annals also inform us that Himiko was one of at least two, perhaps
more, the sources are ambiguous, perhaps more, female rulers of Yamatai.
There is, for example, another reference to a young woman, perhaps a niece of Himiko
named Ichio, who was also chosen to be leader of the Yamatai.
A reference to a tribute mission from Ichio to the Wei court is pretty well the last reference
we have to the kingdom of Yamatai, the last that there is in the Wei sources, sadly for
us.
One interpretation of this, right, of these references to the reigns of these powerful
women in the Yamatai kingdom is that perhaps Yamatai was essentially a matriarchal society.
But of course, with so little evidence, this is really impossible to substantiate.
When Queen Himiko died in perhaps the year 258 CE, the Wei sources note that, and I quote,
A great mound was raised more than a hundred paces in diameter.
The so far fruitless search for this burial mound has occupied Japanese scholars for generations,
but they have had plenty of other massive tombs to investigate.
Indeed, by the sixth century of the common era, the tombs of elite Yamatai dead were
enormous.
The largest were surrounded by moats and faced with stone paving, and each could contain
from one to several coffins.
The grave goods discovered in these elaborate tombs include bronze mirrors, obviously, swords,
different tools, ritual utensils, pieces of armor, and saddles for horses, all presumably
for protection in the afterlife.
Archaeologists believe that these tombs were strongly influenced by the burial methods
being used in the Korean Peninsula during the contemporaneous Three Kingdoms period
that we investigated in an earlier lecture.
Many of the tombs were decorated with paintings and engravings on the stone anti-chamber walls.
Some of these illustrations show groups of humans and animals apparently engaged in some
sort of ritual to offer magical protection for the dead.
Others depict what might be mythological subjects.
There are shields, quivers for arrows, a bird perched on the prowl of a boat, a man about
to seize an extraordinary animal, giant toads.
We really have no idea of the mythical stories in which these figures must have played a role.
Intriguingly, many of these same symbols and images continue to resonate in much later
Japanese art, long after the Yamatai had gone.
And they were often even incorporated into Buddhist art following the arrival of that
spiritual ideology from Korea.
Today these great tomb mounds, which are certainly the most visible archaeological feature in
all of Japan, are covered in grass and trees and resemble tranquil parks.
But such was not their original appearance.
When first raised, the mounds were surrounded by rings of low-fired clay statues, which many
of you may well have seen because they are housed in many of the great art museums of
the world, the enigmatic Hanewa figures, Hanewa figures.
The tombs and the carefully arranged Hanewa seem to capture in stone, frozen in stone
really, the sort of ritual ceremonies that must have accompanied the burials of the kings
and these other elites.
The clay Hanewa figures include a variety of humans.
We find warriors, shamans.
We find dancers in all sorts of poses, farmers, servants.
Also animals, there are fish, pigs, there are monkey statues and horses of course and
all sorts of artifacts, weapons, musical instruments, even boats all lined up in this frozen ritual
procession of clay.
Many of the Hanewa are sufficiently detailed to give us a pretty good idea of how men and
women even dressed during this tomb period, particularly men and women of the elite class
of course.
So both the men and the women appear to wear some kind of robe on the upper parts of their
bodies.
On the lower half women wore skirts and the men wore baggy trousers that actually looked
something like a skirt.
There's some suggestion that the common people may have worn a kind of poncho made of a single
sheet of cloth with a central hole for the head.
The two-piece costume worn by both sexes suggests that the famous one-piece kimono, which eventually
became a trademark of the Japanese way of life, must have been a later historical development.
Like the great terracotta tomb of Chinche Hongdi just outside of Sian today, like the
tombs of the Han emperors, like the tombs of the Koguyo Kingdom in Korea, the mountain
tombs of Japan during this period clearly reflect the fact that these elite leaders were not
only aristocrats, they were warriors.
Representations and artifacts of armor are bound in all these East Asian tombs from this
period and in the Japanese tombs in particular we see the antecedents of the powerful warrior
class that later came to dominate Japanese society, the samurai.
I'll have much more to say about the samurai in a later lecture.
In China, the Wei dynasty aristocrats were clad in full-body armor and were well trained
in the horse-riding traditions of the steppes just to the north of their kingdom.
In Korea, the tombs there depict men buried in suits of armor made of bone and iron.
The Yamato tombs have yielded iron body armor and iron helmets and many of the Hanawa, these
clay figures outside the tombs, dressed as fully armed warriors.
Also common to the tombs of ancient Chinese, Korean and Japanese elite warriors is the
horse.
Sixth century Hanawa depict horses lavishly fitted out with gilded bronze harnesses with
ornaments and saddle decorations.
Gilded tombs in Korea contain effigies of horses made of iron and Yamato tombs, horse
effigies are made of clay.
There is also evidence that some type of horse sacrifice must have been carried out in Yamatai
Japan at the death of the horse's owner because this act is specifically prohibited in a later
law code, the Nihon Shoki.
The emergence of the mounted warrior aristocrat in China, in Korea, in Japan is a reflection
of the power of the mounted armies of the steppenomatic people who as we have seen many
times in this course and as we will see again had such a devastating but also galvanizing
impact on all these ancient East Asian sedentary civilizations.
The source of the power of the kings and the other elites buried in all these Chinese,
Korean and Japanese tombs was wealth and this must in turn have been a product of successful
farming and successful trade which allowed the elites to accumulate such massive resources.
So it's not surprising that there is strong archaeological evidence that agricultural
productivity in Japan grew enormously through the fifth century of the common era probably
because of new tools and new farming techniques that arrived again from Korea including the
first iron tools, the first iron plows and also improved irrigation techniques.
Trade was also expanding if the remains of large ancient storehouses founded Osaka Bay
and also evidence of increased commercial interaction with Korea are any indication.
It is the surpluses of food and other goods that accumulated because of these developments
which clearly explains the source of Yamato royal power.
The more powerful kings buried in the largest keyhole shaped tombs also entered into a complex
network of allegiances with other less powerful chieftains in various regions of Japan.
Archaeologists can determine both the status of the interred but also the allegiance network
to which he or she belonged by calculating the number and quality of polished bronze
mirrors which were expensive and thus a valued form of tribute in all East Asian societies
and they can calculate how many of these are found in the individual tombs.
The picture archaeologists describe then is of a handful of central very powerful kings
distributing these mirrors to allies and subordinates as part of this allegiance network similar
to the tributary system so successfully employed by various Chinese dynasties as we've seen.
By the 6th century however many of the the regional Yamatai chiefs seem to have become
less autonomous probably because they were being incorporated into new and more powerful
kinship groups that were emerging.
Later written sources reflecting back suggest that the 5th and 6th centuries also witnessed
the development of a court system with kings and queens a court system serviced by special
social groups called bae who supplied the elites with their food their tools their weapons
clothing and perhaps their scribes.
These courts were dominated now by hereditary kinship or clan groups although these clan
groups were probably political rather than family groups by this stage.
In fact there appears to have been no dominant single family line amongst these Yamato kings
now until the 6th century when a dominant lineage did indeed emerge.
All these developments meant that by the mid 6th century the Yamato kingdoms and their
allied cultures were on the verge of the next major development in Japanese culture the
appearance of a genuine complex state.
Many of the criteria that archaeologists used to define states were certainly in place we
have elites supported by agricultural surpluses by tributary systems by quite extensive trade
certainly by monumental architecture in the form of these tombs a lot of craft specialization
is going on and now we have kings and queens and courts but what was missing was any sort
of formal administrative system there's no writing yet there's no bureaucracy there's
no written laws no system of taxation nor any mechanism for directly controlling the
outlying territories.
We have already seen that all these developments occurred in Korea during the three kingdoms
era in the final part of this lecture we need to trace the appearance of the first genuine
state in Japan and follow this through to the beginning of the sophisticated Nara period
early in the 8th century.
The appearance of the a clear cut state in Japan can be attributed perhaps ironically
partly to the arrival of Buddhism which had a powerful effect on cultural development
certainly but also political.
As we saw in a previous lecture Buddhism was introduced into Korea by proselytizing
monks during the three kingdoms era it's more than likely that these same monks also
introduced the first writing system into Korea in order to translate the important sutras
of the Buddhist faith.
Tradition then ascribes the transmission of writing into Japan in 405 of the common era
to the work of two Korean Paeche Kingdom scribes who served as Yamato treasury accountants
but it was not until 150 years later in the mid 6th century that intricately written Buddhist
sutras also start to turn up in the Yamato Kingdom evidence that the Buddhist faith had
arrived in Japan a little earlier.
Now initially the arrival of Buddhism sparked violent clashes between those clans that supported
this imported and thus foreign ideology and those who opposed it because it clashed with
vested interest they had in I guess local ritual systems.
In the end the pro-Buddhist factions won and the Buddhist hierarchy that arose as a result
came to compete with the political rulership of the Yamato strongly influencing state development.
As we've already seen many times in this course Buddhists have always relied on state tolerance
state patronage whether from the great Emperor Ashoka in India King Kanishka of the Kushan
Empire the rulers of the northern way and later the Sui dynasties in China or the leaders
of the Paeche Silla and Koguyo kingdoms in Korea.
In return for this royal patronage Buddhist hierarchies supported the rulers and their
imperial administrations so that state building often went hand in hand with religious building.
This was just as true of course in the relationship that developed between the Christian church
and various secular rulers in Europe and between the Islamic faith and the various caliphates
that came to support it and that were in turn supported by the religious hierarchy.
So after the arrival of Buddhism and the appearance of a temple hierarchy the next major influence
on state building in Japan came at the end of the sixth century influenced by events
in Korea and in China a kingship clan known as the Soga who may have also been immigrants
from Korea by the way seized power in the Yamato court.
The Soga were skilled in arts and crafts they were great patrons of Buddhism and they married
their daughters into the Yamato court to secure their own power.
The powerful leader of the Soga in the late sixth early seventh centuries was Soga No Umako
which literally translates to Umako of the Soga.
He maintained his power and prestige by manipulating the kingship through marriage.
State histories of the eighth century make much of the enlightened reigns of Umako's
niece Queen Suako who lived a pretty long life of those times between 554 and 628 CE
and her famous nephew and regent Prince Shotoku who lived between 574 and 622.
Shotoku is said to have centralized Soga power by founding a 12 rank court system that
led to the reorganization of officials very much in a sort of legalistic bureaucratic
Chinese fashion.
The system also seems to have been partly inspired by Confucianism because in a radical
departure from the earlier hereditary system, appointment to the ranks was now based on
merit not birth.
Shotoku was also credited with issuing in the year 604 of the common era the first constitution
in Japanese history, the so-called Constitution of 17 Articles.
This was a set of moral and political principles which outlined the power of the Yamato Lord.
And finally Shotoku launched a program of cultural investigation and enrichment by sending
students and envoys to various courts in China and Korea to learn as much as possible about
the continental way of life.
But the ambitious programs of Umako and Shotoku provoked a backlash against the Soga by other
clans.
In the year 645, an important year in Japanese history, two princes from rival clans stayed
J. Akude Tart assassinating the leading Soga and their supporters.
These princes then introduced a new formal taxation and administrative structure in a
series of reforms later historians celebrate now as the Taika reforms of 645 CE.
Reforms that were aimed at more strongly centralizing power.
Ironically they were able to do this because of the of the expertise in Chinese statecraft
and astronomy that students sent to China by Shotoku had amassed.
Now the next major influence on state formation in Japan occurred 18 years later.
And this was because the victory in the year 663 of the Tang and Silla alliance you remember
over the Pikeshaek Kingdom in Korea actually created a grave foreign affairs crisis in
Japan.
The Japanese now feared imminent attack by combined Tang and Silla forces.
So the Japanese islands and coasts closest to Korea in the south were heavily fortified.
The Yamato court needed to pay for these expensive fortifications.
And this led to the introduction of a much more sophisticated government bureaucracy
based on written communications and on formal taxation.
It also allowed the court to establish even firmer central control of those outlying semi-autonomous
regions of Japan.
These changes occurred quickly and are a clear example of a foreign threat strongly influencing
domestic reform.
The final stage in the process of creating a powerful and formal state in Japan occurred
during the reigns of Tenmu between 631 and 686 and his consort Jito from 645 into the
8th century.
So essentially the second half of the 7th century into the early 8th.
Now first a census of the population was taken in order to extract more taxes, more conscripted
labor also and more military service from the people.
This is the first census in Japanese history obviously incredibly important for historians.
Then secondly the power of local nobles was further weakened.
The first complete legal codes were promulgated and Buddhism was brought more firmly under
state control.
But perhaps the most important innovation of all carried out by Tenmu and Jito was the
adoption of the official title Tenno for the ruler of Japan and the name of Nihon or
Nippon for the Japanese state.
These were the intentional final steps in legitimizing and strengthening the power of the throne
and in creating a modern well-organized central government to rule the state.
Tenno means heavenly sovereign and was actually a Chinese term to describe an emperor who
sits at the center of his realm while everything else revolves around him.
Nihon or Nippon means the base or the origin of the sun which now came to be the official
name for the country.
Both these terms have survived for more than 1300 years to this day Japan has referred
to as Nippon Koku literally the state of Japan and the emperor as the Tenno or heavenly
sovereign.
Another of the great projects carried out by Tenmu and Jito was the construction of
a new and permanent capital city as the symbol of their new powerful state.
In 710 the capital was moved from Fujiwara to a new city Hajo known today by its modern
name as Nara.
The construction of this city strongly influenced by Chinese urban planning and obviously by
the great tongue capital of Chang'an marks the beginning of another new era in Japanese
history the Nara period.
Although the Nara period lasted for less than 90 years it had a profound influence on the
development of Japanese religion, literature, law, government and certainly on the visual
arts.
So this glorious Nara period will be the subject of our next lecture as we continue our journey
through the rich foundations of eastern civilization.
