Hello and welcome to the first in a pair of lectures on the last dynasty destined to ever
rule China, the Qing Dynasty.
Now the Manchus who established the Qing Dynasty in 1644 were descended from pastoral
nomads, although most Manchus had long before adopted a sedentary agricultural life way
in the rich farmlands of southern Manchuria.
They were direct descendants in fact of the Jurchen tribes who had ruled northern China
as the Jin Dynasty between 1115 and 1234 when they were defeated by the Mongols.
The remote ancestors of the Manchus had traded with China for a couple of thousand years
before this ever since the Qing Dynasty had ruled China a way back in the third century
before the common era.
As such the Manchus were part of the great tradition of pastoral nomads who as we have
seen repeatedly in this course had such a profound impact on Chinese and Korean history
for millennia.
There had been frequent clashes over the centuries between Chinese and Manchu over
land and resources along the borderlands of southern Manchuria and northern China with
the Chinese generally having the upper hand.
But during the late 16th century an ambitious Manchu chieftain named Nuhachi unified the
Manchu tribes into a centralized confederation.
Much like Chinggis Khan of the Mongols Nuhachi then promulgated a code of laws and organized
the Manchus into a powerful and very well organized military force.
He then changed the name of his people from Hul Jin which means the later Jin to Qing
a word that means clear in the year 1636.
In the 1620s and 1630s the Manchu army expelled Ming garrisons in Manchuria.
They captured parts of northern Korea and Mongolia and they began launching small-scale
invasions of northern China.
By 1644 the Qing Manchus now under the control of a new six-year-old emperor named Xunche
who was guided by his uncle the regent Dorgon had captured Beijing had crushed their rebel
allies and had seized the throne of China for themselves.
The Qing then slowly extended their authority throughout the rest of China although it took
them almost 40 years to defeat the final pockets of Ming loyalists and other rebels
weighted the south in southern China.
But these events remind us of the last days of their predecessors the Ming dynasty.
You might remember that when a series of famines struck China in the early 17th century the
government was so inept that it was incapable of organizing relief efforts.
As the famine worsened the desperate and starving peasants were forced to resort to eating grass
roots and tree bark.
In the 1630s angry peasants began organizing revolts and as they gathered momentum city
after city withdrew its loyalty from the Ming.
This was precisely the opportunity that the Qing Manchus had waited for they decided
to seize the moment and join forces with the peasants in a concerted attack upon the
Ming government.
By the early 1640s the combined rebel and Manchu forces controlled much of China and
they turned to the capital Beijing for their final assault on the government.
As I'm sure you'll remember on March the 17th 1644 the last Ming emperor personally killed
with his sword most of his family then fled to a pagoda tree in the Forbidden City and
hanged himself bringing to a tragic end the Ming dynastic era of Chinese history.
The victorious Manchus quickly overwhelmed the remaining Chinese forces including their
erstwhile peasant allies by the way and after seizing control of Beijing they began a long
campaign aimed at the complete subjugation of all of China under Manchu hegemony.
The victors proclaimed a new dynasty the Qing or clear dynasty which would go on to rule
China from 1644 until 1912 when the last emperor ever to rule the middle kingdom abdicated.
By the early 1680s the Qing were in control of all of China and were intent upon creating
an enormous empire based on the ancient Chinese Confucian model.
The establishment of the Qing dynasty was a product of Ming ineptitude and also the
formidable military prowess of the Manchus but also partly because of the support of
many Han Chinese for the Manchu invaders.
We actually know of several Chinese generals who during the 1630s and 40s deserted the
Ming dynasty because of its corruption because of its inefficiency Confucian scholar bureaucrats
also worked against the Ming because they detested the eunuchs who had for so long dominated
the imperial court and they hoped that the Qing would restore them to their formerly
favored position in government.
At the same time the Manchu ruling elites were very well schooled in Chinese language
and philosophy particularly Confucianism and because of this and their generally respectful
attitude towards the ancient traditions of eastern civilization the Qing elites enjoyed
more respect from the scholar bureaucrats than did the Ming emperor or his administration.
But the Manchus although certainly respectful of Chinese traditions were also very careful
to preserve their own ethnic and cultural identity.
They were coming to power they outlawed into marriage between Manchus and Han Chinese for
example.
They even forbade Chinese from traveling to Manchuria or learning the Manchurian language.
Qing authorities also forced Chinese men to shave the front of their heads and grow
a Manchu style cue which is a long plaited braid worn down the neck and back as a sign
of submission to the dynasty.
The Manchus also worked to preserve their own ethnic traditions and nomadic origins
so they continued to practice the skills of horsemanship obviously and also archery at
which all pastoral nomadic peoples had been so adept for millennia.
Indeed archery became so important in Qing China that it was incorporated into the imperial
military examination.
Now although the Qing practiced archery in deference to their nomadic ancestry archery
also had a long tradition in China.
It was even mentioned way back in the Shang dynasty oracle bone inscriptions and it was
revered for example under the Tang dynasty.
To this day archery in China remains incredibly popular and still frankly a revered sport.
Now despite these measures aimed at separating ethnic Han and Manchu until the 19th century
the strong imperial leadership practiced by the Qing rulers muted any outbreaks of ethnic
tension between Manchu leaders and their Chinese subjects.
The long range of two particularly effective rulers Kang Shi who ruled for 61 years between
1661 and 1722 and his grandson Qianlong who ruled for 59 years from 1736 until 1795 brilliantly
illustrate the ability of the Manchu's to maintain their hold on China through very
effective leadership.
During the reigns of these two emperors Qing China reached the height of its power and
prosperity as well as frankly an enormous size.
Even today and given the size of China today the Qing Empire is still recognized as the
largest contiguous empire in all of China's incredibly long history.
Let me say something briefly about these two great emperors now to give you some sense
of how these outsiders almost epitomized the best ideals of a Confucian leader.
Kang Shi for example was a superb scholar and an enlightened ruler well versed in the
finest traditions of Eastern civilization.
He was a great reader, he wrote excellent poetry in the best traditional style, he studied
the Confucian classics and genuinely tried to apply their teachings, their philosophy
to his policies.
For example he several times organized major flood control and very expensive irrigation
projects during his reign inspired by the Confucian ethical idea that a ruler's first
job is to look after the welfare of his subjects.
Kang Shi also generously patronized Confucian schools and academies and many important studies
of Chinese history, Chinese literature, philosophy and philology were published during his reign.
But as well as being a great scholar, a poet, certainly an ethical ruler, Kang Shi was
a great military leader and a conqueror.
It was under him that the Qing constructed its vast empire.
Kang Shi for example conquered the island of Taiwan where Ming loyalists had fled, retreated
and fled frankly after their expulsion from southern China and absorbed it back into the
empire and then like the Han and the Tang emperors before him he tried to head off problems
with militarized nomads by extending Chinese influence deep into Central Asia.
Eventually his conquests in Mongolia and in Asia extended almost as far as the Caspian
Sea.
Kang Shi then turned Tibet into a Chinese protectorate in a foreshadowing I think of
the policy of modern Chinese governments which you'll remember annexed Tibet in the 1960s.
Although this earlier conquest of Tibet was only possible after an extended conflict with
yet another group of Central Asian nomads known as the Dzungars, a very powerful coalition
of tribes from Mongolia.
The Dzungars actually invaded Tibet in the year 1717 taking control of the fabled city
of Lhasa with a 6,000 strong army.
They held on to it under the city for two years and soundly defeated the first Qing army
that was sent to the region in 1718.
Eventually the Qing did take control of Lhasa in 1720 when Kang Shi sent a large force there
to defeat the Dzungars.
In the 1650s meanwhile in I think another foreshadowing of more recent tensions between
the People's Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 300 years later
the Qing Empire began to engage the Russian Empire in a series of border conflicts in
the Amur Basin region which ended also in victory for the Qing.
After a series of battles and negotiations both sides ultimately signed the Treaty of
Nuchinsk in 1689 and as a result the border was fixed between these two expansionist empires
and the Amur River Valley was given to the Qing Empire.
Now Kang Shi's grandson Qianlong continued to expand Chinese influence in Central Asia.
Qianlong was the sixth emperor of the Qing dynasty and the fourth to rule over a unified
Qing Chinese Empire.
Qianlong sought to consolidate Kang Shi's conquests in Central Asia by establishing military
garrisons in Turkestan which is the present day province of Xinjiang in modern China.
Indeed it was Qianlong who first renamed the western regions Xinjiang.
This literally means western region and is the name by which they are still known today
after he finally defeated and destroyed the power of the Zungars.
Qianlong also encouraged Chinese merchants to settle in Central Asia in the hope that
they would stabilize the region and help spread Chinese culture and Chinese language deep
in the heart of Asia.
In Tibet meanwhile in an ironic reversal of the policy of modern Chinese governments Qianlong
supported and backed the Dalai Lama and placed a Qing garrison in Lhasa to protect his legitimacy
and power.
Not content with these Central Asian conquests Qianlong next made Vietnam and Nepal vassal
states of the Qing although a war against Burma ended incomplete failure for the Chinese.
Despite this one setback in the south overall the Qianlong Emperor's military expansion
nearly doubled the size of the already vast empire and brought into the fold many nonhand
Chinese people including Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, even Mongols.
But these campaigns were tremendously expensive enterprises virtually all the funds in the
imperial treasury had to be put into these military expeditions and although the wars
were successful they were not overwhelmingly so and indeed the army's efficiency declined
it noticeably in the face of some particularly challenging enemies.
By the end of the various frontier wars the army was considerably weakened.
But despite this most historians still regard Qianlong's reign as the high point of the
Qing dynasty.
Like Kang Shi his grandson was a sophisticated and learned man.
Qianlong was a major patron of the arts and he saw himself as an important preserver and
restorer of Chinese culture.
He also had an insatiable appetite for collecting and personally acquired much of China's great
private collections by frankly by any means necessary and then reintegrated their treasures
back into the imperial collection.
More than any other Qing emperor Qianlong lavished this imperial collection of historical
artifacts and glorious Chinese art with his personal attention and effort.
Like his grandfather Qianlong was also a poet.
He reportedly composed more than 40,000 poems and 1,300 prose texts during his lifetime
and he was a great connoisseur of painting and calligraphy.
But we must also note that Qianlong is remembered by historians as a great burner of books.
2,300 works were listed for total suppression and another 354 partial suppression by his
administration.
The emperor's aim was to destroy all writings that were in any way anti-Qing or inciting
of rebellions including those texts that insulted previous barbarian as in foreign dynasties
or that dealt with frontier or defence problems.
During Qianlong's long, stable and prosperous reign China was an incredibly wealthy state.
We can demonstrate this extraordinary wealth and despite the cost of the campaigns by the
way by noting that the imperial treasury contained so much money during his reign that on at
least four different occasions the emperor cancelled all tax collections for the year.
Imagine that happening anywhere in the modern world.
Throughout the almost six decades of Qianlong's reign then China remained a wealthy well-organised
powerful imperial state undoubtedly one of the great powers of the world.
But towards the end of his reign Qianlong began paying less attention to imperial affairs
and in the manner of his Ming predecessors decided to delegate many government responsibilities
to his favourite unics.
Qianlong ultimately resigned the throne at the age of 85 in the 60th year of his reign
to his son the Jia Qing emperor in 1795.
For the next four years he held the title of retired emperor although he continued to
hold on to power and the Jia Qing emperor ruled in name only.
He never moved into his retirement suites in the Qianlong garden and he died in 1799
at the venerable age of 89.
But rather than model themselves on the behaviour of Kangxi or the Yang Qianlong Qianlong's
successes adopted the practices of the emperor's later years devoting themselves more to hunting
and to their harems than to affairs of state.
This meant that during the 19th century the Qing dynasty faced serious difficulties but
I want to wait until the next lecture to really unfold the story of these difficulties to
you and of China's fall from global power.
Let me instead devote the rest of this lecture to economic matters with a particular focus
on population growth and economic development during the Qing dynasty in China.
For most of its incredibly lengthy history China has been a predominantly agricultural
country and this of course fits very well with the Confucian idea that the land is the
source of everything worthwhile in a state.
Actually this idea also fits very well with Taoist and legalist notions of the importance
indeed the centrality of the land and of farming for the health of the state.
So it's no surprise that the Qing emperor himself reinforced this central importance
of agriculture by personally plowing the first furrows of the farming season.
But it's important to note that only a fraction of China's land is actually suitable for farming.
Even today with modern technology modern fertilizers intensive farming techniques only about 11%
of China's enormous area of is productive agricultural land.
If you've flown over China's vast western regions as I have you will have been struck
by just how arid and unproductive much of this land is.
So to feed the country's enormous population farmers were forced to rely upon intensive
and productive market garden agriculture.
Now these small scale Chinese horticulturalists did this very well of course and on this strong
and successful intensive farming foundation China was able to build the most commercialized
farming economy of the pre-industrial world.
By intensively cultivating every parcel of land Chinese peasants were able to increase
their annual yields of rice, wheat and millet well into the 17th century.
And then from the mid 17th century on just as farmers were reaching the upper limits
of agricultural productivity using native crops Spanish merchants from the Philippines
began to introduce American food crops into China.
So crops that had first been domesticated thousands of years ago in South America and
Central America are crops like maize corn like sweet potatoes like the peanut allowed
Chinese farmers to grow crops in soils that had previously been uncultivated because they
were unsuited to Chinese indigenous crops.
This of course led to an increased food supply and consequently higher populations.
In fact despite regular epidemics of the plague which killed millions China's population rose
rapidly through the early modern period.
Now these are the best demographic estimates we had let me give you some idea of this population
increase.
In the year 1500 the population of China was somewhere around 100 million.
By 1600 a century later it had risen to 160 million.
In 1650 it actually fell perhaps to 140 million because of war and rebellion but 50 years later
by 1700 it had returned to 160 million and by 1750 at the height of the successful reign
of Qianlong China's population had surged to 225 million people.
That's a 40% increase in just 50 years.
By the early 1800s China's population had reached a staggering 360 million people which
is considerably more than the population of the United States today.
This demographic explosion set the stage for dynamic economic growth but of course it also
created all sorts of economic and social problems because agricultural growth could
barely keep pace long term.
These problems did not really become acute until the 19th century as we'll see although
per capita income was already declining during the reign of Qianlong.
While a growing population placed pressure on Chinese resources particularly food resources
the expanding commercial market also offered opportunities for entrepreneurs.
Because of this demographic expansion for example entrepreneurs now had access to an
enormous labour force that was occupationally and geographically mobile so that they could
recruit workers at very low cost.
And as we saw in our last two lectures on the Ming dynasty after the mid 16th century
the Chinese economy also benefited substantially from the influx of Japanese and American silver
which stimulated trade and which financed further expansion.
Now you'll remember of course the great Eunuch Admiral Zheng He and his seven massive maritime
expeditions across the Indian Ocean Basin.
You'll also remember how after the reign of Emperor Yongle the Ming withdrew its support
for these expensive maritime expeditions and they even tried to prevent Chinese subjects
from trading with foreigners.
In order to try and pacify southern China in the 17th century the Qing took this policy
a step further when the government made an abortive attempt to try and end maritime activity
all together.
An extraordinary and frankly unenforceable imperial edict of 1656 forbade and I quote
even a plank from drifting to sea.
In 1661 Kang Xi also ordered an evacuation of the southern coastal regions in an attempt
to end illegal maritime activity and bring the region more firmly under Beijing's control.
Yet these policies had only a limited effect despite the passing of these laws we know
that small Chinese vessels continued to trade actively with Japan and certainly with Southeast
Asia and because these laws were ultimately unenforceable and thus ineffective when Qing
forces finally did pacify southern China in the 1680s the government authorities rescinded
the strictest measures.
But from then on suspicious Qing authorities closely supervised the activities of all foreign
merchants in China and this was to lead to tremendous resentment amongst these international
merchant communities as I want to show you in the next lecture.
The Qing allowed the Portuguese to operate only in the port of Macau for example.
British agents had to deal exclusively with the official merchant guild in Guangzhou
as well as limiting the activities of foreign merchants the Qing also discouraged the organization
of large scale commercial ventures by Chinese merchants and this I think was ultimately
the most significant the most long lasting result of both Ming and Qing isolationist
policies because without government approval it was impossible to maintain shipyards that
could construct vessels like the massive nine mastered ships that Zheng He had sailed in
across the Indian Ocean.
Even more importantly it was also impossible to organize large trading companies like the
English East India Company or the Dutch VOC and this put Chinese merchants at a considerable
global disadvantage.
But despite these government policies we have evidence that thousands of Chinese merchants
did continue to link China into the global trading network albeit without their government's
approval and thus again at a significant disadvantage to their European competitors.
Nonetheless Chinese merchants were especially prominent in Manila in the Philippines where
they exchanged silk and porcelain for American silver that was coming across the Pacific
Ocean in the Manila galleons.
Chinese merchants were also active at the Dutch colonial capital of Batavia where they
supplied the Dutch VOC with silk and porcelain in exchange for silver and Indonesian spices.
Under the Qing then and with no support from the government merchants still established
a substantial Chinese presence throughout Southeast Asia and indeed further afield.
We know that Chinese merchants were active in the Philippines in Borneo, Sumatra, Malaya
and Thailand where they sought a range of exotic tropical products in these regions for their
Chinese consumers.
But again much of this economic expansion took place in the absence of technological innovation.
As we've seen under the Southern Song Dynasty a Chinese engineer produced a flood of extraordinary
inventions and China was by far the world's leader in science and technological innovation.
But under the Ming and the Qing innovation slowed and the Chinese started borrowing ideas
from the West instead.
One clear example of this is that imperial Qing forces began adopting European cannons
and European firearms for their own use thus re-borrowing both advanced iron manufacturing
and gunpowder technology that had originated in China but refined, been refined in the
more war-like and competitive environment of early modern Europe.
Indeed there was little innovation in either agricultural or industrial technologies under
the Qing dynasty.
Part of the reason for this slowdown was the government's emphasis on stability.
Under the Song the imperial government had encouraged innovation as the foundation for
military and economic strength but both the Ming and the Qing governments and the Confucian
scholar bureaucrats who were at the heart of their administration's favoured political
and social stability over innovation which they feared would lead to unsettling change.
The abundance and ready availability of cheap skilled workers also discouraged technological
innovation.
If employers wanted to increase production it was actually cheaper to hire more workers
rather than make large investments in new technology.
In the short term this did maintain relative prosperity in China and helped keep employment
rates high but in the long term the ultimate result of all these developments was that
China lost technological ground to the Europeans who embarked on a round of stunning innovations
beginning in the mid 18th century during a period historians call the Industrial Revolution.
As we will see in our next lecture these developments were to have disastrous consequences for Chinese
sovereignty.
At the heart of the problem facing China with the death of Emperor Qianlong on the eve of
the 19th century was the essential conservatism of the Ming and Qing dynasties which had caused
China to withdraw from the world at precisely the same moment that Western powers were aggressively
engaging in it.
