Today, I want to continue our exploration of the transformation of the key political, economic,
social and cultural foundations of Eastern civilization that occurred during the 20th
century, a century at least partly characterized by Cold War and globalization.
Last time we saw how, following the collapse of the ancient dynastic system of government
in 1912, China had to endure almost four decades of civil war plus a brutal invasion by the
Japanese until some semblance of political stability was re-established.
But this stability came with a high price.
The division of China into two rival states ruled by two competing governments.
In 1948, you will remember, Chiang Kai-shek declared a nationalist democratic government
on the island of Taiwan.
And the following year, on October 1, 1949, Mao Zedong declared the establishment of the
People's Republic of China on the mainland.
The existence of two Chinas, and ironically also of two Koreas and two Vietnams, as we
will see later in this lecture, reflected the wider division of virtually the entire
world into two bitterly opposed and heavily armed camps following the end of the Second
World War.
These two camps, one led by the United States of America, the other by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, were both bristling with nuclear weapons.
They remained bitterly divided for much of the second half of the 20th century by political
ideology.
For this reason, the history of Eastern civilization in the decades after the Second World War
must of necessity be unfolded in the context of the global reality of the Cold War.
As we have seen throughout this course, for thousands of years Eastern civilization had
evolved in relative geographical and geopolitical isolation from the rest of the world.
But from the 18th century on, it had become impossible to ignore the involvement of a
host of foreign players in East Asian affairs, foreigners who dragged most of East Asia into
their colonial empires and spheres of interest.
But this forced interconnectedness of the world increased exponentially during the Cold War.
After the Second World War, there was really nowhere on the planet that was isolated anymore.
Affairs in one part of the world could potentially have a devastating impact on another region
thousands of miles away.
So in this lecture, we take a closer look at the impact of the Cold War and also the
more general trend towards globalization on Eastern civilization during the 20th century.
We'll do this by exploring the theme of division in several ways.
Of an initially close but later bitterly divided relationship between China and the
Soviet Union first, then the outbreak of two bloody hot wars that divided both Korea and
Vietnam into the former permanently the latter for 30 years.
In our very last lecture, we will also touch briefly upon the future of the two Chinas.
How long will Taiwan and Beijing remain unreconciled?
Will we see a restoration of unity in our lifetimes?
Let's pick up the story now with the evolving relationship between the People's Republic
of China and the USSR, a subject that we touched upon in our last lecture.
With the success of the Communist revolutions in Russia in 1917 and China in 1949, by 1950
the Communist camp contained roughly half the world's population.
Delighted with their success, Moscow and Beijing worked closely together during the early years
of the Cold War, united by their common commitment to communism and against their common enemy,
the USA and her allies.
The Chinese were particularly incensed by the American rehabilitation of their former enemy
in Japan and also by U.S. support for the ancient Chinese client states of South Korea
and Taiwan.
Throughout most of the 1950s, China was happy to recognize the USSR as the undisputed authority
in world communism and China received Soviet weapons and Soviet economic aid in return.
For their part, the Soviets worked diligently in the United Nations to have the Chinese
seat in the Security Council transferred from the nationalist government in Taiwan to the
CCP government in Beijing.
The cracks started to appear in the partnership late in that decade when China realized it
was receiving less aid from the Soviets than non-communist Egypt and India were.
It was also in the 1950s that tensions between China and India, along with military skirmishes
high in the Himalayas, broke out over the question of the sovereignty of Tibet.
In the midst of this tense standoff between the two most popular states on earth, India
and China, the Soviets infuriated the Chinese by outwardly remaining neutral in the conflict,
yet secretly giving a huge loan to India.
By the early 1960s, occasional border clashes were occurring between Soviet and Chinese
troops in Central Asia and by 1964 both countries were publicly engaging in name calling.
As I mentioned last time, the CCP declared the USSR under Khrushchev to be revisionist
because it was pursuing a policy of peaceful coexistence with the USA.
The Soviets responded by declaring Mao a dangerous left-wing adventurer because he insisted that
war between communism and the West was inevitable.
When the Chinese successfully tested their own nuclear weapons in 1964, this only served
to further increase tensions in the communist world.
As we also noted last time, Mao then embarked upon a series of social and economic programs
to try and distinguish Chinese communism from Soviet communism.
The Great Leap Forward between 1958 and 1961 was an attempt to have the Chinese economy
catch up with even match those of the more developed nations by collectivising all agriculture
and industry.
But as I mentioned last time, the abolition of private ownership led to failed harvests
and a deadly famine that resulted in the deaths of perhaps 20 million Chinese by 1962.
This deteriorating relationship between two major nations was playing out in the even
larger context of the Cold War, which became a truly global phenomenon in the 1950s.
The globalization of the war was really the inevitable outcome, I think, of a confrontation
that pitted the dominant power of the Eurasian landmass, the Soviet Union, against a power
that could project forces all over the world by land, by sea, by air, the United States
of America.
The Cold War also pitted one bloc aimed at worldwide communist revolution against another
bloc committed to democracy, capitalism and free trade.
Tensions were fueled by related global processes, particularly decolonisation, and most particularly
in Africa, which left a string of unstable, ex-colonial countries open to Cold War competition
and also by rivalry over oil resources in the Middle East.
The globalization of the Cold War became absolute with the invention of intercontinental ballistic
missiles, which placed every corner of the Earth in constant danger of nuclear attack.
In military terms, the Cold War passed through several distinct phases.
In the late 1940s and 50s, when the USA held a distinct advantage in weaponry, the Soviets
or the Chinese could not dare risk a major clash.
When U.S. allies Britain in 1952 and then France in 1960 also developed their nuclear
capacity, NATO was able to publish its doctrine of overwhelming retaliation, a further disincentive
to the outbreak of any major military conflict.
But the Cold War did become hot twice, and in both cases these wars were fought in East
Asia, in Korea between 1950 and 1953, and then in Indochina, where defeated French troops
gave way to Americans in 1954, dragging the USA into the long and bloody Vietnam War,
which lasted until 1975.
So let's leave the deteriorating relationship between China and the Soviet Union for a moment
and turn to those two hot conflicts, both of which occurred in countries that had been
powerfully influenced for millennia by the foundational ideas of eastern civilization.
As we have seen throughout this course, Korea actually has a long history of division between
North and South.
Remember the three kingdoms period way back during the first centuries of the common era.
South Korea was then under the control of the powerful Kaguya Kingdom, while the South
was divided between Silla and Paikche.
The relationship between these three kingdoms was one of constant warfare and shifting alliances
with the Chinese playing a key role.
Even after Silla was able to unify the South under its hegemony in the 7th century, the
North remained under the control of a separate Pahai dynasty.
During their 500 year reign, the Choson dynasty was able to maintain rule over a unified Korea,
but the roots of this cultural division between North and South remained deep, even during
the period of Japanese occupation.
This reminds me that we last visited Korea on August 15, 1945, the date upon which Korea
was liberated from Japanese hegemony, a day of jubilation throughout the country.
But as a result of three and a half decades of Japanese colonial rule, Korean society
in 1945 was a chaotic mix of old and new classes, ideologies and political factions.
The core cultural elements of Korean culture, by that I mean dynastic governance, a rigid
social hierarchy as we've seen, the ancient values of Confucianism and Buddhism and a
pension for isolation from the world had all been turned on their heads by Japanese imperial
rule, which had severely shaken up the ideals and loyalties of intellectuals and ordinary
folks alike.
On the left of the political spectrum now were thousands of dedicated communists, many
of whom had waged guerrilla warfare against the Japanese for years, who were now determined
to transform Korea into a more egalitarian society as their communist comrades in China
were in the process of doing at that very moment.
On the right were the landlords, the businessmen, many former Japanese collaborators who were
determined to try and preserve their privileged place in society.
Now it's easy to see how these political tensions coupled with this long history of
division would become mixed up with Cold War geopolitics to create the two bitterly divided
careers of today.
During the defeat of the Japanese, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to a proposal
opposed by most Koreans, by the way, to jointly occupy the peninsula as a trusteeship with
an agreed upon division between the two along the 38th parallel.
Although this arrangement was supposed to be temporary, the Soviets repeatedly postponed
elections in their northern sector, which led ultimately to the establishment of a communist
state under Soviet auspices in the north and a pro-Western democratic state in the south.
Even this trusteeship arrangement, a forced upon the country by external powers, has deep
historical precedence in Korea, given the various periods of occupation the peninsula
had suffered since ancient times, as we've seen by outside powers like China and the
Japanese.
There is an interesting story behind the decision to make the 38th parallel the dividing line
between north and south, by the way.
In August 1945, two young American officers were asked by the US government to quickly
establish an appropriate line of demarcation between the Soviet and US trusteeships in
Korea.
Coincidentally, one of the two young US officers was Dean Rusk, who later became US Secretary
of State under both President John Kennedy and President Lyndon Johnson.
Working quickly and completely unprepared for this task, the officers used an old National
Geographic map to select the 38th parallel, mainly because it would leave the Choson capital
of Seoul in the western-aligned democratic south.
Although no Koreans were consulted about this, the decision was quickly written into General
Order No. 1 for the administration of post-war Japan.
North of the parallel, a provisional government was established in February 1946 by communist
leader and anti-Japanese guerrilla hero Kim Il-sung, called the North Korean People's
Provisional Committee.
As mistrust grew between the US and the USSR, the US saw it United Nations involvement in
the question of Korea's future, but the Soviets boycotted the discussions.
With dwindling hopes for reunification, the Republic of Korea was declared in the south
on August 15, 1948, and on September 9 of that same year, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea was declared in the north with Kim Il-sung, its first prime minister.
Almost immediately, the relationship between the two Koreas degenerated into a series of
bloody skirmishes along the 38th parallel, skirmishes that escalated into full-scale
war in 1950.
The Korean War that ensued was a bitter military conflict between the Republic of Korea and
the south, supported by the United Nations and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
in the north, supported by the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China.
The war began on June 25, 1950, and an armistice was not signed until just over three years
later on July 27, 1953.
The tense military skirmishes along the 38th parallel escalated into full-scale open warfare,
when North Korean forces suddenly invaded the south on June 25.
In what was the first significant armed conflict of the Cold War, the well-trained and well-armed
North Korean forces, equipped with Soviet weapons, took Seoul in three days and swept
onto the south until by early August virtually all of the peninsula was under their control.
The United States, under UN auspices, quickly came to the aid of the South Koreans, and
General Douglas MacArthur succeeded in splitting the North Korean Army in two with a successful
amphibious assault on the port of Incheon near Seoul.
A rapid US-UN counteroffensive then recaptured Seoul and forced the North Koreans back past
the 38th parallel, but at that moment the Chinese Red Army came to the aid of the Communist
North.
There's a long history here too, of course, of Chinese military alliances with various
Korean factions and even several military invasions of Korea, as we've seen several
times in this course.
Hundreds of thousands of Chinese troops drove the UN forces south again, back past the 38th
parallel.
On January 4, 1951, Seoul fell for a second time.
UN forces managed to recapture the city in March 1952, but thereafter a stalemate developed
between the two sides.
The very real potential that this conflict could escalate into nuclear war finally ended
with an armistice that restored the border between the Koreas near the 38th parallel
and created the Korean demilitarized zone, a 2.5-mile wide buffer zone between the two
Koreas, which of course is still in place today.
This war cost the lives of two million combat personnel and civilians, including 37,000
US dead.
Finally it solved nothing and brought ruin to both halves of the country, although as
we will see with the aid of the United States the economy of South Korea soon staged a
remarkable recovery.
Even today of course, as so often in the past, the Korean Peninsula, the land of morning
calm remains bitterly divided.
The real legacy of the Korean War has been to instill a sense of fear and insecurity
that still blights the two Koreas in both their internal development and more particularly
in the relationship between the two halves.
So one ancient division of an East Asian society continues through to the present and
so also could have been the fate of Vietnam as a result of another brutal Cold War conflict
there.
Vietnam also has a long history of division between North and South.
Divisions as we have seen based on geography, on cultural and even linguistic differences
and in its long and complex relationship with the Chinese and with the French.
During the 18th and 19th centuries the French had assembled a colonial empire in Indochina
which included Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
Much of Indochina was then occupied by the Japanese during the Second World War with
a puppet Vichy style French colonial administration left in charge.
Late in the war Japan replaced this French regime with a pro-Japanese Vietnamese emperor
named Baodai who immediately proclaimed independence from France.
During the war, as was the case in Japanese occupied China and Korea and indeed in much
of Nazi occupied Europe, it was a communist guerrilla force known as the Viet Minh in Vietnam
which formed the most effective anti-Japanese resistance movement.
The Viet Minh were particularly strong in the North close to their bases just across the
border in Southern China.
When Japan surrendered the leader of the Viet Minh, Ho Chi Minh, moved quickly to fill the
power vacuum and quickly proclaimed an independent democratic republic of Vietnam.
But the French were determined to reassert their control of the region.
They occupied the major cities with the indirect assistance of British forces that had been
sent to assist with the surrender of the Japanese.
The first direct confrontation between the French and the Viet Minh occurred at Hai Phong
Harbour in November of 1946 when the Viet Minh fired on a French warship.
In the brutal French retaliation that followed, 6,000 Vietnamese were killed leading to the
outbreak of a guerrilla war against the French.
The initial phase of the war from 1947 to 49 resulted in stalemate.
But with the success of the Communist Revolution in China in 1949 the Viet Minh gained a powerful
ally and with Chinese military assistance they were able to drive the French out of
North Vietnam the following year.
The cost of maintaining this colonial war was now too much for the French government.
From 1952 onwards the United States of America agreed to cover the cost of the war.
The French did make one last dramatic attempt to defeat the Viet Minh by enticing them into
what they hoped would be a decisive confrontation at Dien Bien Phu.
But the 15,000 French soldiers sent to Dien Bien Phu were quickly surrounded by the Viet
Minh and following a six month siege from November 1953 through to May of 1954 the French garrison
was forced to surrender.
This defeat marked the end of French colonial ambitions in Indochina.
The 1954 Geneva Accords that followed Dien Bien Phu partitioned Vietnam into two zones
but the hope was that this would be only a temporary measure before national elections
could reunite the two halves.
The North was now ruled by the Viet Minh as the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
The South was known as the State of Vietnam.
The United States government of course saw the situation in Vietnam as a test case for
the containment of communism and this resolve led to the outbreak of a second and much more
bloody conflict known to Western historians ever since simply as the Vietnam War.
The United States government believed it was essential to prevent the communist takeover
of South Vietnam.
The North Vietnamese government on the other hand saw U.S. involvement as an extension
of the colonial war they had just successfully waged to drive out the French.
The North dismissed the new State of Vietnam later known as the Republic of Vietnam in
the South as nothing more than a U.S. puppet state.
U.S. military advisers started arriving in Vietnam quite quickly in the 1950s.
Troop levels then tripled in 1961 and 1962 and combat units were deployed beginning in
1965.
U.S. and Australian military involvement peaked in January 1968 at the time of the Tet Offensive
when in a well coordinated move 80,000 Viet Minh troops captured around 100 towns and cities.
Although United States troops and their allies recaptured much of the lost territory, the
brutal battles at Hue and Que Sahn shook the U.S. military and also shook the U.S. public
which had been led to believe that the communists were incapable of such tactics and would be
easily defeated.
With this profound erosion of support for the war and with bitter divisions in the administration
of President Lyndon Johnson, United States ground forces were gradually withdrawn.
But despite the Paris Peace Accord signed by all parties in January of 1973 fighting
continued for two more years.
In April 1975 the North Vietnamese captured Saigon just as the last U.S. personnel were
withdrawn an event that marked the real end of the Vietnam War.
North and South Vietnam were reunified the following year and unlike Korea they have
stayed united up to the present day under the control of a communist government in Hanoi.
This second brutal East Asian Cold War conflict also exacted a tragic human toll somewhere
between three and four million Vietnamese from both sides were killed as were two million
Laotians and Cambodians and 58,159 U.S. service personnel.
Let me try and begin to wrap up this lecture now by returning to the global vicissitudes
of the Cold War particularly as it played out in East Asia into the 1970s.
As both the Vietnam and Cold Wars dragged on the United States government decided it
was time to try something new, time to try and take advantage of this tense split between
the Soviets and the communist Chinese.
In 1972 President Richard Nixon visited the aging chairman Mao Zedong in China a diplomatic
coup which had the immediate effect of bringing China back into what had been for the past
quarter century and essentially bipolar world.
Nixon was greeted by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai when Air Force One touched down in Beijing
a city then still known in the West as Peking and an historic handshake took place at the
foot of the gangway.
In the background was a huge anti-imperialism poster quoting the words of Chairman Mao,
make trouble fail, make trouble again fail again until their doom.
This is the logic of imperialism and reactionaries the world over.
President Nixon visited the Forbidden City and the Great Wall of course and at a farewell
banquet in Shanghai found himself involved in a series of heads back swallow it whole
toasts with the Chinese leadership.
Needless to say the trip was a great success as were several follow-up trips by Henry Kissinger.
It wasn't long in fact before liaison officers opened in Beijing and Washington DC and formal
diplomatic relations were later inaugurated in 1979.
In fact during the 1970s, Communist China established full diplomatic relations with
several other major Western powers and also with Japan.
As a direct result of the establishment of this relationship between China and the world
the Soviets felt under increasing pressure to try and stabilize their European flank.
And this led quickly to a major breakthrough in the lessening of Cold War tensions.
The Helsinki Conference which ran from 1972 to 1975.
With Nixon's visit to China and the end of the Vietnam War the Cold War had ended a new
phase that saw China reassume an important geopolitical position as one of the great
global powers, a position frankly that as we have seen repeatedly in this course China
had occupied for much of world history.
But let's not forget that even with these diplomatic breakthroughs China in the mid-1970s
was still mired deep in the Cultural Revolution and desperately trying to deal with a failing
economy.
So in our next lecture it seems appropriate that we return to another of these enduring
themes of the course, economics.
We will see how under the leadership of Mao's successor Deng Xiaoping the ancient Chinese
economy was revived so spectacularly that within one generation China was boasting one
of the largest and most vibrant economies on the planet.
And it wasn't only China that stayed through a remarkable recovery of course.
We will also return to Japan and see how that country quickly rehabilitated itself after
the horrors of World War II to rejoin the ranks of the leading economies of the modern
world and to inspire a similar economic revolution in South Korea and all the other so-called
little tigers of East Asia.
See you soon.
