Five years after the death of Mao Zedong in September 1976, following a bitter power struggle
within the upper echelons of the Chinese Communist Party, Deng Xiaoping assumed complete control
of both the Party and the People's Republic of China in 1981.
Deng immediately moderated Mao's commitment to economic self-sufficiency and isolation,
the sort of isolation that so many Chinese leaders before him had attempted to pursue
over the millennia and brought China into the international trading and financial system.
This new economic policy direction was facilitated by the normalization of relations between
China and the USA that had begun, as we saw with President Nixon's 1972 visit to Beijing,
a diplomatic coup for which Nixon deserves enormous credit, I think.
In his desire to push for more rapid economic development, Deng decided to walk something
of a tightrope to open up the nation to capitalist market principles without surrendering any
of the control the CCP exercised over the state.
This decision to pursue a quasi-capitalist economic model in China would no doubt have
surprised the late 19th, early 20th century sociologist Max Weber.
In two of Weber's classic works, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism and The
Religions of China, Confucianism and Taoism, Weber had argued that the core ideologies
of Confucianism and Taoism were essentially incompatible with capitalism.
Weber argued that actively working to acquire wealth was frowned upon by the Confucian
ethic, which was focused more on self-restraint, on the acquisition of status through intellectual
and ethical cultivation, and an emphasis on communal rather than individual values.
Because of this, Weber believed that capitalism could never develop in China.
Certainly, one of the classic sayings of Confucius in the analytics seems to support
Weber's interpretation.
You might remember this saying from an earlier lecture.
The noble man does what is right, the lesser man does what is profitable.
But perhaps Weber would not have been so astounded by Deng Xiaoping's embrace of capitalism
and China's extraordinary economic success in the 20th century.
He would probably point out that this development was precisely because China had intentionally
turned away from its ancient Confucian values and adopted many of the ideals of the West.
This tension, this tightrope walk between the necessity of adopting imported models and
ideals to ensure modernization and economic success, while at the same time not letting
go of the ancient models and ideals that had sustained unique Eastern civilization for
so long, has been played out over and over again in all the nations of East Asia in the
20th and 21st centuries, as we have seen and as we will see.
Deng Xiaoping's program of introducing the principles of market capitalism to China was
dubbed the Four Modernizations.
Essentially, this meant that China needed to make significant progress in the agriculture
sector, in industry, in science and technology and in defence.
To facilitate this and realising how desperately China needed to educate its managerial class
after the anti-education policies of the Cultural Revolution, during which slogans like Red
Over Expert had abounded, Deng sent tens of thousands of Chinese students to foreign universities
to build a modern professional base to help him achieve the Four Modernizations.
Thinking again of the continuing relevance of Confucianism, just for a moment, we have
seen repeatedly in this course that one of the really enduring ideas of Eastern civilization
has been this commitment to advanced education for the people.
Something Confucius himself argued for, what, 2,500 years ago, and an idea pursued by all
the leading dynasties of China ever since, right through the Confucian exam system.
But an educated populace could also be more difficult to manage by governments, so we
have also seen periods in which a more legal distrust of education was embraced by the
state, beginning with the Qin dynasty and more recently during the Cultural Revolution.
As large numbers of students were sent overseas by the government, and by the way, I remember
them turning up at my former university in Sydney, Australia, they undoubtedly gained
a high quality technical education, but they were also exposed to democratic ideals as
they stated it at universities in Australia and in the United States of America.
It was this exposure that led directly to the outbreak of pro-democracy demonstrations
in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, an event we will consider in our final lecture.
Along with attempts to build a more educated workforce, Deng and the Party also focused
on another modernization, reforming the agriculture sector, a challenge frankly faced by every
Chinese government from the ancient Shang dynasty onwards.
So abandoning Mao's commitment to communes, production teams of 30 or 40 families were
now contracted to produce a certain quantity of crops on land allotted to them by the government.
You remember of course the Equal Field System, first tried by the Sui and the Tang dynasties
what, 1300 years earlier, there are definite similarities here.
These communities could now plan together to maximize production because they had an incentive.
If they produced more than their quota, they could keep it and they could sell it.
This policy, along with the reinstatement of private markets, the sort of markets that
have dominated village life in China for 8,000 years now, had immediate success in increasing
national food production which was Deng's first great triumph.
Turning to the industrial sector next, Deng and the Party opened manufacturing up to foreign
trade and to new technological ideas and they also began to welcome international investment.
As local entrepreneurs with more autonomy were able to concentrate now on the production
of consumer and export goods, foreign exports exploded.
This increased both private and public income and led to surging development particularly
in those coastal areas that already had a long history of involvement in foreign trade.
One such region in southern China was the island of Hong Kong and the manner in which
the Chinese government handled the British hand back of Hong Kong in 1997 is a further
example, I think, of the pragmatism and economic rationality of the People's Republic of China
under Deng Xiaoping.
Hong Kong had long been part of Chinese sovereign territory, having been initially incorporated
into China way, way back during the Qin dynasty, that is in the third century before the common
era.
During the Tang dynasty in the eighth century of the common era, the island and surrounding
territory had developed into a thriving commercial hub, status that it had maintained into the
modern period.
But under the Qing dynasty, the British used what is euphemistically known as gunboat diplomacy
to force the Chinese to cede Hong Kong to Britain for about a century and a half as
part of the first unequal treaty signed between the two nations.
You remember the circumstances.
During the Second World War, Hong Kong was occupied by the Japanese from 1941 onwards
until it was liberated by British and Chinese troops in August 1945.
A flood of labour from the mainland into Hong Kong in the 1950s transformed the territory
into a major industrial manufacturing centre.
In the 1960s, as mainland China struggled economically, traditional Chinese values were
increasingly challenged in Hong Kong by its booming capitalist economy, in which enormous
numbers of Chinese found work in Western-style manufacturing and Western financial industries.
By the 1970s, Hong Kong was arguably the major tourism and commercial centre of Southeast
Asia.
It was being astonished by Hong Kong when I first visited there as a child.
But as the fateful year of 1997 approached, the year in which, according to the treaty,
the British government had agreed to hand Hong Kong back to Chinese control, many worried
residents left the island.
True to their word, the last British governor of Hong Kong, Chris Patton, supervised a peaceful
and orderly handover of sovereignty on July 1, 1997, and the world waited to see what
would happen next.
Surprisingly to many, very little happened to change Hong Kong's position as a major
tourism and economic hub.
The People's Republic of China designated Hong Kong as a region of special status, governed
by a provincial legislative council elected by a selection committee whose members were
initially appointed by the People's Republic of China government.
Under this special status, Hong Kong has continued to thrive and new buildings are constantly
being added to an already extraordinary and impressive skyline.
As the end of the 20th century approached then, China could look back on 50 years of
tumultuous change since the declaration of the People's Republic of China in 1949 by
Mao Zedong.
The leadership of Deng Xiaoping had steered China away from the sort of legalist excesses
of Maoism and towards a successful and stable economic future based on equitable ownership
of agricultural land and the creation of an educated workforce to better manage the manufacturing
and export sectors of the economy.
The bloodshed in Tiananmen Square in 1989, and again this is something we will talk about
more in our next lecture, had stained Deng's reputation.
But the peaceful hand back of Hong Kong not only added a wealthy commercial centre to
the Chinese state, it also allowed China to demonstrate its ability to govern with greater
tolerance.
As Deng's health deteriorated prior to his death in 1997, President Jiang Zemin and other
members of his generation gradually assumed control of the day-to-day functions of government.
This third generation now, third generation leadership was determined to take China into
the 21st century as a stable, prosperous and a more moderate economic powerhouse.
But before we consider China's continuing growth during the past decade and a half,
let's turn next to the economies of the other major nations of East Asia.
This is a topic of enormous world historical importance of course, because there can be
no doubt that the surge towards globalisation and worldwide economic integration that so
characterised the latter part of the 20th century benefited enormously from economic
developments throughout all of East and Southeast Asia.
And this is because the economies of not only China, but also Japan, South Korea and all
the other so-called Asian tiger nations underwent dramatic growth in this age of market globalisation.
Some might argue that what was lost in this tidal wave of globalisation were many of the
core cultural ideologies that had sustained Eastern civilisation for so long, because
it was Western-style economic and cultural ideas that were now adopted by the nations
of East and Southeast Asia.
But as we have seen, despite what some have called the coca colonisation of the world,
there has been a genuine commitment in China, Korea, Japan and Southeast Asia to embrace
those Western ideologies that are critical for survival in the globalised village, but
at the same time not completely abandon the traditional cultural ideas that had sustained
these states for so long.
How much longer this delicate cultural balancing can be maintained will be something incredibly
interesting for us all to watch in the years ahead.
It was policies promoted by the United States, policies obviously influenced by Cold War
politics that jump-started Japan's economic revival after its defeat in 1945.
And so effective was this alliance between United States aid and Japanese industriousness
that by as early as 1949, the Japanese economy was already back to its pre-war output levels.
In the same way that European post-war recovery benefited directly from the injection of cash
and technology funneled in through the Marshall Plan, the Japanese economy also received a
blood transfusion in the form of $2 billion in investment aid from the United States government.
And as a further and frankly perhaps even more valuable form of assistance to this new
U.S. Cold War ally, no restrictions whatsoever were placed on the entry of Japanese goods
into the U.S. market.
The United States then signed a mutual defense treaty in 1960 which stipulated that Japan
could never spend more than 1% of its GNP on defense, 1%.
So in essence the United States took care of Japanese defense, allowing Japan to invest
virtually all of its GNP income back into the economy.
It was the Treaty of San Francisco and the Associated Security Treaty, both signed in
1951, that formalized Japan's relationship with the U.S. and its role in the new international
arena.
By the time the treaties went into effect on the 28th of April 1952, Japan was a free
nation and a very close ally of the United States of America.
Following the Japanese surrender in 1945, the Japanese Imperial Army and Navy had been
decommissioned and as I mentioned all of the Japanese military bases were taken over by
U.S. armed forces.
The U.S. imposed a constitution on Japan that included a no armed force clause in 1947 and
the later Treaty of San Francisco made the U.S. as I mentioned legally responsible for
the defense of Japan.
The U.S. military commitment to Japan continues through to the present day of course.
More than 35,000 military and 5,000 civilian personnel are still stationed on bases in
Japan today.
The base at Yokosuka is home to the U.S. 7th Fleet, the 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force
is based in Okinawa and about 130 U.S. Air Force fighters are stationed at the Misawa
and Cardina air bases.
Now this continuing U.S. military involvement in Japan has many opponents within that country.
Some object to what they see as a continuing U.S. occupation of their country and others
object for social reasons.
Evidence of social concerns was seen at a 2009 protest in Okinawa that denounced the
presence of U.S. Marines after Japanese police had arrested a Marine for the rape of a 14
year old Japanese girl.
After the 1951 treaties were signed, Japanese economic planners decided to focus on pursuing
export driven economic growth supported by very low wages.
Now Japanese workers were prepared to work long hours for very low wages during this
initial period of recovery as part I think of a typically East Asian collectivist approach
to solving their nation's problems.
This of course gave Japanese manufacturers a competitive cost advantage over international
rivals who were paying much higher wages.
This is very much like the advantage Chinese manufacturers have enjoyed over recent decades
of course.
Although Japan had to import its raw materials, the low cost of labor assured price competitive
production and export.
During the 1950s the Japanese economy churned out labor intensive manufacture goods like
textiles and steel.
But by the 1960s Japanese companies had generated such significant profits that they were able
to invest in more capital intensive manufacturing producing higher value consumer products now
like radios, televisions, motorcycles and automobiles.
In the decades that followed Japanese corporations took advantage of what had by now become a
highly skilled workforce to shift their resources to technology intensive products like memory
chips, LCDs, CD ROM drives and so on.
And by the 1980s the label Made in Japan signified state of the art products of the highest
quality.
Will we see something similar happening with the Made in China label in the decades ahead
I wonder.
And that question brings me to my next topic for this lecture, a brief consideration of
the economic situation in East Asia over the past couple of decades.
As their economy continued to grow the Japanese government and Japanese financial institutions
began to assume an increasingly prominent voice in global affairs.
By the 1980s it was even conceivable that Japan could overtake the United States as
the world's largest economy.
But in the 1990s it became clear that these surging growth rates were not sustainable and
the Japanese economy sputtered into a recession that lasted into the 21st century.
Let's not forget however that Japan still has the third largest economy in the world
today just marginally behind China.
Japanese success also served as an inspiration for other East and Southeast Asian countries.
The earliest and the most successful imitators of the Japanese model were Hong Kong, Singapore,
South Korea of course and Taiwan.
And by the 1980s these four so-called little tigers had each become a major economic powerhouse.
All four suffered from similar problems, a shortage of capital, few natural resources
and overpopulation.
But like Japan a generation earlier they transformed these advantages, these disadvantages into
advantages by focusing on export driven industrialization.
Indeed the four quickly became serious competitors to Japan by imitating Japanese products and
then undercutting them with cheaper versions because of their lower labor costs.
Before long Indonesia, Thailand and Malaya had also joined the Tigers Club.
As we've seen it was also in the 1980s that Chinese leaders reversed Mao's economic plans
and instead actively sought foreign investment and foreign technology was imported on a large
scale.
A whole new generation of highly educated managers and entrepreneurs was created now
who used the very real incentives built into the system to also achieve spectacular levels
of growth in all sectors.
With the economy surging the government officially signalled in 1992 that China had embraced
a quote socialist market economy, a socialist market economy.
Under the third generation leadership the centrally planned economic system of the past
had given way to a genuine market economy now where demand for goods and services drove
production and drove price.
The role of government was now transformed from central planner to an entity that provided
a stable but competitive environment.
To do this the government sought and received massive foreign investment because of the
attractions of low labor costs and a vast market of over one billion consumers.
In December 2001 China joined the World Trade Organization and was officially a global economic
superpower.
President Hu Jintao succeeded Jiang Zemin as the top leader of what was then the fourth
generation leadership of the People's Republic of China.
Until his retirement at the end of 2012 Hu Jintao served as General Secretary of the
Communist Party of China, as President of the People's Republic of China and as Chairman
of the Central Military Commission.
His low-key and reserved leadership style was a further example of China's transition
of leadership from old hardcore communists to younger more pragmatic economic technocrats.
In some ways he represented the sort of blended Confucian legalist approach to government
similar to the approach that many of his ancient predecessors had espoused.
For example Hu reinstated some controls on the economy that were relaxed by the previous
administration and he and his colleagues were also highly conservative in their attitude
towards political reform.
But in foreign policy Hu and his colleagues pursued an approach that's been termed China's
peaceful development using soft power in international relations.
Under Hu for example China's global influence in Africa, Latin America and other developing
countries increased dramatically.
This policy approaches seem certain to continue under the new President of the People's Republic
of China Xi Jinping, only the fifth leader of China now since 1949.
What can we say about the future of the Chinese economy?
As I mentioned a moment ago, in mid-2011 the economy of the People's Republic of China
with a GDP of over five trillion US dollars surpassed that of Japan to become the world's
second largest economy after the United States of America.
Just to put that in perspective though, despite the 2008 recession the USA still boasts a
massive GDP of about 14.25 trillion US dollars.
But there's no denying that China is the world's fastest growing economy with average annual
growth rates of close to 10% for the last 30 years.
China was also the second largest trading nation in the world after the USA.
China is the largest exporter of course but also the second largest importer in the world.
As the global financial crisis hit in 2008 China immediately launched an economic stimulus
plan to deal quickly with the crisis and ward off potential recession.
This plan focused on increasing affordable housing, on easing credit restrictions for
mortgages, on lowering taxes on real estate sales and commodities and on pumping more
public investment into infrastructure development such as the rail network, roads and ports
and as a stimulus to development.
The plan was a spectacular success.
By the end of 2009 as the rest of the world was deep in a slump the Chinese economy was
already showing signs of recovery so much so that managing inflation expectations was
added to the list of economic objectives for the plan.
Today China seems poised to move from export dependency to further development of its own
massive internal market particularly in the face of the instability in the European economy.
So wages are rapidly rising all over the country.
Chinese leaders are all calling for an increased standard of living.
Some economic experts have predicted that China could become the world's largest economy
by as early as the year 2030 although to be honest most others see this as unlikely.
But there is certainly every reason to believe that China will dominate the technology economy
in the very near future.
Patrick Thibodeau who is a technology and IT journalist with particular knowledge of
China has pointed to five very valid key reasons why he believes that Chinese domination of
the world of technology is inevitable.
Firstly China's leadership deeply understands engineering and technology.
The time of writing this lecture eight of the nine members of the Standing Committee
of the Political Bureau in 2012 including Hu Jintao himself had engineering degrees.
It's worth noting here that in 2009 China awarded more than 350,000 engineering degrees
compared to just 137,000 in the United States.
Second the Chinese government has made technological innovation their leading goal in almost everything
including clean energy.
In 2009 for example the Chinese invested close to 35 billion US dollars in clean energy nearly
double the investment of the United States.
Third China now has a massive pool of highly skilled technical labor.
I've met many highly trained engineering and technology people in China myself in casual
conversations on aeroplanes and also chemists, physicists and geologists.
Fourth the United States is falling way behind China in science and math education at all
levels.
In China 42% of all college undergraduates earn science or math degrees compared to something
like 10% in the United States of America.
And finally China is dominating virtually all technology manufacturing industries everywhere.
This means everything from TVs to supercomputers.
I'm sure I don't need to remind us all that China is also one of the world's two largest
credit donations along with Japan that owns over 25% of US Treasury bonds.
Okay, so now we have one final lecture to try and wrap up this epic course.
We've spent some time in these last lectures considering two of the key foundational themes
that we have pursued from the very beginning, a politics and the economy.
We have seen continuing experiments in government including the triumph of a modified form of
Marxist-Leninist ideology in the success of the People's Republic of China.
And we have seen extraordinary economic growth and advanced technological innovation that
reminds us very much of the technologically advanced and wealthy China that we have met
so many times in this course before decline under the Qing dynasty.
We've also noted the economic and political success of many other smaller nations of East
Asia including Japan obviously, South Korea and the many other little tigers.
And all this success was despite and in some ways because of the tense Cold War geopolitical
situation that dominated most of the world for much of the second half of the 20th century.
One example of East Asia's complete integration now into the globalized world of today.
In our final lecture, I want to come back to the people of East Asia, to their societies,
to their lives, to the billionaires and the peasants, the lives of men and women.
How many of the ancient ideas about ethical relationships and the role of the individual
in maintaining a harmonious communal society still resonate in contemporary East Asia today
particularly in China.
So please join me next time as we bring our epic exploration of Eastern civilization to
its conclusion.
