Welcome everyone. We'll try to start on time. My name is Marcelo Gleiser. I'm a professor
of physics and astronomy here at Dartmouth, and I also direct the Institute for Cross-Disciplinary
Engagement, which is short, the short for the institute is ICE, but I say it's the
good ICE, you know, because there's another ICE out there. So it's the good ICE, or as
a previous cell said, the coolest ICE, you know. So if you want to know more about what
we do, I'll write a little website for you. One of the things that we do is we have a
fellows program somewhat similar to the Montgomery Fellows where I invite wonderful people that
do cross the boundaries between the sciences and the humanities to spend some time here
and think and talk to people and give public lectures. And so today we're very, very fortunate
to have, as our current fellow, Alan Leitman, who I'm sure you know, as a physicist and
as a novelist. Alan was educated in Princeton and at Caltech, where he did his PhD in theoretical
physics, I guess, with Keith Thorn, who just got the Nobel Prize for gravitational waves.
And then he was at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics as an assistant professor,
and then at MIT, where he had this distinction of having both a position in the physics and
in the humanities, which is something I'm very jealous of, I have to say. I think that's
a wonderful thing. And in fact, he became the John Bertrand Professor of the humanities.
And then he decided to take some time off a little bit from academia, and so now he's
just an adjunct professor there where he teaches science writing because he wants to dedicate
more time to his fiction writing and non-fiction writing. So as you know, he's the author
of five novels, two collections of essays, a book-length narrative poem, and many, many
books on science. And he's written for The Atlantic, granted The New Yorker, The New
York Review of Books, and many, many other publications. His novel Einstein's Dreams was
an international bestseller, has been translated into 30 languages. And his novel The Diagnosis
was a finalist for the 2000 National Book Award in Fiction. His most recent books are
Screening Room, A Memoir of the South, named one of the best books of 2015 by The Washington
Post, and The Accidental Universe, named by Brain Pickings, Maria Popova's blog, as one
of the best books of 2016. He's also a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
He's received many, many awards and five honorary degrees. And on top of all that, Alan also
is the founding director of the Harpswell Foundation, which works to empower a new generation
of women leaders in Cambodia. So he goes there quite often to do this work, which is quite
wonderful. So today, he's going to talk to us about fact and faith. I always said fact
and fiction, fact and faith, which is really the main theme of an upcoming book of his that
I'm sure he will mention Alan is talking about. So Alan, please welcome.
So Alan will talk for about 45 minutes, and then we'll open for questions from the audience.
When you ask a question, I'm going to give a microphone because we are videotaping everything.
Thank you, Marcello. I very much admire the work that Marcello has done with this institute
here to bring the sciences and the humanities. Together, I've had a great experience being
here for a week, and I'll be here another 10 days or so, and I've had some enjoyable
meetings with some of the students here. So thank you, Marcello. Thank you, Ice. Cool
Ice. Thank you, Dartmouth. For many years, my wife and I have spent our summers on a
small island in Maine. There are only six families who live there. There are no roads
or bridges to the island, and everybody on the island has to have their own boat. And
the story I wanted to tell concerned a particular night. It was after midnight, and I was coming
back to the island alone in the boat. I was very quiet, and as I was rounding the tip
of the island, I decided to turn off the running lights of the boat. So what little light there
was disappeared was completely dark, and then I decided to turn off the engine of the boat,
and it got completely silent. And I just lay down in the bottom of the boat and looked
up at the stars. And I don't know whether any of you have looked at the stars from the
ocean on a quiet night, but it is a mystical experience. And after a few minutes, the boat
disappeared, my body disappeared, and I felt like I was falling into infinity. I felt like
I was connected to the stars, and not only connected to the stars, but connected to nature.
I felt like I was part of something much bigger than myself. I felt like I was part of something
eternal. And after a few minutes, I turned on the engine of the boat. I didn't even know how
long I'd been lying there. So as Marcelo said, I've worked as a physicist for many years,
and I've always held a purely scientific view of the world. And by that, I mean that I believe,
and I think that most scientists do, that the world is made out of material, and nothing but material.
And that material is governed by a small number of fundamental forces and laws. And that everything
in the world, including humans and stars, is material and will eventually return to their
component parts. And even at the age of 12 or 13, I was impressed by the logic and the
materiality of the world. I built a little homemade laboratory for myself and did experiments.
And one of the experiments I did was to measure the swing of a pendulum. And I'd read in popular
science or some such magazine that the time it takes a pendulum to make one complete swing
was proportional to the square root of the length of the string of the pendulum. And it was a
beautiful law, which I verified with the help of a watch and a ruler. And it seemed to me that
everything in the world was quantitative and logical, that cause and effect governed everything.
And as far as I could tell, there was no reason to believe in a supernatural being or anything
supernatural. And that's pretty much still my view. But after that experience in the boat,
many years later, I understood the powerful attraction of the spiritual world. I understood
the powerful allure of believing in the eternal and the non-material and the ethereal and things
that were unchanging and eternal and sacred, believing in things and experiences that are
not reducible by logic. And at the same time, and perhaps paradoxically, I remained a scientist.
I remained committed to the material world. I have a good friend in Cambodia. I go there twice
a year. I have a good friend who is a venerated Buddhist monk. And sometimes I talk to him about
scientific and theological matters. And as some of you may know, the Buddhists believe in something
called the Four Noble Truths, which deal with suffering and how to relieve that suffering.
And my monk friend was careful to explain to me that Buddhists come to the belief in the Four
Noble Truths by experience with the world. But there are other things that Buddhists believe in,
like the fact that the universe has gone through an infinite number of cycles,
that are based exclusively on the word of the Buddha, who was a person, a human being named
Siddhartha Gautama. One of the names for the Buddha is the Lakavidu, which in Pali means the
knower of worlds. And a lot of the authority of what the Buddhists believe comes from the
statements of the Buddha, the Lakavidu. And I wondered, how do we know that the Buddha was
the knower of worlds? Were Einstein and Darwin also knowers of worlds? The truths and the laws
that we believe about the physical universe and the spiritual universe, why do we believe them
and on whose authority? Science and religion differ profoundly in the way that truths are
discovered. Can everybody hear me? Good, because I'm not too close to the microphone here. In
religion and theology, these truths and beliefs seem to have two origins. One origin is the sacred
books, like the Bible or the Koran or the Vedas or the Pali Canon. And believers have faith
that these sacred books express the true word of God. And therefore, the authority comes from the
infinite wisdom associated with God or with other divine beings. The second origin of truth
and religious knowledge is more personal. It's what one might call the transcendent experience. So
I wanted to talk a little bit about these two kinds of knowledge and religion. And then I'll turn
to the knowledge and method of science and try to contrast the two. Quotations from the sacred
books are used to declare truths ranging from the origin of the universe to the question of free
will, even to reproductive biology. And let me quote a passage from Islamic Hadith, which is supposed
to be a quotation spoken by the prophet Mohammed. This concerns reproductive biology. He is created
of both he being man and woman. He is created of both the semen of the man and the semen of the
woman. The man's semen is thick and forms the bones and the tendons. The woman's semen is fine
and forms the flesh and the blood. And still today, there are many religious thinkers who
attribute absolute authority to the teachings of the sacred books, which is called Divine
Revelation. Let me quote from a part of the announcement of the Second Vatican Constitution
endorsed by Pope Paul VI. This was in the mid 1960s. And I quote, the books of scripture must be
acknowledged as teaching solidly, faithfully, and without error, the truth which God wanted put
into sacred writings for the sake of salvation. I do respect the notions of God and other divine
beings. However, I insist on one thing. I insist that any statements about the physical world,
and that would include the origin of the universe, reproductive biology, and so on. I insist that
statements about the physical world be tested by the methods of science and rejected if found to
contradict experiment. The spiritual world has its own domain, but the physical world must be the
province of science. In the physical world, the laws of nature cannot apply to some phenomena and
not others and apply at some times and not other times. It's not okay with me if the principles
of aerodynamics work on some of my airplane flights, but not on others. Most religions take
God to lie outside the physical world, outside of time and space. Because science is restricted to
the physical world, science can never disprove the existence of God. And I am impatient and frustrated
with some of my scientific colleagues like Richard Dawkins and Larry Krauss who attempt to use the
methods of science to disprove the existence of God. I think they are just totally missing the point.
Likewise, we can never prove the existence of God. Belief in God must be taken as a matter of faith.
Let me turn to the transcendent experience, which for me as both a scientist and a humanist is the
strongest and most compelling evidence that we have for a spiritual world. By transcendent
experience, I mean the immediate and vital experience of being connected to something larger than
ourselves, of feeling some unseen order in the world. And by the spiritual world, I mean the
totality of these experiences. The experience I had in Maine lying at the bottom of the boat
looking up at the sky was a transcendent experience. I've had many others and I'm sure that all of
you have had transcendent experience as well. The transcendent experience may or may not involve a
supreme being. Unlike the received wisdom of the sacred books or the teachings of the institutions of
religion, the transcendent experience is intensely personal and the authority of that experience rests
on the experience itself. There's no one who can refute a personal transcendent experience that
you've had. It cannot be disproved and often the transcendent experience is a unique one-time event.
The transcendent experience as an avenue to truth is a deeply human experience. In fact,
there are some philosophers and theologians who believe that truth exists only in the realm of
humanity and the human mind. Such a belief runs head-on against the beliefs of science which are
that there is truth and reality outside of the human mind. Doesn't the parabolic arc of a toss coin
exist whether or not there's a human mind to conceive it? These opposing views between whether
truth can exist outside of the human mind or must necessarily be within the human mind were
highlighted in an extraordinary conversation between Einstein and the great Bengali poet and
philosopher Rabindranath Tagore who won the Nobel Prize for Literature. Einstein and Tagore had a
great admiration for each other and they met a couple of times. Once was in July 14th 1930 at
Einstein's house in Kaputh near Berlin and I want to read you a portion of their conversation.
Einstein, truth then or beauty is not independent of mind of man question mark.
Tagore, no. Einstein, I agree with regard to the conception of beauty but not with regard to truth.
Tagore, why not? Truth is realized through man. This is before political correctness whereas
it's gender tilted. Einstein, I cannot prove that scientific truth must be conceived as a truth
that is valid independent of humanity but I believe it firmly. I believe, for example,
that the Pythagorean theorem and geometry state something that is true independent of the existence
of man. Anyway, there is a reality independent of man and there is also a truth relative to this
reality. Tagore, truth which is one with the universal being must essentially be human otherwise
whatever individuals realize is true can never be called truth at least the truth which is
described as scientific in which only can be reached through the process of logic in other words
by an organ of thought which is human. Einstein, the problem begins whether truth is independent
of our consciousness. Tagore, what we call truth lies in the rational harmony between
subjective and objective aspects of reality. I think it's a wonderful exchange.
Well, I want now to discuss the knowledge and science and the way that we arrive at that
knowledge and I think scientific knowledge is of two types. First is there's the description
of physical objects such as the mass and the size of a raindrop, the measurement and description
and second there are the laws that govern the physical world which we call the laws of nature.
One of the first human beings to formulate a law of nature was 2000 years ago
Archimedes, his law of floating bodies and let me quote that law for you.
Any solid lighter than a fluid and lighter meaning less dense than a fluid will if placed in the
fluid be so far immersed that the weight of the solid will be equal to the weight of the fluid
displaced. We can speculate on how Archimedes arrived at this law. 2000 years ago there were
scales and balances for weighing things because there was trade at the market.
So Archimedes could have taken a rectangular box filled with some fluid, put an object
in the fluid, first he would have weighed the object on the scales. Then he take a rectangular
box filled with fluid, put the object in the box, measured how much the water or fluid
level rose, how many centimeters it rose. Then multiply that by the area of the container to
get the volume of water displaced. Then in another container fill it up with that volume of water
and weigh the amount of water and then compare that with the original weight of the object.
And he would have done this many times to arrive at his law. He also would have used fluids other
than water like mercury to get to the generality of the law. And in fact all laws of the physical
world are like Archimedes' law. They're precise, they're quantitative, and they are general,
applying to a large range of phenomena. It's possible that nature wouldn't
obey laws at all. For example, it's possible that we would live in a universe where 2 plus 2
equal 4 and 2 plus 2 equal 3, a universe like that. But most scientists believe that the universes
that didn't obey laws would have self-contradictions like that mathematical one I just said.
Certainly it would be an unlawful universe would be a very frightening place to live.
In the last 200 years we have discovered laws that govern the behavior of the insides of atoms,
the expansion of the universe, the orbits of planets, and many other phenomena. And from those
laws we've been able to explain in quantitative detail everything from the color of the sky,
to the orbits of planets, to the mass and size of raindrops.
And we have seen no evidence to contradict the notion that all phenomena in the physical universe
are governed by laws. And here's a wonderful law of nature that you can
confirm this yourself. Take any object like a pen and drop it to the floor from a height of four feet
and time how long it will take to reach the floor and the gravity of the earth and you'll get a half
a second. Now drop the object from a height of eight feet and you'll get about 0.7 seconds
and drop then drop it from a height of 16 feet and you'll get one second. And what you find if
you drop the object from several different heights is that the time it takes to fall doubles with
every quadrupling of the height. This is a rule of nature, a law of nature. It was discovered first
by Galileo in 1590. It's called his law of falling bodies. And with this rule which you can do yourself
at home you have discovered the lawfulness of the physical world. The law of the swinging pendulum
that I confirm myself at age 12 was an example very closely related to Galileo's law of falling
bodies. And I didn't believe it was true because I read it in popular science. I didn't believe it
was true because I wanted it to be true. I didn't believe it was true because the great Galileo
had said that it was true. I believe that it was true because it worked. It evidently described a
real property of nature. Let me describe the methods and the manner of science. Galileo's
law of falling bodies is a special case of Newton's more general law of gravity. Newton discovered
his law about 50 years later by analyzing the orbits of planets. For two centuries Newton's law
worked beautifully. But then in the mid-19th century it was found that the orbit of the planet
Mercury didn't quite fit Newton's law of gravity. It was off by a very tiny amount, amounting to
about one hundredth of an angular degree every century. An incredibly tiny discrepancy, but the
telescopes were so good at that time the observations so careful that scientists agreed that there was
a problem. Then in 1915 Albert Einstein proposed a new law of gravity replacing Newton's theory of
gravity which explained this orbit of Mercury perfectly also predicted gravitational waves
which were discovered about a year and a half ago and many other phenomena. Now the important point,
we know that Einstein's theory as beautiful and accurate as it is will also be replaced
someday by a more accurate theory. Now all of the laws of nature discovered by scientists
are considered provisional. They're considered to be approximations to deeper laws.
They're constantly being revised as new experimental data comes in and as new ideas come
forth and are tested. In fact what we call the laws of nature should really be called
approximate laws of nature because in any given time we're only working with approximations
even if they're final laws of nature, perfect laws of nature. At any one time we're working with
approximations to those final laws and it is in this process of revision that we see the strongest
difference between science and religion. As I've said everything in the physical world
is subject to laws but we have only approximations to those ultimate laws which we're constantly
revising. The beliefs and knowledge of religion coming either from the divine authority of
the sacred books or from the transcendent experience are not subject to revision.
They are not approximations. Religion does not revise itself in the way that science does.
There is something that scientists believe that cannot be tested according to the methods of science
and that is a principle I call the central doctrine of science and that principle says
that the physical world is governed by laws and that those laws are always true everywhere
and at every time in the universe. I call the central doctrine of science a doctrine
because despite its past success it cannot be proven. No matter what laws we have
we can't be sure that tomorrow we might observe some phenomena that is a miracle that just cannot
be explained by any laws. Our faith in the doctrine is so strong that when we find physical
phenomena that seem to be unlawful like the orbit of the planet Mercury we don't abandon belief
in a lawful universe. When it was found that the orbit of Mercury disagreed a little bit with
Newton's theory of gravity we did not attribute the discrepancy to something mysterious,
to the action of a whimsical god or something that was intrinsically unexplainable. We
realized that our theory needed revision and in fact I can't imagine any event in the physical
universe that would cause scientists to label it as a miracle to abandon belief in a lawful
universe. If this table started floating right now scientists would look for some magnetic levitation
or some other law that they hadn't yet discovered but not a miracle. We are deeply committed to
the central doctrine. There's another belief in science that cannot be proven
and that is belief that there is a final theory that is perfect that is beyond approximation
and many physicists call this a final theory. Such a belief has not emerged from science itself.
In fact the history of science shows that we're constantly revising and revising and revising
and revising so belief in a final theory is just a matter of faith and the irony here is that even
if we were in the possession of a final theory we wouldn't know it because you couldn't prove
that tomorrow you might observe a phenomena that disagreed with the theory so we believe it
as a matter of faith. In his book Dreams of a Final Theory the Nobel Prize-winning physicist
Stephen Weinberg writes quote our present theories are only of limited validity still
tentative and incomplete but behind them now and then we catch glimpses of a final theory
one that would be of unlimited validity and entirely satisfactory in its completeness
and consistency. My own guess is that there is a final theory and we are capable of discovering it.
A final theory is really an extension of the central doctrine of science
and some I would argue that despite the huge differences between science and religion and
the way that knowledge is acquired that both share a certain degree of faith
of belief and commitment to the unprovable science experimentally tests everything that it believes
with the exception of the fundamental belief the belief in the central doctrine of science.
I wanted to end by talking about some of these issues in a more a more personal way in specific
way and that is my personal attitude towards death. One could argue that many of our religious and
spiritual beliefs are motivated by a knowledge of our own impending death.
We confront our own physical demise with invoking the eternal the immortal soul god and so on.
All material things are made out of atoms and molecules and the energy that holds them together
and the forces and energies that hold them together and atoms and molecules are part
of the physical world and according to the view of science all material is governed by laws.
Immortality is not allowed by the laws. Disembodied existence is not allowed by the laws.
Insubstantiality is not allowed by the laws.
I'm a materialist as I said when I started but I consider myself a spiritual person so
you might call me a spiritual materialist. So the question is how does a spiritual materialist
think about his own impending death?
I believe that this distinction between life and death is overrated.
I've come to believe that death occurs gradually through the diminishing of consciousness
and let me explain what I mean.
According to the scientific view we are made of material atoms and nothing more.
In fact to be precise the average person is made out of about 7000 trillion trillion atoms.
The totality of our tissues and organs are composed of these atoms.
And according to the scientific view there's nothing else.
To a vast cosmic being each of us human beings would appear as an assemblage of atoms
humming with our various electrical and chemical energies. To be sure it's a special assemblage
a rock does not behave like a person but the mental sensations that we experience
as consciousness and thought according to science are purely material consequences
of the purely material electrical and chemical interactions between atoms.
And when we die this special assemblage disassembles.
The total number of our atoms in our body say the same but they are scattered about.
Particularly special in these considerations is the brain and the view of science the brain
is where our self-awareness originates our self-identity our ego our consciousness our
eyeness. Neuroscientists have studied the brain in great detail they know a lot about the brain
there's a lot that's that's still unknown. There's a there's good evidence that the processing and
storage of information in the brain occurs principally through the neurons we have about
a hundred billion neurons in our brain these are brain cells. The electrical and chemical
interactions between the neurons are largely understood the matter the manner in which electrical
signals speed down a neuron then are converted to a flow of chemicals that go to the next neuron
these these things are understood very well the long-term memory that we have upon so much of our
self-identity rest is accomplished by the material generation of new connections between
neurons and the reinforcement of existing connections by specific proteins we've seen
new synapses grow between neurons we've seen we know which proteins are involved.
Despite all of this despite the known material nature of the brain the sensation of consciousness
the ego the eyeness is so powerful and compelling so fundamental to our being and yet so difficult
to describe that we endow ourselves and other human beings with a mystical quality some magnificent
and non-material essence that goes far beyond the individual atoms in our brain to some people
that mystical thing is the soul to some it is the self to others it is consciousness
the soul is commonly understood we cannot discuss scientifically so i will not even attempt to discuss
it but that's not the case with consciousness and the closely related self isn't the experience
of consciousness and self an illusion caused by those trillions and trillions of neuronal
connections the connections between neurons and the electrical and chemical flows and if you don't
like the word illusion then you can stick with the sensation itself you can say that the self
is a name that we that we give to that sensation of all of those electrical and chemical
flows between the neurons and and by saying this i don't want to diminish any way
the brain the human brain is capable of wondrous feasts of imagination creativity self reflection
thought by do claim that it's all atoms and molecules if the giant cosmic being that i
referred to earlier examined a human being in detail he she or it would see fluids flowing
sodium and potassium gates opening and closing on neurons electrical electricity races between
the nerve cells the chemical flows between synapses but he she or it would not find a self
the self and consciousness i think are names we give to those sensations
having said that the consciousness is simply a name we give to those sensations
i want to to to make the point that i don't think that consciousness can be understood simply
by the microscopic analysis of individual neurons the brain has roughly a hundred million neurons
in it and when you have very low a very large system like that composed of many many elemental
parts then there is a behavior of the system as a whole that cannot be predicted and which is
qualitatively qualitatively different than what individual elements do and this is called an
emergent phenomena another example of an emergent phenomena is a snowflake uh snowflakes are made
out of crystalline ice ice is water water is made out of molecules molecules are atoms of
hydrogen and oxygen and we can know everything about the orbits of electrons and atoms and and
hydrogen and oxygen uh we can know how those atoms join together to make molecules we can even
understand the six-sided symmetry of a snowflake but when you put billions and trillions of those
molecules together including very tiny interactions with the environment of the snowflake then it is
impossible to predict the zillions of different patterns that snowflakes form it cannot be understood
by analyzing individual elements now let me come back to death if someone began disassembling my brain
one neuron at a time depending on where the process began i might first lose a few motor skills
then some memories then perhaps the ability to find particular words and sentences
the ability to recognize faces the ability to know where i was during this slow process of
taking apart my brain i would become more and more confused disoriented everything that i
associated with myself with my ego with my self-identity would gradually dissolve away
in a bog of confusion and minimal existence the doctors and their blue and green scrub suits
who were taking apart my brain one neuron neuron at a time they could drop those neurons each one
in a metal bowl each would be a tiny gray gelatinous blob each would have the spindly dendrites and
axons coming out of it you wouldn't hear each one drop because they're very soft
likewise the doctors and their blue and green scrub suits could create consciousness by building
a brain from scratch one neuron at a time they could slowly add neurons together delicately
arranging the connections between neurons one neuron at a time and the doctors might hook up
an electrical device to monitor the electrical activity of these neurons and for a long time
there would just be noise but at some point presumably a qualitative change would occur
some coherent signal an unusual hum that would translate roughly into yikes something is messing
with me if we conceive of death as nothingness then we cannot imagine it but if we conceive of death
as the complete loss of consciousness a view supported by the understanding of the brain
as a material object then we can approach death in a gradual stages as consciousness
fades and dissolves the distinction between life and death would then no longer be an all or nothing
proposition the neuroscientist Antonio Demasio has defined several levels of consciousness
the lowest level he calls the protocell the protocell and that's just an organism that is able
to carry on the most basic processes of life but nothing else an amoeba an amoeba has a protocell
I would not associated this this level with consciousness surely you need a minimum number
of neurons to have consciousness next comes what Demasio calls core consciousness
its self-awareness and the ability to think and reason in the present moment but without
memories of the past and certain people with brain disorders have core consciousness
you would be able to understand the world around you but you would exist only in the present
um you cannot form memories that last more than a few minutes you cannot remember what happened
to you in the past except for isolated periods you cannot make plans for the future you're trapped
in the moment in the highest level of consciousness uh which all healthy people have is what Demasio
calls extended consciousness here we remember most of our past life we can remember our view of the
world based on past experiences we can remember places that we've been we can remember what we
like and what we don't like self-identity as most psychologists define it probably requires
extended consciousness that is long-term memories these of course are very difficult issues
the slow dismantling of a human brain whether by my imaginary doctors and their blue and green
scrub suits or by the deterioration of the brain and a neural disease might proceed from extended
consciousness to core consciousness to the proto-self or perhaps it might proceed in a
less orderly manner by removing chunks of extended consciousness here chunks of core
consciousness there until one is left with a proto-self either way one begins with full
consciousness and ends with an amoeba like existence one begins with a full life and ends
with death or the equivalent of death and this process can happen gradually so that there may
may be some awareness of the increasing loss of awareness personal accounts of early dementia
provide the best knowledge we have of approaching death in this manner
in the early stages of dementia where enough of the mind remains to understand and articulate
what's happening you can you can understand how consciousness is gradually being lost
but in later stages the person has slipped into an abyss of confusion somewhere in the
intermediate zone the sense of self dissolves and is gone I know this is a very grim subject
many of you probably know people or have relatives who about dementia I've had some loved ones who
have had dementia I currently have a friend who lives in michigan who is dying of alzheimer's
and she writes me letters frequently and I can see the loss of her herself fading away
now I wanted to end with something truly personal
from a scientific point of view I believe everything that I've said about the materiality
of the brain I've laid it out
but I'm not satisfied with this picture
in my mind I can still see my mother dancing the bossa nova bossa nova in my mind I can still
hear my father telling his kushmaker joke and the last the punchline is it went kush
and I can have another one up in 15 minutes
I often wonder where are they now my deceased parents my father and mother
I know the materials explanation which I've just told you but that does nothing to relieve
my longing for them and the impossible truth that they do not exist anymore
I am alive and I'm enjoying it aching joints and all despite my belief that I am only a collection
of atoms that my awareness is passing away neuron by neuron I am content with the illusion of life
I'll take it and even though I do not believe in a heaven or hell when I do not believe in
the immortal soul I find a pleasure in knowing that a hundred years from now and even a thousand
years from now that most of my atoms will remain those atoms will not know where they came from
but they will have been mine some of them will have been part of the memory of my mother
some of them will be the vinegary smell of my first apartment the memory of that
some of them will once have been my hand and if I could label each of my atoms at this moment
write my social security number on each of my atoms someone could follow those atoms for the next
thousand years as they floated in the air mixed with the soil became parts of plants and trees
dissolved in the ocean and then floated into the air again some of my atoms a thousand years
from now will be parts of other people some will be parts of other lives other memories
and some after that long journey will return to the island in Maine
so that's how a spiritual materialist thinks of his own death
science and religion have been the two greatest forces that have shaped human civilization
I think they both expressed something deeply human about us they're both here to stay
and so let the dialogue continue thank you
this works yes good um so thank you so much for this and I'm sure some people may have questions
comments wow oh there you go we can start there
hey thanks on behalf probably of everybody here I much appreciate the talk
it seems if there's something in common between the scientific approach
and the faith-based approach and that both are asking why why did that happen why did
something happen and with science we we test hypotheses and some of them when you come across
consciousness and you say well we can't understand it it's sort of mystical in a way and it's not
surprising to me therefore that some people would say well there must be something bigger something
greater involved so it's not surprising to me that there's this difference in part because
they seem to both be asking the same question good comment yeah I don't think I need to
respond to that I agree with what you said okay there was a hand yeah
um it perhaps you've provided an answer to this question and uh caused me to find some comfort
but I've always been uh troubled by the uncertain uncertainty of quantum mechanics the further
you investigate into material the less certain it becomes um you you've kind of addressed that but
perhaps it's worth some additional thought from your side how it fits in and how it's explained
well it's it's not true it's not quite true that the further we investigate quantum mechanics
the more uncertain it becomes um the the uncertainty in quantum mechanics uh
well what it says uh explicitly is that you uh for example that you can't know
precisely where a particle is and at the same time know precisely how fast it's moving
but there is a uh a quantitative relationship a quantitative equation that tells you exactly
how much that trade-off is that uncertainty is between position and motion and uh
uh we uh when we have large numbers of particles uh we can we can convert that uncertainty to
probabilities and we can predict very accurately how a large number of particles will behave um
um so um
there is there is a fundamental uh fuzziness of of nature at at the smallest scales
but I I don't think that it's true that that that uncertainty is getting larger and larger
as we learn more and more I think we have been able to put a box around that uncertainty
and even quantify it and we actually have equations that express that uncertainty uh so
there there there are a lot of uh philosophers and ethicists and uh theologians have have
invoked quantum mechanics or the uncertainty in quantum mechanics to express uh uh theological
and ethical issues philosophical issues such as whether uh we can have free will uh versus
determined whether whether we have a free will in making choices or whether our actions are
completely determined um if there's a little bit of uncertainty maybe that explains uh some
arbitrariness in our actions uh but I think that most of those arguments are are misusing
quantum mechanics um so I I don't mean to uh to uh dismiss your your question at at all
but I do think that that quantum mechanics is not the place to look for this uh uh
union or sympathy between science and religion
we all seem to struggle with this concept of consciousness and life itself in fact
and I might offer the concept that the universe and everything in it is in fact alive is conscious
and sentient and is intelligent and therefore the phenomena that we see that we don't understand
do have an intelligence behind them even though it is not of our understanding I don't accept
the supernatural but I know that there are phenomena that we do not cannot explain today
but that that certainly can be part of our natural universe
thank you for your talk um I have no question just a couple of observations that are
personal about consciousness um and I'll just let them float out there to my youngest students I used
to say uh accept that if we accept that the universe is just a series and I'm a non-scientist
this will be pretty clear to you but if we accept that the universe is just a series of random
accidents of physics and chemistry isn't it pretty remarkable that it ends up with you
on one level and uh another thing I think about quite a lot although I have not read up on it
is that and this is about my personal consciousness who writes scripts casts and directs my dreams
because it is not me the comments are floating okay
thank you so much for your talk um I was wondering so um as a Muslim from a religious
point of view I can understand where ethics and morality derives from in terms of
okay assuming god created you god understands you best he knows how this whole machine works
and you follow the rules prescribed by god where do um I guess where the ethic or the word where's
the source of ethics and morality from a more materialistic or scientific worldview um and um
yeah I guess that's primarily yeah yeah
um well uh first of all I I I do not think that you need a divine being or a creator
to develop for human beings develop a sense of ethics and morality um that doesn't mean that
that such a being doesn't exist but it just means I don't think it's necessary um
um I think that that some of our ethics and morality
evolved and maybe all of it from evolutionary forces that is uh for our own survival
and I think that you know Wilson might have written a book uh on the altruistic gene
um Marcel am I right about that
wrote a lot about altruism yeah and and uh according to that idea uh and of course we we can't
prove the idea because evolution happened over millions of years that that you're uh you're
feeling uh your your tender feelings for other people and the desire to help them
could have originated from the desire to preserve your community not just yourself but
your family if one of your family members uh survives then they can help take care of you
uh and so uh through the process of evolution when lots of different uh
random processes were occurring and some were beneficial for survival and some weren't
the the desire to help your fellow human being in certain ways could have been had survival
benefit for you and thus would have been uh preserved uh that trait um the the very strong
feeling that you have for a mate uh is clearly of evolutionary benefit uh to form a union that
allows the protection of the children while they're they're growing up um I know this is a very cold
hearted explanation of of of ethics and morality uh but this would be the materialist explanation
I believe
hello yeah so as you're sitting there with these men in the uh blue and green suits
and uh having your your brain dismantled uh neuron by neuron um they're they're taking the
neurons and and putting them into a jar and and remaking another brain that that has the
exact same shape as the one that they're dismantling just in a different place and slowly as your
consciousness goes down to to the point where it disappears and the consciousness of of the brain
that's forming in the jar slowly peaks up into a yikes what's happening to me um
what are your thoughts there on the continuity of self and is is the the consciousness that
wakes up in the jar a continuity of of you sitting at the table well that's that's that's the basis
of a wonderful science fiction story and uh I of course don't know the answer to that
but I think would be a great a great um here here's where uh I do think that that uh physics
would come in and that is I think that you could show that it's impossible to recreate
the brain exactly starting from scratch that is if you're if you're given all of the
positions the positions of all of the atoms in my brain um I think it would be impossible to
to recreate that exactly so there'd be little errors here and there you know this one nerve
filament was supposed to connect to this neuron and it didn't it connected to that one instead
and uh so I I don't think that it would be actually possible uh but if it were possible
uh that it's a great question of whether my consciousness would suddenly appear somewhere
else um and uh I think that that eventually when we understand the brain well enough
that we may be able to download a lot of the information in our neurons and put it on a piece
of silicon and then the answer is does does that have a consciousness and how is it related to the
original consciousness but it's a great question and uh I I hope that you will write a sci-fi story
based on it having a public dialogue in Boston in the spring of 2018 on transhumanism which is
pretty much one of the things that deals with this kind of stuff one last question there was a
lady here did you still have a question while you were speaking I was just kind of remembering
this counterculture Catholic church group I was in back in the 70s in California and the Catholic
priest during communion you know we'd have communion together he would say now you know
we can be imagining um that we're just sharing in now all of what creation is made of and the
body and blood of Jesus and the stuff of all of what creation is made of and it's all material
and it's all spiritual someday we'll know that it all goes together so thank you
note I'll thank you all for coming and stay tuned for more thank you
