We live in an electrical society.
Electricity provides about one-seventh of all the energy in the world.
It's just so easy to plug something into a wall outlet and turn it on.
Electricity is the ultimate convenience in energy.
We've even developed portable electricity sources, batteries, to provide electricity
on demand and on the go.
Electricity is so common that it's difficult to remember that controlled electricity has
only existed for about 200 years, since the early 1800s.
We now know that electricity is just electrons traveling through a material called a conductor,
so called because it conducts electricity.
Most metals are good conductors of electricity.
In fact, that's one of the general properties that all metals have in common.
Materials that don't conduct electricity well are called insulators, and they have their
uses in the modern world as well.
When a conductor conducts electricity, there's always a little bit of resistance to the electron
flow that resistance causes heat and robs the electricity of some of its energy.
Because of this, transmission of electricity isn't as efficient as it could be.
Under some circumstances, however, some materials lose all their resistance to electron flow,
and the electricity becomes virtually 100% efficient.
We call these materials superconductors.
We know of several, and in some cases have adopted them in some modern technologies.
But before we discuss superconductors, we need to see how regular conductors work.
Like I said, most metals are good conductors, which raises the question, what is it about
metals that allows them to conduct electricity?
The answer is in the organization of electrons in an atom.
Recall that electrons in an atom are organized into shells and subshells around the nucleus.
Each shell of electrons only has a certain number of subshells, the first three of which
are labeled with the letters S, P, and D.
The outermost shell of electrons is called the valence shell, and because it is the outermost
shell, it is farthest away from the atomic nucleus.
For virtually all metals, the outermost electrons are in an S subshell, which is the farthest
subshell away from the nucleus within any shell.
That means that they are relatively free to move around.
In our modern model of electrical conductivity, these outermost electrons are so free to move
around that a sample of metal can be treated as a bunch of atoms surrounded by a C of electrons.
If we were to add electricity to one side of the metal, not only would the metal accept
these new electrons easily, but it would push out some electrons on the other side to make
room.
It's much like attaching an already filled hose to a spigot.
When water gets forced into one end of the hose, water comes out the other end quite easily.
In a sense, this is exactly what happens with electrons, and we interpret this behavior
as a current of electricity.
However, as I said, there is some resistance to the electron movement.
The atomic nuclei are, after all, positively charged, and they attract the negatively charged
electrons.
And let's face it, a metal is composed of atoms, and these atoms can literally get in
the way of a moving electron.
A conductor's resistance to electricity flow is called, well, electrical resistance, and
it's a physical property of the material.
It's measured in units called ohms.
Some conductors have a relatively high resistance, some have a relatively low resistance.
For example, one meter of silver wire can have a resistance of about 0.005 ohms, while
a similar wire made of aluminum has a resistance of 0.009 ohms, and another wire made of iron
has a resistance of 0.03 ohms.
By contrast, if you have a similar wire made of pure water, its resistance would be about
60 billion ohms, and if it were made of glass, its resistance would be about 30 million billion
ohms.
These last two wires wouldn't be considered conductors, rather they would be called insulators.
There's not a specific dividing line between a conductor and an insulator, but for our
purposes we'll stick to obvious examples of each.
A conductor's resistance increases with increasing temperature.
This is because at higher temperatures, the atoms in the solid are moving around more and
becoming a larger hindrance to the movement of electrons.
At lower temperatures, the resistance is lower, which means that electricity flows more efficiently.
It was this general trend that prompted the historical experiments of electricity at very
low temperatures.
Before I talk about these experiments, let me say a few words about temperature scales.
There are several common ways to state a temperature.
For everyday purposes in the United States, the Fahrenheit scale is used.
It was designed in 1724 by German scientist Daniel Fahrenheit using some benchmarks for
0 and 100.
This interval was divided into 100 divisions called degrees, and then extended below 0 and
above 100.
Warm temperature is about 72 degrees Fahrenheit, body temperature is 98.6 degrees, and a cold
day might be 20 degrees Fahrenheit.
The U.S. is only one of three countries in the world that use the Fahrenheit scale.
Everyone else uses the Celsius scale, where the freezing point of water is the zero point,
and the boiling point of water is 100.
Like the Fahrenheit scale, Celsius degrees can be extended above and below these benchmarks.
In this scale, room temperature is about 22 degrees Celsius, body temperature is 37 degrees
Celsius, and a cold winter day is minus 7 degrees Celsius.
Finally, there's the Kelvin, or absolute scale.
This is demonstrated that there's a minimum possible temperature.
This temperature is absolute zero, and marks the zero point on the Kelvin scale.
The size of the Kelvin degree is the same as the size of the Celsius degree, so the
absolute scale tracks linearly to the Celsius scale.
In the Kelvin scale, room temperature is about 295 Kelvin, body temperature is about
310 Kelvin, and that cold day is about 265 Kelvin.
Finally, absolute zero in the Kelvin scale is minus 459 degrees Fahrenheit, or minus 273 degrees Celsius.
Keep these benchmarks in mind as we talk temperatures.
Now let's talk about conductors.
One of the popular areas of study in the late 1800s and early 1900s was the behavior of
materials at low temperatures, and by low temperatures I don't mean a cold day,
I mean hundreds of degrees below zero.
For the first time in history, scientists were finally approaching the coldest possible
temperature, absolute zero, as they developed new experimental techniques for achieving such cold temperatures.
In 1908, Dutch physicist Heike Kammerling Onus liquefied helium for the first time.
To give you an idea of what an achievement this was, you should know that helium becomes
a liquid at only 7 degrees Fahrenheit above absolute zero.
It has the lowest boiling point of any known material.
With the liquefied helium, Kammerling Onus began investigating properties of other
materials cooled down to that temperature, including the electrical properties of metals.
When he cooled down a sample of mercury to the temperature of liquid helium
and measured its electrical resistance, he found that it vanished.
Kammerling Onus recognized the significance of this, and in a publication announcing it,
called it at first superconductivity, but later superconductivity.
Over the next few years, other materials were found to be superconducting at various temperatures,
lead metal at 13 degrees Fahrenheit above absolute zero,
vanadium metal at 9 degrees above absolute zero, and tantalum at 8 degrees above absolute zero.
Some alloys are superconductive, including alloys of magnesium and boron,
niobium and aluminum, and niobium and tin, compounds like indium nitride superconduct,
and other materials need to get even lower in temperature before they superconduct.
Aluminum superconducts at 2.1 degrees Fahrenheit above absolute zero,
and titanium does so at a chilly half degree above absolute zero.
Having zero resistance to electric current means that a current will continue to flow
even if there's no additional voltage added to the circuit.
Measurements of current flowing in superconducting rings suggest that the current will continue
for at least 100 millennia, that's 100,000 years before it stops, if not longer.
Of course, as soon as the temperature of the conductor gets above a certain value,
called the critical temperature, resistance reappears and the current starts slowing down,
quickly disappearing unless additional voltage is added across the circuit.
A superconductor has another interesting property, it excludes all magnetic fields,
a property called the Meissner effect. Normally, matter allows magnetic field
to pass through it, sometimes concentrating the magnetic field and sometimes spreading it out.
A superconductor almost completely excludes a magnetic field. This leads to some interesting
effects, including the apparent levitation of a small magnet over a superconductor
because the magnetic field is repelled. There's a limit to the Meissner effect though.
If an external magnetic field is strong enough, it will penetrate the superconductor
and then superconductivity will be lost. Here's an irony though, electrical current itself causes
a magnetic field, which means that at some critical current, the magnetic field caused
by the current will make the superconductor lose its properties.
The strengths of these critical magnetic fields and critical currents depend on the material,
its critical temperature, and the size of the sample. But it seems that there are some limits
to what a superconductor can do.
Why are some materials superconductive? Before I can explain, I need to talk about
three things, fermions, bosons, and phonons.
Most of us know that matter is ultimately composed of fundamental particles like protons,
neutrons, and electrons. But there are other subatomic particles as well,
muons, pions, gluons, neutrinos, and the like. This is the realm of particle physics.
But one issue of interest to us is that each of these particles has a certain
characteristic amount of momentum that comes with it.
This characteristic amount of momentum is called spin. We can't really tell if a
particle is spinning, so it's a bad name that's unfortunately stuck with us.
What's important though is that each different particle has a characteristic value of spin.
These values are multiples of Planck's constant, one of the fundamental constants that define our
universe. And the values of spin are either integer multiples of Planck's constant,
or half integer multiples of Planck's constant.
For example, an electron has a spin of one-half of Planck's constant, so we simply say that the spin
on the electron is one-half. On the other hand, there's a particle called the W boson that's
involved in the weak nuclear force that has a spin of one. But again, each type of subatomic
particle has a characteristic value of spin. A particle that has a half integer spin is called
a fermion, named after Italian scientist Enrico Fermi. A particle that has an integer spin
is called the boson, after Indian scientist Satyenda Bose. In the mid-1920s, about the same
time as the development of quantum mechanics, it was realized that fermions and bosons behave
differently. While an unlimited number of bosons can occupy a particular energy level,
only a certain number of fermions can occupy a given energy level.
Think of an energy level as a shoe box. If the shoes were bosons, you could fit any number of
them in the box. But if the shoes were fermions, you could only fit one pair of shoes in each box.
Electrons are fermions, so only a certain number of them can fit in any energy level.
This has major implications for how electrons are organized in atoms and molecules,
but that's another lecture. The important thing to understand is that fermions and
bosons behave differently at the subatomic level.
Now, about phonons. Even though we usually think of the solid phase of matter as having
its atoms or molecules fixed into place, that's not actually the case. The nuclei of atoms are
actually vibrating in place. A collective motion of multiple nuclei that have the same frequency
is called a phonon. Phonons are important for conducting heat and sound through solids.
They're also important in understanding the conduction of electricity through conductors,
including superconductors. The currently accepted theory of superconducting behavior
is called the BCS theory after the three scientists who developed it,
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schriefer, who won the 1972 Nobel Prize in physics for their work.
As a negatively charged electron is traveling through a conductor, it slightly attracts the
positively charged nuclei in the solid. A second electron gets attracted to the positive charge,
and the two electrons make a combination called a Cooper pair. If the temperature
of the conductor is low enough, the Cooper pair doesn't have enough energy to break apart
and can be treated as a single particle. The interesting thing is that when two electrons
come together, their spins interact so that the overall spin of this two-piece particle
is now an integer, and now it can act like a boson rather than a fermion.
Remember, though, that we could fit many, many more bosons into a single energy level
than we can fermions, so the distribution of Cooper pairs into the available energy levels
of the solid is now completely different. The collection of all these Cooper pairs into a
single state, a single shoebox if you will, is called a condensate. The condensate acts as a
single unit, and because there are lots and lots of Cooper pairs in any macroscopic sample,
the presence of atoms in the way is much less bothersome because the atom would have to interact
with all the pairs simultaneously. Because it's less bothersome, the net effect is that the resistance
to electronic flow, or current, virtually disappears, and the material is a superconductor.
Of course, as I already mentioned, if the temperature is too high, there's enough energy
to disrupt the Cooper pairs, and the electrons start acting as fermions again, and superconductivity
is lost. It's the formation of Cooper pairs and their interactions with the phonons of the material
that are ultimately the cause of superconductivity.
But the story of superconductivity isn't over yet. In the 1970s, measurements showed that some
metal oxides were superconductive at temperatures higher than some metallic elements, all of 23
degrees Fahrenheit over absolute zero. This was a surprise because metal oxides are usually
insulators, not conductors. Scientists did what scientists normally do, and experiments on
additional compounds found substances whose critical temperature went higher and higher.
Finally, in 1986, two IBM researchers named Georg Begnorz and Alex Muller found a copper
oxide material that had a critical temperature of 63 degrees Fahrenheit above absolute zero,
shattering the record by a full 20 degrees. For their work, Begnorz and Muller were awarded the
1987 Nobel Prize in Physics only a year after their discovery. Since their initial discovery of
so-called high-temperature superconductivity, researchers have been pushing the critical
temperature limit higher and higher. Currently, the record for the highest critical temperature
is 134 Kelvin, which, while a cold minus 218 degrees Fahrenheit, is still 241 degrees Fahrenheit
above absolute zero. There are three noteworthy things about these new high-temperature superconductors.
First is their structure. They're all composed of some copper and oxygen compound called a
cuprate, whose crystal structures resemble a mineral called perovskite. However, instead of
being a pure copper and oxygen compound, the copper and oxygen mixture is intentionally
contaminated, or doped, with other elements. These other elements currently include yttrium,
barium, bismuth, thallium, calcium, and mercury. The exact critical temperature depends on the
elements used for doping and their ratios. For example, an yttrium-barium cuprate was one of
the first high-temperature superconductors, and it has the ratio of yttrium to barium to copper at
1 to 2 to 3, with the amount of oxygen somewhat variable. The current high-temperature record
holder has mercury, barium, calcium, and copper in the ratio of 1 to 2 to 2 to 3.
Note that, because of the presence of oxygen, these substances aren't metals, they're not even
alloys. They're actually ceramics, and again, part of the surprise of them being superconductors
is that ceramics are usually considered insulators.
The discovery of ceramics actually being superconductors has opened up the possibility
that other compounds, not normally considered good conductors, may actually be superconductors at
low temperatures. That possibility is already borne fruit. In the early 21st century, some
iron arsenic compounds were discovered to be superconductors, and the search continues.
The second noteworthy thing about these high-temperature superconductors
is that they're superconducting at liquid nitrogen temperatures rather than liquid helium
temperatures. Liquid helium has a temperature of 4.2 Kelvin, or about 7.6 degrees Fahrenheit
above absolute zero. Any material that becomes superconductive at temperatures lower than 77 Kelvin
needs to be cooled using either very dangerous liquid hydrogen or the more safe liquid helium.
If the critical temperature is greater than 77 Kelvin, or 138 degrees Fahrenheit above absolute zero,
you could use liquid nitrogen to cool the material. Liquid nitrogen costs less than 40 cents per
liter, or about $1.50 per gallon. On the other hand, liquid helium costs over $15 per liter,
or about $60 a gallon, and these prices are fluctuating quite a bit because of uncertainties
in its production. Nitrogen is 80% of our atmosphere, and the supply is virtually limitless.
Using liquid nitrogen to produce superconductivity is significantly more cost-effective than using
helium, so it's a practical incentive to having higher-temperature superconductors.
The final issue about these ceramic superconductors is that they're, well, ceramics. They can't be
drawn into wires, and because they're rather brittle, it's difficult to machine them into
specific shapes. To date, their actual use in products has been limited, but because of their
high critical temperatures and the use of liquid nitrogen instead of liquid helium,
there's a significant effort at finding ways to utilize these ceramic superconductors.
Finally, I should point out that the mechanism behind the superconductivity of doped
cuprate ceramics is currently unknown. There are a few hypotheses about how it works,
or maybe how it doesn't work. While it's fairly clear that cooper pairs of electrons are still
involved, research has shown that phonon modes in the crystalline ceramics are not.
There's some evidence that it has something to do with the copper and oxygen combination,
but for now, the actual mechanism is not understood. I suspect another Nobel prize is
waiting for some folks to figure it out. There are at least some special applications
of superconductors. Perhaps the biggest application is for the construction of large,
powerful electromagnets for use in magnetic imaging resonance systems in the medical and
scientific fields. In this application, a sample, for example a patient's body, is exposed to a
magnetic field and exposed to radio waves that interact with the nuclei of the atoms in the
sample. By measuring the absorption of radio waves, a technician can determine what kind of atoms are
in the sample, up to and including the type of tissue in a biological sample. Physicians use
this information for diagnosing diseases or injuries. Because of the relative size of
the human body, a large magnet is needed, and the best way to get this is to use
superconductor wires to make a large and strong magnetic field. It's because of this
that patients have to be very careful with pieces of metal in their pockets or with metallic implants.
If the implants metal is attracted by a magnetic field, it could be very uncomfortable.
Similar systems that use superconducting magnets are also used a lot for scientific research, too,
and the production of superconducting electromagnets is a multi-billion-dollar industry.
For now, though, most of the applications of superconductors are still in the experimental
stage or restricted to the research lab, especially when it requires large amounts
of liquid helium, making superconductor applications very expensive.
Certain very sensitive detectors are constructed from superconductors
that need to be cooled to liquid helium temperatures in order to function.
For all the particle physicists out there, superconductors are used to make particle
detectors, particle accelerators, and very fast electrical circuits needed for research purposes.
For example, the Large Hadron Collider in Europe, where the recent discovery of the Higgs Boson was
announced, uses not only superconducting magnets to control the particle beams,
but superconducting magnets in its various detector systems.
Then there's something called a squid, which stands for superconducting quantum interference
device. It uses a quantum mechanical effect called tunneling, which has been known for single
electrons since the 1920s. It's a phenomenon where electrons jump through a barrier that's
seemingly too high to overcome, but they do it anyway. It's now considered a well-known
quantum mechanical effect. However, in the early 1960s, a British physicist named Brian
Josephson predicted the tunneling of Cooper pairs of electrons, not just single electrons,
and experimentally it does happen, and what it produced is a very small but measurable current.
It turns out, though, that this current is extremely sensitive to small magnetic fields,
so a squid is essentially a very sensitive magnetic field detector, able to measure magnetic fields
16 orders of magnitude smaller than your refrigerator magnet. Because of this sensitivity,
squids are used to detect the very tiny magnetic fields generated by living organisms,
or to survey the magnetic field of the planet to try to detect metal or deposits underground.
One potential application is for the detection of submarines underwater,
while another one suggests that squids can be used as the fundamental circuit in a
quantum computer, a completely new type of computer that uses quantum mechanical phenomena
rather than microchips as its fundamental operational principle. Research on quantum
computing is still in its infancy. Superconductivity is ultimately a quantum
mechanical phenomenon. We can't explain it in terms of classical science, and for certain
superconductors we still can't explain it yet. Its occurrence is fascinating because it seems to
violate simple rules of electrical behavior, including Ohm's law, the idea that the voltage
of a circuit is equal to its current times its resistance. But superconductors have no resistance,
and the violation of a simple law of nature is very disturbing to us.
But we've already seen that the laws of nature may change in extreme circumstances.
For example, when we get to very fast speeds near the speed of light, Newton's laws of motion
don't apply, but the laws of relativity must be used instead. We can still use Newton's laws of
motions for large objects, but when we get to looking at tiny objects like atoms and molecules,
we have to use the laws of quantum mechanics instead. And when we get to very low temperatures,
Ohm's law doesn't help because quantum mechanics takes over once again, and we have superconductors.
But in the last 30 years, we've found some substances that don't need extremely cold
temperatures to be superconductive. We don't know exactly why they work that way,
but it gives us hope, the hope that someday we may find a superconductor that operates at
room temperature. Then we can have current with no resistance, no energy lost by heat,
and a lot more energy to apply to useful processes. Just to give you one example,
energy losses due to electrical transmission lines are about 30% of the total thanks to the
resistance of the wiring. Can you imagine the change if we could use superconducting wire
instead of copper or aluminum and get that 30% back? It would have a huge impact on the efficiency
of our electrical devices. Room temperatures, superconductors may be the stuff of science
fiction, but then 100 years ago, a television set was the stuff of science fiction. Who knows
what we'll come up with in the next 100 years. Thank you.
