When a cannon is fired, the cannonball is acting like a large particle of matter, while
the boom from the cannon is a loud sound wave.
Historically, scientists always thought that everything in nature was either one or the
other, a particle or a wave.
This differentiation worked fine until the late 19th century.
Take light for instance.
This is a standard digital video disc, or DVD.
Look what happens when I shine it in the light.
You see a sort of rainbow effect, as the light hits it at just the right angle.
Why does it do this?
Well, the tracks of information on a DVD are burned into the plastic in lines that are
about 750 nanometers apart.
How close is that?
Considering that a human hair is about 80,000 to 100,000 nanometers thick, there are about
a hundred tracks of video or audio in the width of a human hair.
It turns out that the distance between tracks on a DVD is about the same length as the wave
lengths of visible light, which run from about 700 nanometers to about 300 nanometers.
Because of this coincidence, as visible light reflects off the adjacent tracks of the disc,
the light can experience constructive and destructive interference just like any other wave.
Most interference is destructive, but at certain angles, constructive interference can occur.
Something is that happens for different colors of light at slightly different angles, so
the net effect is the production of a rainbow, which is what you see.
This is classic wave behavior, constructive and destructive interference.
It's what Thomas Young used in 1801 to demonstrate that light did indeed have wave properties.
But we now know that light has particle properties too.
It behaves like a discrete package of energy, for example.
That's why we use the term wave particle duality to describe the true nature of light.
But what about matter?
Matter is ultimately made up of particles, protons, neutrons, and electrons make up atoms,
which themselves make up molecules that comprise normal everyday matter.
These particles behave like particles, like large pieces of matter that can move around,
that fall when you drop them, and move in straight lines in accordance with Newton's
laws of motion.
Individual atoms and molecules are just smaller than the normal pieces of matter that you and
I come into contact with everyday, but they behave the same way, don't they?
Actually that was an assumption through the 19th century and into the 20th that tiny pieces
of matter behave just like large pieces of matter.
It turns out, though, that they don't.
Tiny pieces of matter follow different rules.
We didn't notice it at first, because tiny pieces of matter were so, well, tiny, and
we weren't looking closely enough.
It's like looking at a computer monitor and seeing a photograph.
If you look closely enough, we see the photograph is actually composed of tiny red, green, and
blue dots.
It turns out it's the same thing with matter.
From far away it looks like it behaves, well, normally, but close up we see that it actually
behaves differently.
We didn't start looking closely until the 1860s, and it took over 60 years to realize
that matter, like light, behaves like waves.
By the way, the tracks on blu-ray discs are even closer together, about 320 nanometers
apart, or only about half the distance of a regular DVD.
Because they're so close together, they don't make that rainbow effect when light reflects
off them.
It's a quick and simple test to check if you have a regular DVD or a blu-ray disc.
We've already established that at the level of a light wave, energy is quantized.
This was the key conclusion of Planck's and Einstein's theories of light.
But energy is only one quantity that we use to describe a system.
What other quantities are there?
Well, think of a golf ball in a fish tank.
What are the quantities we use to describe this system is the position of the golf ball.
As a fish tank has three dimensions, lengths, widths, and height, we need three independent
positions to determine the precise position of the golf ball in the tank.
We'll arbitrarily use the letters X, Y, and Z to represent those three dimensions, just
like the dimensions of three-dimensional space.
The golf ball is not moving, so it has no kinetic energy, which is energy of motion
and a property of matter.
It does have potential energy, which is energy of position, another property of matter.
But we can always define our zero point of potential energy any way we want to.
We typically define our zero point to make things easiest for us.
So let's define our zero point as the bottom of the tank.
Finally, and also because the golf ball is not moving, the ball has no momentum, which
is another property of matter in motion.
Because in the fish tank, the ball will usually roll in straight lines, we refer to the momentum
as linear momentum.
Suppose we move to a round fish bowl instead of a tank.
The idea of the energy of the golf ball stays the same, but our concept of momentum can
be different.
In a round fish bowl, the golf ball might tend to roll in circles rather than straight
lines.
In that case, we say the golf ball has angular momentum, not linear momentum.
No matter what the shape of the tank, we can use quantities like energy and momentum to
describe the nature of this or any other system.
But here's the thing.
What possible values can these quantities have?
That is, can they have any possible value, or can they only have limited values?
Are the possible values discrete, or are they continuous?
Take angular momentum, for example.
For a given radius and mass, the angular momentum of our golf ball is determined by how fast
it's going around in a circle.
If the golf ball isn't moving at all, it has an angular momentum of zero.
But as it starts to move faster and faster, the angular momentum increases because the
golf ball can have any speed, it can have any momentum.
These are continuous values of angular momentum.
But what if the speeds around the fish bowl were at fixed values?
Say the golf ball can only go around once per second, or twice per second, or three
times per second, and so on.
Then the angular momentum would also have fixed values.
In this case, angular momentum is a discrete property, not a continuous one.
We could even go so far as to say that the angular momentum is quantized, just like energy.
These are issues we need to keep in mind as we look more closely at the behavior of matter
and energy.
Remember, it wasn't until we started looking very closely at individual atoms, individual
molecules, individual light waves that we realized that the energy of light was quantized.
As you might expect, we're going to see momentum showing up in the picture as well.
I've already mentioned that the element hydrogen has a very simple spectrum.
This makes sense because hydrogen is the simplest known element.
But it's not just that the hydrogen atom was simple.
It turns out that the hydrogen atom's spectrum follows a simple pattern.
In 1885, Swedish scientist Johann Ballmer deduced a simple mathematical formula to predict
the wavelengths of the visible light lines in the hydrogen atom spectrum.
In 1888, his compatriot, Johannes Rydberg, generalized the mathematical formula for all
regions of the spectrum of the hydrogen atom.
Because his expression is more generalized, it's called the Rydberg formula.
In this formula, the Greek letter lambda is the wavelength of the light being absorbed
or emitted.
R represents a constant that's the same for any line of light in the spectrum.
The two lowercase n variables are the important players here.
They represent whole numbers or integers, so that any line in the hydrogen atom spectrum
is related to the difference of two integers.
Now, there's no question that this is a straightforward formula as formulas go, but the question remains
why integers?
Why the difference between two integers?
Where did this constant R come from?
Although Rydberg's formula worked, there was no fundamental theory that explained why it
worked.
And finally, while every element had its own characteristic spectrum, simple equations
could not be deduced for any other element.
Not even for helium, the second most simple element.
Could scientists find a simple or even complicated mathematical formula to predict the spectrum?
Well, this was in the late 1880s.
Recall what happened a few years later.
Planck came up with this famous equation E equals H nu in 1900 to help describe light
given off by glowing objects.
And in 1905, Einstein applied that equation to light itself to suggest that the energy
of light is quantized.
Something else happened in the early 1900s.
Scientists began to figure out the structure of atoms themselves.
Scientists had already figured out that atoms themselves were composed of smaller, so-called
subatomic particles, first the electron, then the proton, and then later the neutron.
But how were these particles themselves arranged into atoms?
Ernest Rutherford, a scientist working in England, devised an ingenious experiment.
He took tiny particles coming off a radioactive sample and aimed them at a very thin metal
foil and then observed what happened.
Most of the particles went straight through the metal as if it was empty space.
Some of the particles were deflected off to one side, and a small number of particles were
reflected straight back towards the source.
Rutherford was surprised by this last result.
He was quoted as saying, It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell
at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you.
Based on these results, Rutherford proposed a model for the atom in 1911.
He proposed that the more massive protons and neutrons were collected into the center
of the atom into a tiny structure called the nucleus.
The nucleus had most of the mass of the atom.
The tinier electrons occupied the space around the nucleus in orbits, much like planets circle
the sun and defining most of the volume of the atom, even though most of this volume is
empty space.
This is called the nuclear model of the atom, and some parts of it are still accepted today,
especially the part about the protons and neutrons in a central nucleus of an atom.
The electrons do not circle the nucleus like planets around the sun.
This is an unfortunate oversimplification.
But this model was an important step forward.
Building on this model, in 1913, a Danish scientist named Niels Bohr considered Rutherford's
nuclear model as it applied to hydrogen, a single proton in the nucleus with a single
electron in orbit around it.
Bohr already accepted the fact that energy was quantized, but he took it a step further.
What if the angular momentum of the electron going around the nucleus were quantized?
And in particular, what if it were multiples of Planck's constant, which, as it turned
out, has the same units as angular momentum?
What Bohr is suggesting can be stated mathematically as, angular momentum is proportional to NH,
where H is Planck's constant and N is an integer, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so forth.
Essentially, angular momentum is a multiple of Planck's constant.
Bohr is assuming that the angular momentum of the electron is quantized.
It's the same thing as our golf ball going around once per second, or twice per second,
and so forth.
Bohr was assuming that the angular momentum of the electron in hydrogen can only have
certain numerical values.
Bohr then made two more assumptions.
First, that the force between the oppositely charged proton and the electron were perfectly
balanced out by the centrifugal force of the rotating electron.
Here Bohr is taking two simple physics concepts, two types of force, and setting them equal,
kind of like a tug of war with two sides pulling exactly the same amount.
The first force, the force between the proton and electron, is the well-known force between
opposite charges called the Coulombic force, which in this case attract each other because
they have opposite charge.
The second force, the centrifugal force, is the also well-known force of a rotating object
that tends to fling the object out, like when you're riding on a merry-go-round at the
playground.
Bohr argued that these two fundamental forces had to balance perfectly if hydrogen was going
to be a stable atom, which it is.
Finally, Bohr argued that the only way an electron can go from one value of angular momentum
to another is to absorb or emit light that has exactly the same energy as the difference
in energy between the two angular momentum values.
This is called the Bohr frequency condition, and it's still considered valid today.
With these assumptions and the concept of quantized angular momentum, Bohr was able
to algebraically derive a simple equation.
Again, we don't need to understand the details of Bohr's equation, except the note that
all of the items in the equation, except three, are physical constants of nature.
The three that aren't are the wavelength of light, lambda, and the two integers that
relate to the amount of angular momentum of the electron.
But here's the thing.
It agrees perfectly with the Rydberg equation.
And using modern values of the various physical constants in Bohr's equation, we can calculate
a value of R that is within 0.001 percent of the experimentally determined value for
R. Essentially, Bohr was able to model the spectrum of the hydrogen atom from simple
physical principles.
When a theoretical model agrees this well with experiment, we have to admit that there's
something correct about the assumptions of the model.
And what was the key assumption of Bohr's model?
That angular momentum of the electron and the hydrogen atom was quantized.
By the way, there was one more conclusion of Bohr's model of the hydrogen atom.
Bohr showed that the energy of the hydrogen atom itself was limited by a certain combination
of constants, including Planck's constant, and the value of that variable n, which remember,
would only be an integer.
In fact, the variable n was the only thing that can change when calculating the energy
of the hydrogen atom.
All the other symbols in his mathematical expression were constants, like the mass of
the electron and the speed of light and the constant pi.
Because the total energy of the hydrogen atom was limited to certain values, we can say
that the energy of the hydrogen atom is quantized.
The variable n, limited to integers, is called a quantum number.
The only possible values of energy that the hydrogen atom could have were limited by the
quantum number n.
What Bohr demonstrated is that light is not the only thing that had quantized energies.
Atoms like hydrogen also had quantized energies.
Now Bohr couldn't use his model to predict the spectrum of any other atom, even by modifying
his equation to make it more complicated and less elegant.
But the crucial step had been taken.
At the atomic level, energy is not the only thing that's quantized.
Angular momentum is quantized as well.
There was one more piece of the puzzle.
In the early 1920s, somebody thought, light has wave and particle properties, and then
asked, can matter have particle and wave properties as well?
French scientist Louis de Broglie took two equations for energy, E equals h nu, and E
equals mc squared, and brought them together.
Instead of using the speed of light, c, he used the variable v for the velocity of the
particle, and got an equation that the wavelength of the particle was related to Planck's constant,
the velocity of the particle, and the mass of the particle, lambda is equal to h divided
by mv.
The wavelength variable lambda here is called the de Broglie wavelength, and is the wavelength
of a moving piece of mass.
De Broglie's equation implies that matter does have a wavelength.
But why don't we observe it?
We don't observe it because the value of h Planck's constant is so small, on the order
of 10 to the minus 34th power, using standard units.
How small is this?
Consider a cube of water that's about 70 yards on the side.
That's about two-thirds of a football field, almost 300,000 tons of water.
One part in 10 to the 34th power is one water molecule in that entire volume.
Because Planck's constant is so tiny, the de Broglie wavelengths are also very, very
tiny.
For instance, if a pitcher throws a baseball at 90 miles an hour, the wavelength of that
baseball is about a millionth of a billionth of a billionth of a billionth of an inch.
We can't even measure a distance that small, and likely never will.
So the wavelength of a baseball is invisible to us.
It's meaningless to us.
But as mass gets smaller, the fraction in de Broglie's equation gets larger because
mass is in the denominator.
And when a denominator and a fraction get smaller, the resulting fraction itself gets
larger.
When the mass in de Broglie's equation is as small as an electron, the de Broglie wavelength
may be significant.
In fact, if the pitcher threw an electron instead of a baseball, then the wavelength
of the electron would be about one-fifth the width of a human hair.
That's almost big enough to see with a naked eye.
We can't ignore that.
We would have to treat the electron like a wave, not a piece of matter.
Well, all this is fine, but is it correct?
Do electrons have wave behavior?
Between 1923 and 1927, physicists at Bell Labs were studying nickel metal with electron
beams and, without realizing it, diffracted electrons.
Why is this significant?
Because only waves diffract.
This was the first experimental evidence that electrons did indeed behave like waves.
And the resulting waves had wavelengths exactly as predicted by de Broglie's equation.
There's no doubt about it.
Electrons behave as waves.
What that means is that any fundamental theory of electron behavior must treat electrons
as waves.
And Niels Bohr's theory did not do that.
That was the reason that Bohr's ideas were only partially successful.
In fact, a simple calculation based on Bohr's own results shows that an electron wave is
about five times larger than an atom itself.
So any proper model of electrons in atoms must treat them like a wave.
Bohr's ideas were a huge leap forward, no doubt.
But not the best model of electrons, because they're not treated like waves.
With the physical evidence that electrons behave like waves, we need a new model.
This model has to treat electrons as waves, not as little baseballs or even golf balls
of matter.
In 1925 and 1926, German scientists Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrödinger did just
that, working independently of each other.
They used different mathematical formalisms, and the one used by most scientists was formulated
by Schrödinger.
In either case, this new model is called wave mechanics, or more properly, quantum mechanics.
Schrödinger proposed that the behavior of a particle of matter was described by a mathematical
equation called a wave function.
Wave functions could be any function that is physically possible, like a sine or cosine
function in one or two or even three dimensions.
Wave functions are represented by the Greek letter psi.
But, Schrödinger proposed, the wave function had to satisfy a very specific differential
equation that we know as the Schrödinger equation.
Now, the mathematics aren't important to us, but what is important is that the Schrödinger
equation contains the variable e, which stands for energy.
This means that energy, already one of our primary quantities, has a central role in
quantum mechanics.
The Schrödinger equation is a type of math formula called a differential equation, and
there are many techniques that mathematicians use to solve these differential equations.
Actually, they've been doing this for hundreds of years.
Newton's laws of motion, for example, can be written as differential equations and can
be solved for certain situations.
When we do this for a variety of systems and quantum mechanics, we not only find mathematical
expressions for the wave functions, but we also find expressions or values for the energy.
In almost every case, the energies are limited to certain values determined by some integer
that we call a quantum number.
If energies are limited to certain values, we call them quantize.
Quantum mechanics predicts quantize energy.
It doesn't assume, or propose, or hypothesize them, rather, quantize energies are the results
of quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics also predicts other quantize variables, like angular momentum.
At the macroscopic level, it's easy to ignore or overlook these quantize values.
It's like having a staircase where the stairs are so short and close together, it behaves
like a smooth ramp.
But at the scale of an atom, we can't ignore these individual steps, the individual values
of quantize energy and angular momentum.
So if we really want to understand matter, again, the better we understand it, the better
we could use it to suit our needs, we need to accept the fact that things like energy
and angular momentum can only have certain values.
As strange as some of its conclusions are, quantum mechanics is still currently the best
model we have of electron behavior.
And because electrons determine the chemistry of atoms and molecules, the nature of materials
is ultimately determined by quantum mechanics, with energy at the center of it all.
So matter has wave behavior, and electron behaves like a wave, so much so that our best theory
of electron behavior treats them as such.
Is a proton or a neutron behave like a wave?
Yes, they do.
But because protons and neutrons are about 2,000 times more massive than an electron,
their wave properties are about 2,000 times smaller.
But experiments confirm that protons and neutrons also behave like waves.
What about atoms and molecules?
Well, technically yes they also behave like waves, but the increasing masses of atoms
and molecules over single protons and neutrons and electrons means that their wave nature
gets more and more invisible to us, although waves of helium atoms have been used to study
other matter.
For our purposes, the wave nature of matter affects mostly the electron.
But that affects atoms and molecules and how matter interacts with each other, so we can't
ignore the wave nature of the electron.
But there's another way we could use electrons as waves, in electron microscopes.
A regular microscope uses light waves and magnifies them with mirrors or lenses so that
we could easily see tiny objects.
However, a microscope is inherently limited by the wavelength of light used, so a light
microscope can only see things that are about 300 nanometers across.
That's barely enough to see the smallest bacterium.
We can't see anything smaller than that with a microscope.
We can't see viruses or even large molecules.
With the microscope that uses light, that is, realizing that electrons behave like waves,
in 1931 two German scientists invented a microscope that used electrons using magnets as lenses.
Within two years, engineers had built an electron microscope that had better magnification than
a light microscope, and scientists began seeing things too tiny to see before.
Today's electron microscopes have the ability to magnify objects up to two million times,
which is almost enough to see large molecules like DNA.
We've been able to get even better magnification from special types of microscopes called scanning
tunneling microscopes, and even those are based on a quantum mechanical effect called
tunneling.
And with tunneling microscopes, we've finally been able to see individual atoms and molecules
confirming the modern atomic theory 180 years after John Dalton proposed it.
So light, like matter, has wave particle duality.
We've come a long way from the time when science thought that something had to be either
a particle or a wave.
We now understand that these two properties aren't mutually exclusive.
We also recognize by virtue of the Schrodinger equation that energy has a central role in
how electrons behave at the atomic and molecular level, something we need to keep in mind as
we try to understand the properties of atoms and molecules.
And because we understand all this, we have a better understanding of the wonderful nature
of matter.
Thank you.
