The
human body is an amazing machine.
From blood cells to bones, from individual organs to a wrapping of skin, we're all
a bunch of biochemical reactions and structural mechanisms that keep on going for sometimes
more than 100 years.
For most of us, much of this time, these biochemical reactions and structural components
work fine.
Every once in a while, however, something doesn't work right and our bodies break down.
We get a cut, we break a bone.
We fall prey to viruses or bacteria and get sick, and sometimes fungus grows where it
shouldn't.
For time, we literally wear out.
Our teeth, nails, hair, muscles, and joints show their age.
I don't mean to be depressing, because on the positive side, the wonders of modern
biomedical engineering can come to the rescue.
In the last few decades, scientists and engineers have constructed replacement body parts that
can take the place of worn out or broken pieces of our cells, increasing both the length and
quality of our lives.
Generally, we call these replacements implants.
The practice of replacing or augmenting body parts with implants is hundreds of years old,
but the maturing of chemistry and medicine in the last 100 years or so has brought major
advances in implant technology.
And given that we all want to live longer, healthier lives, why not spend a little bit
of time talking about how these materials make our lives better?
Note that I'm not talking about transplants.
A transplant is the complete replacement of an organ, usually with an organ from another
person.
Replacements of this type have their own issues, but that's not what I'm going to be talking
about here.
I'm talking about artificial replacements that require a good knowledge of biology, chemistry,
and material science that all come together to support the body human.
So what challenges do we face when we're trying to find a good material for an artificial
implant?
When you stop and think about it, the human body is a pretty hostile place.
Let's start with the stomach, full of hydrochloric acid.
That's obviously a chemically hazardous spot.
But remember, food starts breaking down almost immediately because our saliva contains enzymes
that start reacting with our food even as we chew.
These enzymes must be pretty reactive chemicals.
As we go further down the digestive tract, we see that our body tissues are constantly
being exposed to the body's waste products without being harmed.
What about our bloodstream?
Not only does it have enzymes, but it also has antibodies that attack bacteria and viruses
as part of our immune system.
Let's face it, if all goes well, these antibodies destroy invading germs so they don't make
us sick.
In most cases, the immune system only fights off invaders, but there are some diseases
called autoimmune diseases where the immune system starts fighting the body itself.
Celiac disease, type 1 diabetes, lupus, multiple sclerosis, and rheumatoid arthritis are just
a few diseases in which the very destructive immune system works against the body rather
than against the body's enemies.
Finally, there's the chloride ion.
The element chlorine is present in the human body at a concentration of about two parts
per thousand.
However, it's never present in the elemental form of chlorine.
That would be poisonous.
Rather, it's present in the form of the negatively charged chloride ion.
The problem with the chloride ion is that it's known to promote corrosion in many metals,
including stainless steel and many high-tech alloys.
This means that we're going to have to be careful if we want to use certain metals as
replacement body parts.
If they corrode, they may not provide long-term structural support, or may even poison a person
as they dissolve inside the body.
The point is, the human body is full of chemicals that can attack, react, dissolve, and destroy
other substances.
Sometimes it's amazing that we survive our own body's attempts to destroy us.
With all of these things to watch out for, there are four main considerations when evaluating
a material for its use as an implant.
First, it must be able to withstand the environment of the human body, including a temperature
of 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, and the possible acidic, corrosive, enzymatic conditions I
just mentioned.
Second, it must invoke minimal response by the body's immune system, which, after all,
has evolved to attack foreign material in the body.
Adverse immune responses can be treated with drug therapy, but if the drugs aren't needed,
so much the better.
On a related note, the material must itself be non-toxic to the body, or not promote diseases
like cancer.
Third, it must be structurally able to perform its job if providing structural support is
necessary.
And finally, it should be cost-effective, although depending on the need, this is less important.
Not every implant addresses these four concerns equally well, but for implants that are used
most of these requirements can be met.
One of the oldest body parts to be replaced with implants is the tooth.
Sometimes a small part of the tooth is replaced because it's been worn away or are cavity
forms.
In other cases, the entire tooth is replaced by some other material.
For starters, understand that dental restorations of any sort are a tricky type of implant because
of the extreme environment of the mouth and the severe pressures put on the teeth by chewing.
We may not think of the mouth as being an extreme environment, but it's warm, wet, full
of enzymes, and ever so slightly acidic.
It's not too acidic, otherwise our teeth would slowly dissolve.
But what we put into our mouth can be even more reactive.
Acids from foods like fruits, fibrous tissues from plants and meats, hot coffee, and cold
ice cream.
Our teeth are directly exposed to a wide variety of conditions.
Any material we use to repair or replace teeth has to be up to the challenge.
Let's start on the small end, a cavity.
Many of us get cavities in our teeth even if we practice the best dental hygiene.
Historically, one of the first materials used to fill small holes in our teeth was dental
amalgam.
Although there are some indications that it was used as early as the 7th century in China,
the modern use of dental amalgam started in France in the early 1800s.
An amalgam is an alloy that contains mercury.
The amalgam, which is about 50% mercury, about 25% silver, and some tin, copper, and a few
other metals is easy to work with, hardens into a tough solid, and is resistant to the
harsh conditions of the mouth.
It's still widely used around the world.
Now, mercury in certain chemical forms can be very toxic, but despite some stories in
the media and the claims of some special interest groups, there is no reliable evidence that
the mercury in dental amalgams contributes to mercury poisoning.
If you have amalgam fillings, it's considered safer to keep them rather than have them removed
and replaced.
Another material used for dental fillings is called dental composite, which is essentially
a resin or plastic with finely ground sand mixed in to give it a white appearance, similar
to teeth.
Most composites don't have the longevity that dental amalgams do, but the fact that they
have the same color as teeth makes some people prefer them from a cosmetic perspective, especially
if the filling is easily visible by others.
For a restoration of larger portions of a tooth, materials like porcelain, a type of
ceramic, are used.
These porcelains are typically made of aluminum oxide or zirconium oxide that are fused together
at high temperatures.
Dentists can make a mold of the remaining tooth and fashion a replacement section that's
then bonded to the leftover bone.
Recently, advances in computer-aided design and manufacturing, and even three-dimensional
printing, have been used to construct replacement tooth parts quickly and easily.
Dentists can take a three-dimensional scan of the broken tooth and have a replacement
piece automatically milled by a computerized milling machine in as little as 20 minutes.
Gold and silver alloys are also used to replace parts of teeth.
By themselves, pure gold and pure silver are rather soft and would be poor tooth replacements.
Instead, alloys are used that contain as much as 80% to as little as 40% of the base metal
because they have superior mechanical behavior.
As you might guess, these types of restorations are rather expensive.
If the entire tooth needs to be replaced, the actual tooth itself is usually ceramic,
although it can be a noble metal like gold or silver.
Historically, replacement teeth were fashioned from human or animal teeth, including ivory.
Mounting it to the jaw is another issue.
Usually, titanium implants are screwed into the jaw with the artificial tooth mounted
onto the end of the implant.
Titanium, either pure or alloyed with other metals, is one of the few metals that does
not react badly in the body, and so is very biocompatible.
It's also relatively light and strong, so it's well suited for dental uses.
Once a titanium implant is screwed into the jaw and the bone fuses around the screw, an
artificial ceramic tooth can be mounted onto the end, and no one but your dentist will
know the difference.
And then, of course, there are dentures, which are used to replace multiple teeth.
Generally, dentures are removable instead of being permanently implanted.
They can be partial, which replaces a few adjacent teeth, or full, which replaces the entire
top or bottom, each of which is called an arch.
If the denture is partial, then it's usually a few replacement teeth that are fit in between
the remaining natural teeth.
If it's full, then the artificial teeth are fit into a base that itself fits over the
upper or lower gum line.
The base is usually made out of acrylic plastic, using molds made from the patient's own
gums.
The teeth themselves are usually acrylic, ceramic, or porcelain.
Although teeth are considered part of the skeletal system, replacement of other parts
of the skeleton require a different approach, largely because many bones need to provide
structural support for the rest of the body.
Historically, stainless steel has been used to replace bones, but some people are sensitive
to some of the metals in the various stainless steel alloys.
Nowadays, titanium is the material of choice for bone replacements, just like for dental
implants.
It's half as heavy as steel, is very resistant to corrosion, and has excellent mechanical
properties.
Instead of pure titanium and alloy with about 5% each of aluminum, n-vanadium, or niobium
is used.
These minor components provide additional strength to the metal.
To better match the mechanical properties of actual bone, the implant can be made porous
rather than completely solid.
Instead of being a solid piece of metal, metal powder is heated until the powder particles
just begin to fuse together in a process called sintering.
This process makes the implant more like a sponge than a completely solid piece.
A porosity of up to 40%, meaning that 40% of the implant is rather empty than metal,
is the target for implants for bones like the femur or thigh bone.
In order to better bond with any remaining bone, sometimes the titanium implant will be
coated with hydroxyapatite, which is the scientific name for the mineral portion of
bone.
Hydroxyapatite is a mineral containing calcium, phosphorus, oxygen, and hydrogen.
Unfortunately, the coating process occurs at high temperature, and when the implant
cools, the hydroxyapatite coating may crack because of different rates of contraction.
However, many doctors prefer the coated implants because it allows them to avoid the use of
glue in the replacement process.
Because titanium is very biocompatible, it's one of the materials of choice for long-term
implants because it doesn't chemically react in the body.
It also has the advantage of being non-magnetic, so people can get magnetic resonance imaging,
or MRIs, without problems associated with magnetic metals.
These advantages also make titanium alloys the preferred material for small screws, plates,
or rods that might need to be implanted to provide additional structure or strength after
injuries or surgeries.
It's not a total wonder material.
Titanium will set off metal detectors, so a patient may still need to provide proper documentation
of their implant.
Sometimes a joint needs to be replaced, not just a bone.
One of the more common joint replacements is at the hip.
Here the issue is not just structural, but functional as well.
In this case, there are two approaches called hard-on-hard and hard-on-soft.
For the hard-on-hard approach, either chrome alloys or ceramics, like alumina or silica,
are fashioned into a replacement ball and socket joint.
The manufacturing must be done very carefully so that the materials don't chip or grind
too much during years of expected use.
For the hard-on-soft approach, a metal or ceramic ball is polished as finely as possible,
and then an ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene plastic is used as the socket.
Something similar is done for the knee, which is another common joint replacement.
In this case, however, the joint is a hinge joint, not a ball and socket joint.
What happens here is that the ends of the femur and the tibia, the major bone in the
lower leg, get metal ends attached, and between them goes a polyethylene plate that the top
metal piece slides over.
Curiously enough, the kneecap bone, called the patella, can be replaced either with a
polyethylene disc or with the actual kneecap.
The knuckle is another joint that occasionally needs replacement, especially for people suffering
from debilitating cases of arthritis.
The knuckle is the common word for the joint where the bones of the palm of the hand, the
metacarpal bones, join with the bones at the base of the finger or the phalanges.
The fancy name for the knuckle is the metacarpophilangeal joint.
The bones are connected by several thick fibers called ligaments, and the surfaces of the bones
are covered with a thick, tough tissue called articular cartilage.
In some people, this cartilage can wear out over time, leading to pain and swelling.
Doctors can replace this worn-out cartilage with pads of silicone that will allow the
joint to slide back and forth again.
Now, I said silicone, not silicon.
Silicone is an element, a metalloid that has some properties of a metal and some properties
of a non-metal.
The element is the basis of the modern semiconductor industry, which, as you probably know, has
a huge impact on modern electrical devices.
It hardly ever appears as the pure element in nature because most of the time it's combined
with oxygen to make silicon dioxide, the main component of sand, or as silicate minerals.
Silicones are mixed silicon-oxygen organic group polymers.
They have a chain of alternating silicon and oxygen atoms, with two additional carbon-containing
groups bonded to the silicon atoms in the chain.
The properties of the silicone depend on the identity or identities of the carbon-containing
groups on the chain.
They're more properly called polymerized siloxanes, but the name silicone is more prevalent.
They can be liquids or solids.
They can be used as solvents, grease, rubber, coatings, or plastics.
They're very biocompatible and are not susceptible to attacking the body, either by the body's
defense mechanisms or by microorganisms.
Because of their variable properties, the right silicone can be used for joint replacement
depending on the demands of the joint, in this case the metacarpofalangeal joints or
the knuckles.
Breast implants are another body substitution that can be made, one that has had its share
of controversy over the years.
Breast implants can be used as part of reconstructive surgery, either following mastectomies or
deformities, or for cosmetic purposes.
Breast implants go back to the late 19th century, when German physician Vincent Zerny used some
of his patient's own fat tissue to reconstruct a breast that had a tumor removed.
For this feat, Zerny is known as the father of cosmetic breast surgery.
Early breast implants were not very successful and included materials like a patient's
own fat tissue, paraffin wax, glass or rubber inserts, and plastic sponges.
Modern safe implants were developed in the 1960s and are one of two things, a saline-filled
silicone sac, or a silicone-filled silicone sac.
Again, it's silicone, the organic and silicon-containing polymer, not silicone, the element.
Breasts filled with other materials like oil or tiny beads of plastic have been used
in the past but are currently not in production.
There are several surgical methods for inserting a breast implant, but they all require making
an incision and placing the implant in the chest.
When using a saline implant, a smaller incision can be made because the implant isn't filled
with saline until after it's been implanted.
The saline that's used is a 0.9% solution of sodium chloride, normal table salt and
sterile water.
This type of solution is called normal saline and has the same approximate salt concentration
as blood.
When using a silicone-filled implant, a larger incision must be made because the implant
is already filled with silicone.
As I mentioned before, different silicones have widely different physical properties,
and the silicones used to fill breast implants have properties that provide the appropriate
physical and visual effect.
Most of them are either thick liquids or a bit gelatinous.
Because the silicone sac is biologically inert, the body's immune systems aren't activated
for either type of implant.
That's not to say that getting breast implants is completely without possible complications.
One of the biggest potential problems with breast implants is the possible leakage of
the saline or silicone from a broken sac, which eventually completely deflates.
In the case of saline implants, the body simply absorbs the saline, but the recipient loses
the effect of the implant, and usually more surgery is indicated to remove it or, if desired,
replace the original implant.
A decade-long study of saline implants suggests that as many as 10% of saline-filled implants
rupture over a 10-year period.
If a silicone implant ruptures, the implant doesn't deflate like saline implants do, but
the silicone filler can leak into the surrounding tissues.
Now although I said that silicones are biologically inert, the leaked silicone does represent a
foreign material in the body, just like a splinter would be.
The body's immune system can react by sending a type of white blood cell called a macrophage
to attack the object.
The collection of macrophages creates a small lump called a granuloma, and can also lead
to inflamed lymph nodes in the surrounding region.
Of course, a breast implant is itself a foreign object in the body.
In some cases, the body can react to it by surrounding the implant with scar tissue to
isolate it.
In extreme cases, the production of scar tissue defeats the purpose of the implant by changing
the shape and tissue distribution around the breasts.
Although this happens only in a few percent of breast implant cases, it does point out
the issue that optional breast implants need to be seriously considered and not taken lightly.
Now let's focus on smaller implants.
Let me start out by pointing out that the human body is full of tubes.
For example, the bloodstream, arteries and veins are just biological tubes that transport
blood.
The kidney passes waste liquids through tubes, and we eat and breathe through tubes.
Well, sometimes because of disease and injury, some of these tubes collapse, and that can
be hazardous to our health.
There are implants, however, that help keep biological tubes open.
They're called stents.
Most of us know stents through their use in arteries, especially coronary arteries that
supply the heart itself with blood.
The stent is a wire mesh tube, usually made out of stainless steel or an alloy of chromium
and cobalt.
Early stents were just bare metal.
One of the major problems with bare metal stents, though, was that the presence of the
stent sometimes promoted growth within the artery wall adjacent to the implant.
In some cases, this growth, called restinosis, was so much that the artery got significantly
blocked again.
In the early 2000s, so-called drug eluting stents were developed.
These stents had the metal framework, but were coated with a polymer that contained a
drug that minimized the growth of the arterial wall.
The drug slowly leaks, or elutes, from the polymer to keep restinosis from occurring.
The first such stent was approved by the FDA for use back in 2003, and research is still
underway to identify better drugs and delivery systems for this type of stent.
The insertion of a coronary stent is an interesting process.
The technique is called angioplasty, and it involves the insertion of a catheter with
a tiny balloon on one end into the circulatory system, usually through the femoral artery
in the leg.
The stent is wrapped around the balloon, which is initially deflated.
Using X-ray visualization, the doctor pushes the catheter through the circulatory system
until the balloon reaches the proper, rocked artery, then inflates the balloon.
As the balloon expands, so does the stent, until the stent is firmly pushing against
the collapsing artery.
The doctor then removes the catheter, and the procedure is done.
It's important that the stent be firmly against the artery wall, otherwise it can act as
a site for blood clot formation, which is exactly the opposite intention of the stent.
Stents can be used for other tubes.
A urethral stent can be used in men that have enlarged prostate glands, which can block
urination.
An esophageal stent can be applied in cases where the esophagus is blocked, such as after
an injury or in a person suffering esophageal cancer, allowing the user to eat and drink
normally.
Our knowledge of materials and their biochemistry has allowed us to develop replacement body
parts that we can actually implant into the human body.
The last few decades have brought significant advances in implant technology, perhaps none
more ambitious than the artificial heart.
Although investigation in artificial heart replacements began in the 1940s, the first
successful artificial heart, an actual implantable pump as opposed to an external heart lung
machine, was implanted in 1982.
Patient survived, although admittedly uncomfortably, for 112 days.
In this case, the implanted device was still supported by about 400 pounds of machinery,
so it was no way near portable.
Today, there are artificial hearts that are self-contained and can last for a few years,
although many are used as a bridging mechanism while waiting for an actual heart transplant.
We also have cochlear implants to help those who are profoundly hard of hearing.
Scientists and engineers are even now developing replacement arms and legs that can receive
nerve impulses so users can use them as true replacements, although the level of control
still isn't at the level of the real thing.
In the near future, we may have replacement stomachs that digest food, artificial eyes
that can actually see, replacement kidneys that will eliminate the need for dialysis.
All of these implants are ways to improve the quality of life of those suffering pain
and injury.
But as our technology learns to replace more and more parts of the human body, one wonders
where it will stop.
Can we actually replace the entire human body and still be considered human?
Of course, there's one part of the body that we haven't replaced yet, and that's the human
brain.
All discussions of computers and artificial intelligence aside, it's really our brain
that makes us human.
Until and unless we find a way to replace our brains, we're all going to have to remain
members of the human race.
Thank you.
