In the science of chemistry, we could separate the field into two parts, one called inorganic
chemistry and one called organic chemistry.
Inorganic chemistry is a study of all the elements in the periodic table except for
one.
Organic chemistry is a study of that remaining element of the periodic table.
That element is, of course, carbon.
Organic chemistry is the study of the chemistry of carbon.
Why carbon?
Simply put, carbon demonstrates the widest variety of chemistry of any element known
by far.
There are over 70 million known compounds of carbon.
Granted, most of them are obscure and found only in a laboratory, but the point is that
carbon forms more compounds, more types of compounds, than any other element.
Because of that, carbon deserves a fuel of chemistry all to itself.
But there's more than that.
Carbon compounds are the basis of life.
That's the reason why we're called carbon-base life forms.
The chemistry of living things, all living things, is based on compounds of carbon.
In fact, it's only because of the complexity of carbon chemistry that life evolved on this
planet at all.
Why carbon and not other elements?
Actually, there are several reasons.
Carbon is relatively common.
Not too common, there's more aluminum in the earth than there is carbon, but there's
still enough carbon to go around.
Carbon makes four chemical bonds, the maximum number commonly found among earthly elements.
Carbon makes those bonds three-dimensionally, allowing for some additional complexity.
And carbon makes fairly strong, stable bonds, not just with other carbon atoms, but atoms
of other elements like hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, chlorine, and phosphorus.
Granted, other elements may exceed carbon's ability in one of these categories, but no
other element combines the positive features that carbon has in all of these areas.
Carbon is a unique element, which is why it gets a field of science all to itself.
There's an idea that goes way back to Hippocrates in ancient Greece, an idea that also comes
up in ancient Eastern traditions.
Living things are different from non-living things.
I mean, it's obvious, isn't it?
Living things like animals and plants are inherently different than non-living things,
like rocks.
The ancient cultures and philosophies came up with different ways of expressing or defining
what made living things different from non-living things.
Here's the ancient Chinese concept of qi, for example.
In Western culture, which borrowed a lot from the ancient Greeks, it was known as a vital
force, which gave rise to the general concept of vitalism.
Living things had something vital in them that separated them from non-living things.
This idea endured even as the old ideas of alchemy evolved into the modern science of
chemistry, starting in the mid-1600s.
By the 1820s, almost 200 years later, modern concepts of elements and atoms had been defined.
But the chemists of the times still thought there were fundamental differences between
the chemicals that made up living things, called organic chemicals, and the chemicals
that made up non-living things, called inorganic chemicals.
Even the word organic betrays its origin.
It means from the organism, meaning that it came from a living thing.
As chemistry matured, if only slowly, the concept of vitalism meant that organic chemicals,
chemicals of the organism, could only come from living things, while inorganic chemicals
only came from non-living things.
In 1825, German chemist Friedrich Voller tried to synthesize the inorganic chemical ammonium
cyanate.
He failed.
It took him three years, but by 1828 he was able to demonstrate that in an attempt to
combine two inorganic chemicals to make ammonium cyanate, he actually made an organic chemical
called urea, so-called because it was originally isolated from urine.
Voller had actually synthesized an organic chemical from inorganic sources.
There is nothing special about the chemicals.
There is no vital force that makes organic chemicals any more or less special than inorganic
chemicals.
Despite this convincing demonstration, the concept of vitalism died a slow death as the
1800s passed, but the point was made.
This from that time until now have taken advantage of any and all ingredients, organic or not,
and modern synthetic organic chemistry was born, and has since identified over 70 million
different compounds.
The modern definitions of organic and inorganic are actually a bit slippery.
Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and carbonate compounds like limestone and marble are considered
inorganic even though these substances contain carbon.
Graphite and diamond, both forms of elemental carbon, are likewise considered inorganic
compounds.
Simple cyanide salts are inorganic, as are carbon-containing alloys like steel.
Most other carbon-containing compounds have some link to living things in a way, and so
are properly considered organic chemicals.
The simplest organic compounds are called hydrocarbons, which are compounds that contain
only the elements carbon and hydrogen.
If all the bonds in the hydrocarbon are single covalent bonds, the hydrocarbons are called
alkanes.
Methane, whose chemical formula is CH4, and which is the principal component of natural
gas, is the simplest alkane.
The next simplest alkane is ethane, whose formula is C2H6, and has two carbon atoms
bonded together.
Then there's propane, C3H8, which has three carbon atoms linked together, and is used as
a fuel in some of our barbecue grills.
Then there's butane, C4H10, a four carbon chain surrounded by hydrogen atoms, and used
in cigarette lighters.
You may notice that these compounds consist of a chain of carbon atoms surrounded by hydrogen
atoms.
That's one type of hydrocarbon, and it illustrates one of the reasons carbon is central to organic
chemistry.
It makes long chains of molecules.
Some alkanes have chains that go dozens, hundreds, even thousands of carbon atoms, all linked
one after another.
But it doesn't have to be a straight chain.
At any carbon atom in a chain, more than one carbon atom can be bonded, and the chain can
go off in two, or even three, other directions.
These are called branched alkanes, and they only add to the complexity of possible hydrocarbons.
This has shown that there are 75 different compounds that have 10 carbon atoms in differently
branched chains.
But if you have 20 carbon atoms, would you believe over 366,000 differently branched molecules?
And carbon atoms can also form rings, not just chains.
It's no wonder that carbon chemistry is so complex, and this is only for alkanes.
As simple as they are, alkanes are very important in our society.
I've already mentioned the uses of methane, propane, and butane, but realize also that
gasoline is mostly hydrocarbons.
You may have guessed it by now, but we use alkanes largely for fuels, to cook our food,
heat our houses, and power our vehicles.
If organic chemicals were nothing but hydrocarbons, then organic chemistry would be rather boring.
The real excitement in organic chemicals is the fact that carbon makes chemical bonds
with other elements, or even itself, in different ways that lead to huge varieties in chemical
and physical properties.
A certain bonding of atoms or elements that leads to a certain set of chemical properties
in a molecule is called a functional group.
It's called that because it strongly influences the way a molecule functions, if it has this
certain bonding arrangement.
The existence of a large number of functional groups is largely responsible for the huge
variety and complexity of organic compounds.
In this lecture, I'll only be able to cover a few of the many functional groups that carbon
forms.
Perhaps the simplest functional group is when two bonds exist between adjacent carbon atoms
and a chain.
This is called a double bond.
A carbon-carbon double bond undergoes certain chemical reactions that carbon-carbon single
bonds don't, which is what makes it a functional group.
It's called the alkene functional group.
Some molecules also have three bonds between adjacent carbon atoms, which is called a carbon-carbon
triple bond.
A triple bond is also considered a functional group.
It's called an alkyne.
Alkenes and alkynes are also hydrocarbons, just like alkanes.
Most functional groups, though, involve atoms other than carbon and hydrogen.
In organic chemistry, such atoms are called heteroatoms.
For example, one heteroatom could be a chlorine atom substituting for a hydrogen atom in an
alkane.
Take methane, for example.
It has a single carbon atom bonded to four hydrogen atoms.
If we replace one of the hydrogen atoms with a chlorine atom, we make a new molecule that
has a carbon-chlorine bond that has a different reactivity than the other carbon-hydrogen
bonds.
Replacing one hydrogen atom with a chlorine atom makes a molecule called either methylchloride
or chloromethane, which was once used as a refrigerant.
Replacing two hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms makes something called methylene chloride,
or dichloromethane, widely used in the past as a solvent.
Replace three hydrogens with chlorines, trichloromethane, or chloroform.
You may recognize the name chloroform as a compound used as an anesthetic in the past,
although no longer because it messes up your liver and your kidneys.
If we replace all four hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms, we have a new molecule called
carbon tetrachloride, also known as tetrachloromethane, a chemical that was used in dry cleaning.
Because of environmental and health concerns, most of these chlorine-containing chemicals
aren't used as much as they were.
But let's not forget that many of these compounds have connections to living things.
Many species of seaweed give off chloroform into the oceans and atmosphere, to the tune
of over 600,000 tons per year.
Don't worry, it degrades in sunlight rather quickly.
You may notice that I gave two names for each new chlorine-containing molecule.
Part of the reason for this is that many compounds, especially simple ones, were well known before
a good understanding of their nature was understood.
Because of this, many of these simple compounds were given common names.
Over time, once our understanding of organic chemicals grew, we realized that a systematic
naming system was necessary.
The names methane, methylchloride, methylenechloride, chloroform, and carbon tetrachloride are
common names given to these chemicals in earlier times.
The names chloro, dichloro, trichloro, and tetrachloromethane are considered systematic
names based on a naming system that allows us to determine a unique name for every unique
substance.
Naming this system of naming is an important part of every chemist's education, and one
we won't go into here.
In the chlorine example of a functional group, a heteroatom simply replaces a hydrogen atom
in an organic molecule.
There are other functional groups, though, that are specific groupings of atoms, not
just replacements.
For example, when an oxygen atom and a hydrogen atom are bonded together, we have something
called the alcohol functional group.
Because an oxygen atom usually makes two bonds, the alcohol functional group can be connected
to an organic molecule in place of a hydrogen atom.
When we do this, we make an organic molecule called an alcohol.
You're probably familiar with alcohol because ethyl alcohol, or ethanol, is a common drink.
It turns out, though, that ethyl alcohol isn't the most simple alcohol.
The simplest alcohol is methyl alcohol, made by taking methane, a one-carbon hydrocarbon,
and adding an alcohol functional group to it.
Methanol, as it's also called, should not be drunk because the body treats it as a poison.
First you go blind, then you die.
Ethyl alcohol is an alcohol that comes from ethane, the two-carbon hydrocarbon.
When drunk in moderation, ethyl alcohol can be inebriating, although many an over-and-biber
does feel poisoned after the next day.
Drinking too much ethyl alcohol in a short period of time can also be toxic.
Let's get back to names for a minute.
You may notice that the names methanol and ethanol, the two formal names for these alcohols,
end in the suffix O-L, or ALL.
This is a standard organic chemistry naming tool to indicate an alcohol functional group
in a molecule.
You may also be familiar with a substance called cholesterol.
Guess what?
It has an alcohol functional group, too.
Isopropyl alcohol, also called rubbing alcohol, is another molecule you're probably familiar
with that has an alcohol functional group.
If instead of having a hydrogen atom on one bond, you have a carbon-containing group making
both bonds to the oxygen atom, you have a functional group called an ether.
The compound that was once used as an anesthetic, diethyl ether, is one example of this type
of compound.
Like chloroform, it's rarely used as an anesthetic anymore, but for a different reason.
The ether is highly flammable, and its vapors can explode if they build up too much.
Oxygen makes other functional groups.
Remember that I said that the oxygen atom typically makes two bonds?
Well, if both of these bonds are made to a single carbon atom, that is, if we have a
double bond between the carbon atom and the oxygen atom, we have a functional group called
a carbonyl group.
Now, because carbon atoms tend to make four bonds, there are still two more bonds that
this carbon atom can make.
If at least one of these additional bonds is to a hydrogen atom, then we have an aldehyde
functional group.
If the other bond is also made to a hydrogen atom, we have a compound called formaldehyde.
Formaldehyde is probably best known as a preservative of biological samples, either in a school
or a medical setting.
If you've ever dissected a frog in biology lab, it's likely you know its smell.
Formaldehyde is also used in a variety of resins used to build houses and other structures.
But if both of the other bonds on the carbon and the carbonyl group are made to carbon
atoms, then the functional group is called a ketone.
The compound acetone, which has three carbon atoms, is the most simple ketone.
It's a liquid at room temperature, and is actually a pretty good solvent.
Some of its uses are as nail polish remover, as something used to unstick superglue, and
as a way to remove tar or other gunk that doesn't come up with water.
You have to be careful with acetone, though.
It can dissolve certain synthetic fabrics, so be careful not to spill any on your clothes
or your furniture.
Suppose now you take this carbonyl functional group and attach an alcohol functional group
to the carbon.
Now you've made something called the carboxyl group, or in more common terms, the acid functional
group.
Yes, organic chemistry has an acid functional group, and in some respects it behaves just
like its name, as an acid.
What does that mean that these compounds will dissolve metal and human flesh and be generally
really really dangerous?
Not really.
Although organic acids do chemically behave like acids, they're all rather weak acids.
In fact, we regularly eat and drink several organic acids.
I'll get to that in a minute.
The organic acid functional group has one more bond to make to the carbon atom, and if
that bond is made to a hydrogen atom, then we have a compound whose common name is formic
acid.
The name for formic acid comes from biology, from the genus Formica, ants.
Formic acid was first isolated in 1671 by an English naturalist by distilling a large
quantity of ant bodies, so this new compound was named after the Latin name for ants.
And in fact, formic acid is the active component in an ant's bite, so if you've ever been
bitten by an ant, you know what an injection of formic acid feels like.
Because formic acid has a single carbon atom in it, its formal name comes from the word
methane, and it's known as methanoic acid.
The next largest organic acid has two carbon atoms in it, and its name comes from ethane,
the two-carbon hydrocarbon.
Formally then, we call it ethanoic acid, but its common name is acetic acid.
Acetic acid is the acid in vinegar, a common ingredient in our kitchens.
Vinegar is about 4-5% acetic acid in water, so anybody who's eaten anything with vinegar
has eaten an organic acid.
Before I leave acids, let me mention a few more organic acids that we eat or drink regularly.
Citric acid found in oranges and lemons and limes, oxalic acid found in leafy greens
like spinach, pantothenic acid also known as vitamin B5, malic, malaiac, and tartaric
acid found in apples, grapes, and wine.
The list goes on.
Finally, for oxygen, suppose you take the acid functional group and replace the hydrogen
atom with a carbon-containing group.
You've now made the functional group called an ester.
Esters are very interesting compounds because many of them have rather nice tastes than
odors.
In fact, many esters are used as additives in commercial products to give them a particular
flavor or aroma.
The flavoring oil of wintergreen, used in candy, is an ester called methyl salicylate.
The smell of apples is produced by the ester pentyl acetate, while ethylactate smells
like butter.
Pairs get their aroma from propyl acetate, another ester.
The artificial fragrance and flavoring industry knows of dozens of other esters it can use
in prepared fumes, foods, or perfumes, or colognes.
Oxygen isn't the only heteroatom that can make functional groups.
Consider the nitrogen atom.
One of the simplest compounds that nitrogen makes is ammonia, whose formula is NH3, and
which has a nitrogen atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms.
Suppose we substitute one of the hydrogen atoms with a carbon-containing group.
Now we have an organic molecule that has an NH2 group on it.
This NH2 group is called the amine functional group.
One common property of simple amines is that they're stinky.
They smell of ammonia or rotting fish.
In fact, the smell of fish gone bad is actually due to the release of small amine molecules
as the fish decomposes.
If only one hydrogen atom is substituted with a carbon group in ammonia, we call the amine
a primary amine.
As you might guess, we can substitute a second, and even a third, hydrogen atom with a carbon-containing
group.
In doing this, we make either a secondary amine, or a tertiary amine.
Each class of amine has its own characteristic physical and chemical properties, making the
nature of these organic compounds even more complicated.
Nitrogen makes other functional groups, like one with oxygen having the formula NO2.
That's called the nitro-functional group, and is found in explosives like nitroglycerin
or trinitrotoluene or TNT.
Other heteroatoms show up too.
Sulfur and phosphorus are two other common elements in functional groups.
Functional groups of heteroatoms may also contain hydrogen or oxygen, or may include
double or triple bonds.
It's this wide variety of functional groups that adds complexity to organic molecules.
Also, many molecules contain more than one functional group, making things even more
complex.
One very important group of organic chemicals are the amino acids, which are the building
blocks of proteins.
As you might guess from the name, amino acids have at least two functional groups, an amine
functional group, and an acid functional group.
One amino acid is glutamine, a form of which is part of monosodium glutamate, a common
food additive.
The glutamine molecule actually has four different functional groups, and this is a relatively
small molecule in organic chemistry.
Okay, so we've established that carbon can bond with other atoms in a large variety of
ways, which is one of the reasons the chemistry of carbon is so complicated.
But there's another aspect to carbon chemistry that adds to its complexity.
It's the three-dimensional nature of carbon's bonding.
Recall that carbon can make up to four bonds to up to four different atoms.
Those four bonds don't make a square, as one might suspect.
Rather, they point towards the corner of a tetrahedron, a three-dimensional arrangement.
Now, when carbon makes a double bond or a triple bond to another atom, it loses its
tetrahedral geometry.
But any time a carbon atom bonds to four other atoms, the geometry around this carbon atom
is roughly tetrahedral.
There's an interesting thing about tetrahedral geometry.
If there are four different atoms or groups connected to that central carbon atom, then
there are two different ways that these four groups can be bonded three-dimensionally.
You can actually demonstrate this yourself.
Get a marshmallow and stick four toothpicks into it in a tetrahedral shape.
Now, take four different colored gumdrops and stick them onto the ends of the toothpicks.
Bring your molecule over to a mirror and look at it.
The mirror image of your molecule is different three-dimensionally.
Another way to say this is that you cannot rotate your mirror image so that all four
gumdrops are in the same place as your original molecule.
It's very much like your left and right hands.
Your two hands are mirror images of each other.
Yet no movement or rotation will ever make it so that your left hand and your right hand
are exactly superimposed on each other in three-dimensional space.
This only works when the carbon atom is bonded to four different groups, like your four differently
colored gumdrops.
This property of three-dimensional molecules is called chirality, a word that comes from
the Greek word for hand.
Two different molecules that are exactly the same except that they are not superimposable
on each other are called enantiomers of each other.
Individually, these molecules have exactly the same chemical and physical properties.
It's just that they are mirror images of each other.
Well, if they have the same chemical and physical properties, then so what?
The situation changes when a molecule has more than one carbon atom that has four different
bonds.
In this case, there are more than two possible three-dimensional shapes a molecule can have,
and when this is the case, physical and chemical properties can be different.
If a molecule has x number of carbon atoms with four different groups, then it will be
two to the x power different possible three-dimensional structures, and only one of these structures
might be important, especially in biological systems.
For example, the molecule carvone has one chiral carbon.
Depending on which mirror image, the carvone molecule smells either like spearmint or like
caraway seeds.
Even with just one chiral carbon, the nose knows the difference.
But with larger molecules, there are larger numbers of chiral carbons, and complexity
increases exponentially.
Remember I mentioned cholesterol earlier?
In terms of functional groups, cholesterol only has two, one of which is an alcohol.
But in terms of chiral carbon atoms, the cholesterol molecule has nine of them.
Two to the ninth power is 512, so there are 512 different cholesterol molecules, all the
same except for their orientations in three-dimensional space.
And of those 512 possible cholesterol molecules, the body uses one.
How does the body know?
Well, organic chemistry is complicated, and the complex biochemical reactions in the body
make sure that one and only one three-dimensional structure of cholesterol is present.
Organic chemistry has come a long way from the theory of vitalism and the idea that there
is something different about organic molecules.
It's very tempting, and probably psychologically satisfying, to think that the chemicals that
make up our bodies and other living things are somehow special.
But Bohler and other chemists have demonstrated over and over again that there's nothing
chemically special about organic molecules.
The atoms that make up organic molecules are the same atoms that make up non-organic molecules,
and a town and chemist can make one from the other.
We haven't been able to create living things in a test tube yet, but there's no conceptual
reason why we can't make every single organic compound from inorganic ingredients.
Along those lines, some people think that getting vitamins from natural sources, like
your diet, is somehow superior from getting synthetic vitamins from a pill.
Well, that attitude is 200 years dead and buried.
If it's the same molecule, nature doesn't care if the vitamin C you ingest comes from
an orange or is synthesized in a lab.
Granted, you may not get the fiber, the aroma, the other nutrients from a pill that you'd
get from a real orange, but if all you care about is the vitamin C, the molecule, and
how your body treats the molecule is exactly the same.
From the perspective of organic chemistry, there's nothing vital about it.
Thank you.
