Scientists and engineers have made some pretty amazing things since the Industrial Revolution
began, haven't they?
I remember telephones when I was a kid.
There was actually a dial that you had to rotate to dial a number, and it cost money
to call someone a few miles away using something called long distance.
Today, I could take a phone out of my pocket and call someone halfway around the world for
free if I have the right phone plan.
And even though we still use the phrase dialing a phone number, there's hardly ever a dial
involved anymore.
Technology has made some huge advances in just the last few decades.
For instance, the computer that's monitoring your car's fuel and exhaust system is more
complicated than the computers we use to send men to the moon.
Humanity has benefited tremendously by manipulating matter and energy.
But where did that matter ultimately come from?
And I don't just mean it was smelted in an iron factory using iron ore dug out of the
ground in Minnesota or created in a petrochemical plant using crude oil as raw materials.
Where did the actual atoms come from?
How were they made?
How did they get here?
Believe it or not, scientists are pretty sure they know the answers to these questions.
We've realized it for about a hundred years.
What's interesting is that many of the people who first figured it out weren't chemists
or physicists or even engineers.
They were astronomers.
The telescope was invented around 1608 by some Dutch eyeglass makers.
The Italian scientist Galileo heard about it a year later and promptly built his own
much improved model.
Before the telescope, people had to rely on just their eyes to make observations.
The telescope allows users to observe things very far away, even into the outer reaches
of the solar system.
Galileo discovered four large moons of Jupiter only seven months after he constructed his
first instrument, causing an uproar from those who believe that all heavenly objects must
orbit the Earth.
We now refer to Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto as the Galilean satellites of Jupiter
and Galileo's honor.
Perhaps not coincidentally, around the same time the microscope was invented, allowing
us to see tiny objects much closer to us, but our concern is with the telescope.
Although the original telescopes use visible light, today scientists and engineers can
construct telescopes using all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum.
With these tools, astronomers can study the universe around us.
One of their conclusions is that the element hydrogen makes up about 74% of the ordinary
matter in the entire universe.
The element helium makes up about 24% of the matter, and that the rest of the 116 known
elements make up only 2% of the matter in the universe.
How do astronomers know this?
By studying the light emitted by stars, recall that atoms give off or absorb only certain
characteristic colors of light in a spectrum.
By measuring these spectra here on Earth, an astronomer can compare them with the star
spectrum they get through the telescope.
This allows the astronomer to know what elements are in the star.
For example, I could show you a spectrum of the sun, although a rainbow of colors is clearly
visible in the spectrum, there are some dark lines in the rainbow where a certain color
of light has been absorbed.
These lines of light were absorbed by certain elements in the star, and astronomers can
identify what elements they are.
Using data like this from a variety of objects in the sky, and using telescopes that work
in other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, astronomers conclude that 98% of visible matter
is hydrogen and helium, the two simplest elements.
The question then is where did the other 2% of visible matter come from, if virtually
all of it is hydrogen and helium?
The best answer comes from understanding how the universe itself evolved.
The current theory of the history of the universe is called the Standard Cosmological Model.
Based on evidence from a wide variety of telescopes and from theoretical models, astronomers
have deduced that the universe began about 13.7 billion years ago in an event called the
Big Bang.
The Big Bang wasn't really an explosion, as much as the sudden appearance of space time
with an equivalent temperature of about a trillion degrees.
In a billionth of a billionth of a billionth of a second, space expanded by a billion billion
billion times, an expansion that continues to this day, although at a much slower rate.
Mathematical simulations of these conditions predict that only certain elements were formed.
This process is called primordial nucleosynthesis.
Most of the matter, about 75% by mass, became hydrogen, formed by a single proton and one
electron, while almost all of the remaining matter became helium.
A tiny amount became deuterium, an isotope of hydrogen that has a proton and a neutron
in the nucleus, and even tinier amounts became the elements lithium and beryllium.
That's all.
The rapid expansion of the young universe and its relatively rapid cooling kept other
elements from being formed.
To give you an idea by what I mean by rapid cooling, the standard model predicts that
it took about 20 of our minutes for the universe to cool down enough that additional nucleosynthesis
stopped.
And for the longest time, the entire universe was 75% hydrogen, 25% helium, and precious
little else.
This is actually not too different from the current elemental abundances in the universe.
But where did the heavier elements come from?
Consider Earth.
It's mostly oxygen, silicon, aluminum, and iron.
Hydrogen is only 0.15% of our planet, not 75%.
Where did these heavier elements come from?
In a word, stars.
Before we get to stars, let's talk about forces.
There are four fundamental forces in our universe.
The strong nuclear force, the weak nuclear force, gravity, and the force due to electrical
charge.
Of these four, the strong and weak nuclear forces only act inside an atomic nucleus.
The force due to electrical charge requires that there be an imbalance in electrical charge,
either positive charge or negative charge.
In addition, force due to charge can be attractive if the charges are opposite signs, or repulsive
if the charges are the same sign.
Force due to electrical charge can also be nullified if an object has no net charge,
that is, is electrically neutral.
Gravity is none of these things.
It acts on all pieces of matter, big and small.
It is purely attractive.
All matter in the universe attracts all other matter in the universe.
And it cannot be shut off.
When the Big Bang spread matter across the universe, it did so ever so slightly unevenly.
So the force due to gravity was ever so slightly uneven.
And matter started to attract other matter, well, unevenly.
Eventually, a big collection of hydrogen and helium collected into a large cloud,
contracting further and further under the influence of gravity.
As the cloud of gas is contracted, two properties increased, pressure of the cloud and the temperature of the cloud.
At some point, thanks to gravity, the temperature and the pressure of the cloud got so large,
atoms got pressed together that the electrons and the atoms were so ignored,
and the atomic nuclei began to come together under the influence of the strong nuclear force.
What I'm describing is nuclear fusion, and a star is born.
Now, nuclear fusion gives off a lot of energy, and the pressure generated by this energy
halts the collapse of the cloud further for millions, billions of years.
But let's focus on what happens in nuclear fusion.
Atoms literally combine their nuclei to make larger nuclei, larger atoms.
And the conditions aren't like right after the Big Bang,
when fundamental particles are trying to come together in the vast expanse of space.
Well, they can't, the space is too vast.
In a star, however, the atoms are crowded together, brought together by the inexorable force of gravity.
To give you an idea of the conditions, scientists estimate that the inside of a star has a temperature of several million degrees,
and a pressure of over a hundred billion times the normal atmospheric pressure on Earth.
When nuclear fusion occurs in stars, larger atoms, larger elements are formed.
However, they aren't random formations, because different elements have different stabilities.
The current consensus is that the following nuclear fusion reactions occurred.
First, four atoms of hydrogen fuse to become one helium atom.
In order for that to happen, two protons must convert to neutrons.
While this may seem strange that hydrogen will do this, there are two considerations.
First, the temperatures and pressures are so high that nuclear processes like this are possible.
Second, energy considerations must be satisfied.
While it may seem strange that a proton will turn into a neutron,
it turns out that helium is an especially stable atom, and natural processes tend to favor energy stability.
Under these conditions, not found in the Big Bang, remember, hydrogen converts to helium.
If a star is small enough, this is the only process that ever occurs, and the star, called a red dwarf,
can last this way for billions or even trillions of years, longer than the age of the universe to date.
If the star is massive enough, gravity continues to dominate.
Eventually, the hydrogen starts running out, becoming scarce.
Most of the star is now helium.
Then other nuclear fusion processes begin to occur.
Three helium atoms fuse to become carbon atoms.
Now, why didn't this happen in the Big Bang?
It's because the helium atoms weren't close enough for three of them to come together to make a carbon atom.
Another issue here is that we don't need to worry about protons becoming neutrons.
Three helium atoms have just the right number of protons and neutrons to make a nice, stable carbon atom.
Eventually, the helium starts running low.
Then other nuclear fusion reactions begin to occur.
Carbon begins to fuse with itself, and the remaining helium to eventually make atoms like oxygen and silicon and neon.
You can probably see the progression.
As a large star runs out of the lighter elements, the remaining elements start fusing to make larger elements under the influence of gravity.
As we get to larger and larger elements, the actual reactions get messier and more random,
but eventually, many of the chemical elements known to scientists get nucleosynthesized inside stars.
Meanwhile, as these nuclear reactions occur, energy is constantly being given off.
The star continues to shine, and gravity continues its pull.
Now, where does all this energy come from?
Actually, it comes from mass.
It turns out that the mass of a single helium atom is slightly smaller than the mass of four hydrogen atoms.
How much smaller?
Well, only about 0.7%, which is the equivalent of a 170-pound person like me losing just a pound.
But then there's this equation.
E equals mc squared.
Energy equals mass times the speed of light squared.
A mathematical equation made famous by Albert Einstein relating the equivalence of matter and energy.
When four hydrogen atoms fuse to make a helium atom, a huge amount of energy is given off as the matter is converted to energy.
Well, how much energy?
If one pound of hydrogen were converted to helium, it would give off about 100 million billion joules of energy.
How much energy is that?
It's enough to vaporize a cube of iron almost 30 yards on a side weighing over 170,000 tons.
And, by the way, iron vaporizes at over 5,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
By point, nuclear fusion gives off a lot of energy.
But only to a point.
It turns out that nuclear fusion gives off energy until it makes the nickel-56 atom, which is a nickel atom with 28 protons and 28 neutrons.
Making larger atomic nuclei actually requires energy, and although a star is a great source of energy, it's not enough to make larger atoms.
Also, nickel-56 is radioactive.
It decays with a half-life of about six days into cobalt-56, which is also radioactive, and decays with a half-life of 77 days into iron-56, which is stable.
So, as a star generates its energy by fusing hydrogen, to helium, to carbon, to other elements, eventually it all becomes atoms of iron.
Now, this is all well and good.
Many aspects of our society depend on elements up to and including iron.
Water, most of the elements living things, the components of concrete, the iron and steel, we now understand where all these atoms come from.
But we have two problems.
First, we also have plenty of elements around us that have atoms larger than iron.
Well, maybe not plenty, but they're well known to us.
For example, if you're wearing any gold or silver jewelry, you're wearing atoms that are larger than iron.
The lead shield in your dentist x-ray room, it's made of atoms larger than iron.
So, the first question is, where do these elements come from?
And the second one is, how do we get them out of the star?
Back to our story then.
At this point, stuck at iron-56, there are two possibilities.
In smaller stars, some of the fusions that normally occur give off extra neutrons.
These neutrons, one at a time, can be easily captured by other atoms in the star.
Why is it so easy for nuclei to capture neutrons?
Easy!
Neutrons have no electrical charge.
Remember that the nucleus is where all the protons are, and protons are positively charged.
Any attempt to force an additional proton into the nucleus is met with repulsion by the positively charged nucleus.
That's one reason fusion is so hard.
It takes very extreme conditions of temperature and pressure to overcome that repulsion so that the strong nuclear force takes over.
This is the force that keeps nuclei together, but it only acts over very, very tiny distances.
In fact, fusion is so hard that it only naturally occurs in stars.
But there's no electrical repulsion between the nucleus and the neutron because neutrons are electrically neutral.
They can pass into atomic nuclei relatively easily.
Sometimes, when they do, the presence of an additional neutron makes an atomic nucleus that's radioactive,
and usually decays by turning a neutron into a proton and an electron.
This makes an atom of another element, because remember, it's the number of protons that identifies a particular element.
This neutron capture process continues, and over a period of millions of years, elements larger than iron can accumulate.
This process is called the S-process of stellar nucleosynthesis, where the letter S means slow.
It's a slow process, taking thousands or millions of years to accumulate larger atoms, one neutron capture at a time.
Some of these larger elements can be vaporized into space, and are called stardusts.
But it's unclear what the ultimate fate of this matter is, because the lifetimes of these stars are longer than the known age of the universe.
There's another possibility.
Let's go back to the point where iron is being formed as the terminal part of fusion.
If the mass of the star is greater than about one and a half times our sun's mass,
then there comes a point where the mass of the star can't withstand its own gravity, and the star collapses within a few seconds.
During this collapse, protons and electrons are forced together to make neutrons.
The sudden flood of neutrons sprays all the heavier atoms, whose nuclei easily capture some, or even many, neutrons.
Once again, these nuclei are radioactive, and neutrons decay into protons and electrons, making heavier elements.
This process is called the R-process of nucleosynthesis, the R-standing for rapid, because the neutron capture happens in a few seconds, not over millions of years if the S-process takes.
At the end of the sudden collapse, a huge shockwave is formed, much like the jerk at the end of a very bad elevator ride.
The shockwave blasts the outer layers of the star off in a huge explosion called a supernova.
Supernovas are among the most energetic events known in our modern universe.
One supernova can outshine an entire galaxy with its sudden release of energy.
The blast sends much of the non-neutron material out into space, while the remaining material degenerates into what's called a neutron star.
One example of a supernova leftover is the Crab Nebula, which is a collection of material thrown off by a supernova that occurred in the year 1054.
We know this because the actual supernova was observed by Chinese astronomers in that year.
Since then, astronomers have seen this nebula slowly expanding, and have been able to backtrack the nebula to its origin, and have found evidence for a neutron star right at this point.
What elements are spewed out by these supernova explosions?
Well, all of them, even radioactive ones, that have short half-lives.
How do we know this? Again, from astronomers, who can study the light given off by supernovas and identify the elements admitting or absorbing that light.
Over billions of years, the material ejected from supernovas collects around the universe and, under the constant effect of gravity, collapses into another star.
This time, however, the star is not just hydrogen and helium, but has a small percentage of heavier elements as well.
Again, we know this from astronomers, who can get relative amounts of the elements and stars by studying the light they emit.
Astronomers even have a word for this, metallicity.
Astronomers believe that the life cycles of stars have happened at least three times.
They define population 1 stars as stars that have relatively high metallicity, like our Sun, which is about 2% or about 0.02 in decimal form.
Then there are population 2 stars, which have smaller but non-zero metallicity.
And then there's the population 3 stars, an as-yet unobserved type of star that has virtually no metal because they were the first stars formed after the Big Bang,
when no metal was formed.
It's thought that all these stars have already died out and made population 2 and population 1 stars, but astronomers keep looking.
Even with a low metallicity, it's possible for a Sun to form a planetary system.
Indeed, most of the extrasolar planets that had been detected to date are thought to be gas giants, like our own Jupiter,
in part because they were detected by movements or perturbations of their star during the orbit of the large planet.
Only a few extrasolar planets have been discovered that can be described as rocky, like our Earth.
But with a metallicity of 2% like that of our Sun's, that seems awfully low.
Is that enough to form a solar system with rocky planets instead of gas giants?
Well, apparently so, because you live in one.
Well, consider this.
There are nine rocky bodies in our solar system between the sizes of Earth and the Moon.
Four of them are the planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars.
And five of them are satellites, including our own Moon.
The total mass of those nine objects is only 0.0062% of the masses of the larger gaseous objects, including our Sun.
How small is that?
Well, suppose you had a million dollars and that represented the mass of our solar system.
The rocky objects would be represented by six dollars and twenty cents.
Even if you included all the other tiny satellites, asteroids, and comets, you're likely not to get above six dollars and fifty cents.
The metallicity of the Sun is 2%, that's twenty thousand dollars in our analogy, way, way more than enough to have hard rocky planets.
On one of those planets, conditions were proper enough that water could exist as a liquid and certain gases could accumulate into an atmosphere.
There have been several changes in the overall composition of the atmosphere over time, but in the course of about a billion years, something wonderful happened.
Molecules that had the ability to self-replicate formed.
Over the next three and a half billion years, these molecules evolved into the various forms of life we see today.
In the atoms and molecules that make up all these animals and plants, they were once part of a star, formed over thousands and millions of years, very slowly,
or in the course of a few seconds before they were blasted into space by a supernova.
As noted scientist Carl Sagan said,
the nitrogen in our DNA, the calcium in our teeth, the iron in our blood, the carbon in our apple pies were made in the interiors of collapsing stars.
We are made of star stuff.
To add to Sagan's quote, we are star stuff made by gravity, and we have astronomers to thank for figuring out most of this.
Nuclear fusion is currently a topic of much research in high energy physics.
Humanity has been able to perform nuclear fusion, but mostly in the form of nuclear bombs that use the energy given off for destructive purposes.
Current research is going on to try to generate fusion in a controlled fashion for useful energy purposes.
Unlike in stars, the human interest in fusion stops at helium.
There's little chance that we'll be nucleosynthesizing iron anytime soon.
Easier to dig it out or recycle an old car.
There are a few interesting historical stories involving the discovery of nucleosynthesis.
Ralph Alfer was a graduate student at George Washington University in the mid-1940s,
working for an ex-Russian physicist named George Gamow.
Alfer's dissertation project focused on nucleosynthesis during the Big Bang,
demonstrating that only hydrogen and helium, and only tiny portions of heavier elements, could have been produced.
When it came time to publish his work, Gamow, who had a rather well-developed sense of humor,
added a friend's name to the list of authors.
His friend was eminent physicist Hans Beta, and the paper became known as the Alpha, Beta, Gamow paper,
with the names of the authors being puns on the Greek letters Alpha, Beta, and Gamma.
Alfer was apparently not too amused, as he was afraid that his contributions would be overshadowed
by the two more famous names, including one who contributed nothing to the work.
Actually, Hans Beta was one of the discoverers of stellar nucleosynthesis, and there's another story about his contributions.
Beta wasn't originally interested in the topic, but after attending a conference on the Puzzles of the Source of the Sun's Energy in 1938,
he started working on possible nuclear processes.
Beta eventually found a series of nuclear fusion reactions that involved carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen
that are now thought to be a significant part of the solar energy process, which is referred to today as the CNO cycle.
Beta's mother was still in Germany, which at the time was experiencing the rise and the violence of the Nazi Party.
She needed money to emigrate to the United States.
One of Beta's students told him that the New York Academy of Sciences was having a contest for the best explanation of solar energy production,
offering a prize of $500.
Beta sent his paper on the CNO cycle in and promptly won the prize, using the money to bring his mother to the States.
That was in 1939.
In 1967, Hans Beta won the Nobel Prize for his work on the CNO cycle and stellar nucleosynthesis.
His mother had died the year before, but surely she would have been proud.
We, and all of our wonderful materials, are star stuff.
Thank you.
