Consider a rubber ball. A simple toy, a thing of joy. And it bounces. However, not everything
does. What determines if something bounces or not?
Believe it or not, molecules do. Some objects, like the rubber ball, are made up of very,
very long molecules. When you throw them on the floor, these long molecules distort just
a tiny bit under the force and then spring back into shape. When they spring back into
shape, they generate an opposing force that sends the object back the way it came. It bounces.
Other objects aren't made of long molecules, so they don't show any bouncy effects.
So, the key to bouncing is very, very long molecules. Molecules like this have certain
special properties, properties that humanity started using only about a hundred years ago.
But here's an interesting thing. Life itself is also made up of very, very long molecules.
Everybody wouldn't be alive without them. They make up a majority of our own bodies,
and they're intimately involved in the production of new life.
So some of these long molecules are natural, while others are synthesized in the laboratory.
While many of these molecules are complicated, their building blocks can be very simple.
How about if we start with a simple and see how these building blocks make some of the
largest molecules in existence?
Let's begin with mother nature, specifically plants. Many plants give off a whitish liquid
when they're injured. Pick up a dandelion and watch what happens to the stem that remains
behind. This liquid is called latex, and it's a complicated mixture of proteins and starches
and other stuff that quickly solidifies, forming a sort of scab to protect the remaining plant.
In the mid-1700s, scientists noted that the solid latex from a certain South American
tree could rub off pencil marks, so the material got the name rubber. These trees, which produce
a lot of this latex, are now called rubber trees.
Rubber is interesting stuff. It's waterproof, and it can be molded to make different objects,
like rain boots. We can make gloves and balloons from it, gaskets for windows, and of course,
rubber erasers for pencils. Perhaps its most useful property, though, is that it's stretchy,
it's elastic. It changes shape under pressure, but when that pressure is released, it returns
to its original shape. But natural rubber also decomposes easily, and it's sticky and
melts and gets brittle when it gets cold. Subjected to air and sunlight and even certain
bacteria, rubber eventually breaks down and becomes useless.
This limited rubber's long-term use until the discovery that heating rubber with a little
bit of sulfur turned it into a form that's not only more elastic, but more resilient as
well. This process, called vulcanization, was introduced by Charles Goodyear in the U.S.
and Thomas Hancock in the United Kingdom in the 1840s. The use of rubber increased with
its increased durability, and it eventually became the material of choice for automobile
tires.
What gives rubber its properties and why does heating it with sulfur change it for the better?
It all has to do with the molecular structure of solid rubber. Raw latex is a solution containing
molecules of a substance called isoprene, a small molecule made up of five carbon atoms
and eight hydrogen atoms.
What's interesting about the isoprene molecule is that it has two carbon-carbon double bonds,
one on each end of the molecule. Under proper circumstances, the two double bonds can break
and on one side remake a double bond in the center of the isoprene, and on the other sides
link with other isoprene molecules.
The next molecule can do this as well, and so forth down the line until a new, very long
molecule of rubber is formed. This long, repetitious molecule of rubber is called a polymer from
the Greek words for many parts. The individual isoprene molecule is called a monomer, or
one part.
So why is rubber so bouncy? Well, the long polymer molecules of rubber aren't all lined
up in straight lines. Also, the bonds between the carbon atoms and the polymer have angles
anywhere between 109 and 120 degrees. Under pressure, these bonds close up a bit, much
like a pair of scissors closing.
It doesn't need much. Because of the thousands or even millions of bonds in any one polymer
molecule, even if one bond angle closes up slightly, there's lots of them doing it,
and the cumulative effect is easily noticeable. But then, the bonds move back to their original
position, generating an opposite pressure that makes the material bounce back.
Well, what about vulcanization? Remember I said that when isoprene forms natural rubber,
a carbon-carbon double bond forms in the middle of the original monomer. Well, sulfur
atoms can react with those double bonds, and when a sulfur atom does that, with two double
bonds on different polymer molecules, it makes a link, called a sulfide link, between the
two molecules.
If enough of the polymer molecules get linked, the resulting polymer changes its properties.
It gets a bit tougher, it doesn't change its properties with temperature as much, and
it becomes more elastic. That's exactly what happens in vulcanization.
There's an easy way to explain polymers by looking at the most simple one. The molecule
ethylene has two carbon atoms connected by a double bond, with each carbon atom also
connected to two hydrogen atoms. Its molecular formula is C2H4.
Under the right conditions, one of the bonds between the carbon atoms can break and point
outwards and make a bond with another ethylene molecule that's doing the same thing. This
can happen over and over again, until you get a molecule that has thousands and thousands
of monomers all lined up in a row.
This is the polymer of ethylene, and it's called polyethylene. Polyethylene actually
has many uses in society, especially in the packaging industry. It's used to make wrapping
films, bottles, and other containers, and pipes.
As simple as polyethylene is, it can get more complicated. Imagine if you will, that the
molecules in polyethylene are indeed long and straight. Because of this, the molecules
can pack together fairly tightly. This makes high-density polyethylene, and it's used to
make the familiar gallon milk jugs, as well as pipes and margarine containers.
But ethylene molecules don't have to connect end-to-end all the time. In certain conditions,
the bonds can rearrange, and two ethylene molecules can add to the end of the chain,
and then keep growing. What we've just made is a branched polyethylene.
The density of the polymer depends on the extent of branching, because typically, the
more highly branched polymers don't pack their molecules as efficiently. Depending
on its density, the polyethylene has different uses, from bubble wrap to frozen food bags,
from pipe fittings to even toys.
Other monomers can be used to make polymers. For example, if we take one of the hydrogen
atoms in ethylene and replace it with a one-carbon branch called a methyl group, we have a monomer
called propylene, and it can be polymerized to make polypropylene. It's used to make plastic
furniture and carpeting, and can even be woven into fabric for specialty clothing. It's
relatively resistant to heat, so it can be used for medical instruments that have to
be sterilized, or for eating utensils that have to go through the dishwasher.
If we replace one of the hydrogen atoms with a chlorine atom, we have a compound called
vinyl chloride, which we can use to make polyvinyl chloride, also known as PVC. We use PVC for
credit cards, to make pipes for plumbing in your house, and as insulation on electrical
wires.
If we replace one hydrogen atom with a six-membered carbon ring called the benzene ring, we get
the monomer styrene, which polymerizes into polystyrene. It's used to make plastic utensils,
CD cases, and disposable razors.
But you probably know polystyrene best as a substance that makes a plastic foam known
by its trade name, styrofoam. It has good insulating properties, so it's used to make
cups for hot and cold drinks, and it's also used as a packaging material because it absorbs
shocks well, providing protection for objects being moved or shipped.
There are other polymers too, like polyethylene terephthalate used to make soda bottles, nylon
used to make hosiery, and even polymers called silicones that have silicon and oxygen backbones
instead of long carbon chains.
All of these polymers are examples that use a single monomer. There are polymers that
use more than one monomer. These are called copolymers, and this is one way of varying
the physical and chemical properties of the final product.
The copolymer can be strictly alternating with monomer number one, followed by monomer
number two, followed by one, followed by two, and so forth. It could be periodic with some
of monomer number one, followed by some of monomer number two, and so forth.
Or it could be totally random, with a statistical mix of each monomer throughout the polymer
chain. By using two or more different monomers, polymer makers can fine tune the properties
of the final product to their individual needs.
Although I've talked about how simple polymers are made, I'd like to say a few more words
about it. When one bond of a double bond opens up in the monomer to make new bonds with other
monomers, the resulting polymer is called an addition polymer. Polyethylene, for example,
is an addition polymer. No additional atoms are needed or given off as products. Only
chemical bonds are rearranged.
A condensation polymer is different. In the formation of this type of polymer, one or
more atoms from each monomer are given up to form another small molecule as a product.
An example of this type of polymer is nylon. Nylon is a copolymer, where one monomer ends
in an NH2 or amine group, and the other monomer ends in a COOH or acid group.
When these two groups come together, they react with the NH2 group giving up one of the H-atoms
and the COOH group giving up an O and an H-atom, leading to the formation of HOH, otherwise
known as H2O, or water. The nitrogen atom from the amine group bonds to the carbon atom
in the acid group making a longer molecule. This happens over and over again as a long
polymer molecule is formed.
Polyester is another example of a condensation polymer, where an acid group and an alcohol
group come together, giving off a water molecule and making a new organic group called an ester.
And because it's a polymer, it's called polyester.
But this is the making of the molecule. How about making an actual object out of the polymer?
Once again, there are different possible ways of turning polymers into useful objects.
Polymers are divided into two general categories called thermoplastics and thermosets.
A thermoplastic is a polymer that gets soft when it's heated, and so by heating a piece
of thermoplastic, it can be molded or blown into a particular shape. By the way, this
implies that if the polymer is reheated, it could be reshaped, which may be good or bad.
It's bad if changing the shape changes its function. So if, for example, a bowling ball
made of thermoplastic were heated and warped, it might not act like a good bowling ball
anymore. On the other hand, if you're trying to make an airtight seal around a window with
a thermoplastic, then heating the polymer may help make the seal more useful.
Polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, and PVC are examples of polymers I've mentioned
that are thermoplastics. In many cases, products are made out of these polymers by starting
with small beads of the polymer and heating them in a metal mold.
A thermoset is a polymer that starts out as a liquid or soft material and then is heated
or cured to a higher temperature to make the object. The heat actually helps make the polymer,
so in this case the object has a permanent shape.
Additional exposure to high temperatures causes decomposition, not remelting. Thermoset polymers
are usually more brittle but stronger than thermoplastics. Many polyesters and polyurethanes
are thermoset polymers.
Polymers have some great properties, especially because there are different monomers and even
different ways of mixing monomers to make copolymers. But a polymer might not have the
optimal properties you want. That's where additives come in.
The most straightforward additive is probably a color. Like any substance, polymers have
their own color. Pure polyethylene, for example, is clear or translucent white. For visual
purposes, manufacturers may want to add a color to a polymer, so they'll add dyes to
make the material the desired color.
Other additives are used to change the physical or chemical properties of the polymer. Many
polymers are very rigid, so an additive called a plasticizer is added to make the polymer
softer. Plasticizers are usually small molecules that are somewhat oily, which allow the long
polymer molecules to slip and slide against each other more easily.
It's the plasticizers that account for the so-called new car smell that's so noticeable,
and therein lies a problem. Plasticizers evaporate slowly, and the physical properties of the
polymer revert to their original, not necessarily desirable state. So the dashboards crack, the
seat covers get stiffer, and the radio buttons may break off, all possible signs that it's
time to get a new car.
Some additives are used because they're cheaper than the polymer itself and add volume with
minimal cost. Additives in this category include powdered shock, zinc oxide, or even starch.
The use of starch is interesting because it has another purpose. It helps make the polymer
partially biodegradable. Plastic made from pure starch can even be added to your compost
pile and will decompose completely within a year.
I've already mentioned rubber as a naturally occurring polymer, but do you know that your
own body is composed of polymers? Believe it or not, most of your body tissues are polymers,
and there's a very interesting biological polymer that contains the instructions for
life itself.
Three major components of the human body are proteins, fats, and carbohydrates. Yes, I
know, there's bone and blood and other stuff, but let's focus on the three major categories
that make up most of our solid food diet. Of these three, two of them are polymers. Those
two are proteins and carbohydrates. Our discussion of fats will have to wait until another lecture.
Let's start with carbohydrates. The very word carbohydrate means hydrated carbon, and
what we have are a class of materials that can be thought of as polymers of the monomer
whose chemical formula is CH2O, carbon and water. While technically, any molecule that
has that general formula of one or more units is a carbohydrate, but in practical terms there
are only a few real carbohydrates.
For all practical purposes, the simplest carbohydrates are the saccharides, which is a word that
comes from the Greek word for sugar. A sugar is a small molecule that makes food taste
sweet, and while we're familiar with table sugar as a common example, there are in fact
many different sugars.
The sugar found in grape juice is a simple molecule called glucose. Its formula is C6H12O6,
and its molecular structure has a six-membered ring of five carbon atoms and one oxygen atom.
Many fruits contain a similar sugar called fructose. It has the same molecular formula
as glucose, but it makes a five-atom ring with four carbon atoms and one oxygen atom.
Sugars like glucose and fructose form the basis of large carbohydrates, so they're sometimes
called monosaccharides.
Two monosaccharides can link together as a sort of a two-piece condensation polymer
to make a sugar called a disaccharide. Regular table sugar is a disaccharide called sucrose
that has one unit of glucose and one unit of fructose. Lactose, a sugar found in milk,
is composed of one unit of glucose and one unit of galactose, another monosaccharide
that has the molecular formula C6H12O6.
Aligosaccharides are polymers containing three to nine monosaccharides. You've probably heard
of some oblique reference to oligosaccharides if you've ever heard your blood type. All
red blood cells have some four or five saccharide sugars attached to their surfaces. If it's
a certain sugar, you have typo blood. If it's a different sugar, you have type A blood.
And if it's a third sugar, you have type B blood.
A small percentage of people have both A sugars and B sugars, so they have type AB blood. These
oligosaccharides are part of your immune system and didn't cause any problems until the invention
of the blood transfusion. But again, that's another lecture.
Polymers of large numbers, like hundreds or thousands of glucose monosaccharides, are
called polysaccharides. There are several major polysaccharides and they differ by the
geometry of the link between the glucose unit. Each link is made by an oxygen atom, which
makes two bonds. If both bonds point up, it's called an alpha
linkage and the resulting polysaccharide is called starch. If the starch is a straight
chain of glucose molecules, it's called amylose. If it's a branched chain of glucose molecules,
it's called amylopectin. Technically speaking, starch comes only from
plants. The form of starch that comes from animals is called glycogen, and it's even
more branched than amylopectin.
Starch is one of the main energy storage compounds for life. In our body, an enzyme called amylase
breaks down the starch into individual glucose units, which are then transported to the cells
for cellular respiration. There, the glucose is broken down in the presence of oxygen to
make water and carbon dioxide.
It's exactly the same chemical reaction as burning glucose, only it's a little more
biologically complicated. When we need additional energy, the body can metabolize glycogen directly,
but the body only contains about half a pound of glycogen, mostly in the liver and some
in muscle tissue.
If the oxygen linkage between glucose units points up and down, it's called a beta linkage,
and the resulting polysaccharide is called cellulose. Cellulose is a structural polysaccharide
because it makes up the structural components of plants. Trees, grass, and flowers all have
cellulose to keep them standing straight up.
It's actually the most common polysaccharide on our planet, and it would be a great source
of food, but humans don't have the proper enzymes to digest cellulose. If we eat plants,
we can't digest their structural components at all, and it passes through our digestive
tract into what we call fiber.
Some organisms can digest cellulose, mostly termites and animals called ruminants, which
include cattle, deer, sheep, and goats. But even then, in these examples, it's not the
animal that digests the cellulose, it's the bacteria in their guts that actually does
the digestion.
Humanity uses cellulose to make paper, and cotton is mostly cellulose, so we use it to
make clothes as well. But imagine how much more food we would have if we could only digest
this biological polymer.
There's one form of cellulose where the molecules have some nitrogen atoms in them. This form
of polysaccharide is called chitin. Chitin is the principal component of the exoskeleton
of insects, the shells of shrimp, crabs, and other crustaceans, and the scales and butterfly
wings.
Although chitin isn't a normal part of the human diet, in 2007 enzymes that digest chitin
were discovered in the human digestive tract, but we still don't eat shrimp shells.
But because there's a lot of chitin in the natural world, scientists today are exploring
how it might be used as a natural, biodegradable polymer for things like surgical thread and
additives to thicken or stabilize processed foods.
Now let's talk about proteins. But first, I need to define an amino acid. An amino acid
is a small organic molecule that has an amine group, whose formula is NH2, and an acid group,
formula COOH, attached to the same carbon.
The most simple amino acid is called glycine, in which the other two bonds to the central
carbon atom are made to hydrogen atoms. There are amino acids that contain over 30 atoms
and contain carbon and nitrogen containing 5 and 6 membered rings. There are over 500
amino acids known.
If you remember our discussion of nylon, you may recall that an NH2 group on one molecule
can react with a COOH group on another molecule and make a condensation polymer by ejecting
a water molecule. That's exactly what happens with amino acids. They'll make condensation
polymers to form long chains of alternating amino acids. This long chain of amino acids
is called a polypeptide, or more commonly, a protein. So the protein is simply a polymer
of amino acids.
Proteins are copolymers. There are many amino acids that can participate in protein formation.
In humans, there are 20 different amino acids that polymerize to make the proteins in our
body. In fact, those same amino acids are found in all other forms of life, with the
exception of some bacteria that have up to three other amino acids.
Of the 20 amino acids, 9 of them cannot be synthesized by the body, and so must be obtained
by the diet. These are called essential amino acids, and because amino acids are found in
various foods, people on restricted diets, like vegetarians and vegans, must watch what
they eat to make sure they get enough of the essential amino acids in their diets.
Proteins are the second most common substance in the body, after water. They make up most
of our muscle tissue, our skin, our hair. They act as catalysts for biochemical reactions,
and when they do, they're called enzymes.
Some proteins, like insulin, carry signals from one type of cell to another, and some,
like hemoglobin, carry oxygen and carbon dioxide back and forth from the cells to the lungs
and back again.
Protein can also be metabolized for its energy content. Proteins are the workhorses of the
body, which is likely why the very name protein comes from the Greek word meaning primary.
One polymer has a central role in heredity. Take a phosphate group, and attach it to
a five-carbon monosaccharide called deoxyribose. Then connect the saccharide to a cyclic molecule
that contains a nitrogen atom, which we'll call a base. Take a whole bunch of these three-part
combinations and connect them through the phosphate group, making a polymer.
You've just made one half of a DNA molecule. The other half of the molecule must be a certain
mirror image of the first half in order to make a whole molecule of DNA. The letters
DNA stand for deoxyribonucleic acid, and over the last century or so, science has determined
that DNA is responsible for life by controlling the construction of proteins, those workhorses
of the body.
It's responsible for heredity, because in the course of cellular reproduction, the chromosomes,
the place in the cell where the DNA resides, come apart and rejoin during the fertilization
process to make a new person with the characteristics of both parents.
Its structure is the famous double helix that you've undoubtedly heard about, and the story
of its isolation, discovery of function, and discovery of structure is one of the most
fascinating stories in the history of science.
The story continues even today, because much of the biochemical research going on in the
world is studying that double helix and how it functions. And it's worth remembering that
this fascinating story focuses on a polymer.
Thank you.
