The internet, flip phones, water beds, nuclear weapons, submarines, moon landings, voice recognition.
What do these things have in common?
It turns out that they were all predicted by science fiction before they became reality.
Of course, science fiction also portrays things that aren't currently known, like life on
other planets, or things that are thought to be impossible, like faster than light travel.
But like the baseball fan who correctly predicts the World Series winner in pre-season, science
fiction likes to point out things it predicted that ultimately became reality.
Of course, some of today's science fiction will become tomorrow's science fact.
In most modern societies, progress is continuous, and part of that progress includes the development
of new materials.
We can use these new materials to make new products, or these new materials will have
desirable properties that we can adapt into new inventions.
We're still limited by the matter that we find around us.
I can name one invention that relies on man-made matter.
What you guess what it is?
We'll get back to that later, but the point is that for virtually everything else, we
must use the raw materials that nature provides for us.
But the fun part about being a chemist is that we still have lots of combinations of
these raw materials to explore, and we never know what combination might make a new material
with new properties.
For example, the so-called high-temperature superconductors discovered in the 1980s are
composed largely of copper and oxygen, two rather common elements that, in the right
combination, make a material that superconducts at unusually high temperatures.
I'll have more to say about that shortly.
So let me talk about some of the past science fiction that's now science fact, and then
I'll offer you a wish list of new materials for the future.
Maybe in the end, you'll be inspired to construct a wish list of your own.
To start off, let's ask this, what drives progress?
Two things it seems, the desire to kill and the desire to live, two urges that seem opposites
of each other.
Our desire to live, and perhaps more importantly to live better, has fueled significant history-making
progress including domestication of plants and animals, the development of societies,
laws and customs, and the progression through the stone, bronze and iron ages.
The Industrial Revolution marked the transition from human or animal muscle power to machines
run by steam, petroleum and electricity, relieving us or our livestock from the physical burdens
of daily life.
And it continues to this day as we continually seek ways of making our lives easier through
new materials and the play things we can make from them.
But what about the other part, the desire to kill?
It's no secret that the desire to defeat one's enemies in battle was, and still is,
a powerful motivation to improve one's technology.
In ancient Europe, stone gave way to bronze, which gave way to iron, in providing stronger
materials with which to make offensive weapons and defensive armor.
Stones for throwing were replaced by knives, then spears, then the bow and arrow, then
the longbow, then rifles, cannons and other guns.
Almost every time the side that came with a more advanced weapon was victorious, providing
an object lesson for the losers and observers.
And lest you think it stopped, remember that only in the last century have airplanes reinvented
warfare, that atomic weapons were developed, that planes were made invisible to radar, that
missiles can engage missiles that drones have found a place in combat.
No, the art of war still drives technological development.
But even outside quality of life and warfare issues, simple curiosity suggests that technological
progress will continue.
One of the problems with turning science fiction into science fact is that we rarely recognize
how basic science will turn into an application of technology.
In the 1950s, when scientists first detected that certain atomic nuclei could absorb radio
waves, they never imagined that eventually we would have magnetic resonance imaging,
or MRI.
Similarly, in the 1960s, when several universities looked into how they could link up their computers,
they never imagined that they were the precursor of the Internet.
Many of the ultimate products of technological progress are unintentional.
Let me talk about one example before we consider some science facts that we might want from
today's science fiction.
I mentioned moon landings as one of the items that was once only in the realm of science
fiction.
Well, this literary history, going to the moon, goes back to at least the second century
when Lucian of Samasata, in present-day Turkey, wrote in Greek about stories of people traveling
to the moon by being swept there by whirlwinds, presaging Dorothy's trip to Oz by a tornado.
Moon voyage stories erupted in earnest after the invention of the telescope in the early
1600s.
And in 1865, French author Jules Verne published his popular book called From the Earth to
the Moon, in which the heroes rode to the moon on rockets, not entirely unlike how it
really happened.
Authors as varied as Johannes Kepler, Cyrano de Bergerac, H. G. Wells, and Edgar Allan
Poe wrote early moon stories, and famed science fiction writers Robert Heinlein, Isaac Asimov,
and Arthur C. Clarke not only wrote science fiction stories about lunar travel before
the fact, but were alive to witness them during the fact as well.
The so-called space race to land on the moon was as much political as it was scientific,
but I won't dwell on that here.
Suffice it to say that starting in June 1969, and for the next three and a half years, six
missions delivered 12 human beings to the surface of the moon and returned them safely
to Earth.
To date, no other humans have visited the moon, and as of this recording, only eight
of them are still living.
Many people have argued against the moon landings, claiming that just as much could have been
learned using robot landers, and with much less expense and significantly less worry
over the potential loss of life.
I won't argue that point here. However, the space program wasn't and still isn't
simply about the primary mission. Here I can present some of the subsidiary technological
advances that have accompanied our drive out into space.
Because vomiting in a space suit isn't particularly fun, NASA went to great lengths to make sure
that the astronauts didn't suffer from food poisoning on their trips. They developed
a seven-step system to ensure food safety, and two decades later, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration adopted NASA's system for nationwide application.
In one year, the number of salmonella food poisoning cases dropped by half. Even with
that, there are still about 500 deaths per year due to salmonella poisoning in the United
States.
For best launching capability, NASA has one of its major longs facilities in Florida at
the Kennedy Space Center. Unfortunately, it's rather hot and humid there.
To protect the launch pads from the hot, humid, corrosive Florida weather, NASA invented a
protective coating for their buildings and equipment.
At least two other prominent structures in similar environments, the Statue of Liberty
and the Golden Gate Bridge, are now also coated in the same material.
Teflon-coated fiberglass was an original component of space suits, and now has multiple non-space-related
uses, most famously the fabric top of the Metrodome in Minneapolis.
Finally, I should mention that a lot of the energy provided in spacecraft comes from batteries,
but special types of batteries called fuel cells.
You may recall that much of the thrust in large rockets comes from the reaction of liquid
hydrogen with liquid oxygen. These two elements burn to make water, giving off so much energy
that a Saturn V rocket can achieve Earth orbit.
Well, in more controlled conditions, hydrogen and oxygen can react together to produce electricity,
just like a battery. These types of batteries are called fuel cells.
Fuel cells were the electricity sources of choice for manned spacecraft, in part because
they also produced a useful product, water.
They also produced no pollution, making them environmentally neutral. They are expensive,
but because of their advantages, they are experiencing a resurgence of interest as a
modern research topic. All this and more because of the space program.
Perhaps I should mention one misconception associated with the space program, Tang.
It's a material we drink, a fruit-flavored powder that's commonly associated with NASA.
It wasn't developed with the space program in mind, contrary to popular belief. It was
actually introduced in 1957, years before President Kennedy challenged the nation to
go to the moon.
Granted, it was used by astronauts in orbit, but it wasn't invented especially for the
astronauts, nor was it particularly well received. In fact, in 2013, in an interview with National
Public Radio, Buzz Aldrin, the second man to walk on the moon, used rather colorful
language to express that he didn't like Tang.
So if we were to make wishes for new materials, what would they be? What are our future goals
for manipulating matter into new forms with new behaviors? Actually, several ideas come
to mind.
In our electrified society, we have to transfer electricity from an electrical generation plant
to the end user through wires. In the United States alone, there are about 7,000 power
stations provided 4500 terawatt hours of electricity per year. How much electricity is that? It's
enough to light a single 100 watt light bulb for just over 5 billion years.
But here's the scary thought. About 30% of that energy, almost one third of the total,
is lost due to resistance of the wires used to transmit, lost to heat. Imagine how things
would change if we could recover that. If instead of losing that much energy, we could
put it to productive use, or decrease the price of energy accordingly. It would be like
suddenly getting a 30% raise in salary. Most of us would like that, and it illustrates
how much better off the world would be if we had room temperature superconductors.
I've already mentioned superconductors. Discovered in the early 1900s, at first, superconductivity
required cooling substances, like mercury, down to liquid helium temperatures, just a
few degrees above absolute zero. In the 1980s, a new class of superconductors
was discovered that would superconduct when cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures, which
is much more common and much less expensive than liquid helium. But it still requires
liquid nitrogen. No, the first wish for new materials is a room temperature superconductor
a superconductor that conducts without resistance and without having to be cooled.
Here's another idea. The recent rise of inexpensive 3D printers is transforming whole industries.
One of the technologies used by these printers is called Fuse Deposition Modeling, or FDM.
In this method, three-dimensional parts are built up by melting plastic in thin layers
as thin as one-sixteen-hundredth of an inch each. By depositing plastic in just the right
place as a printhead rashes back and forth, a three-dimensional object can be built up.
A variety of plastics can be used as long as they melt under heat.
The problem is, these plastics don't conduct electricity, so while 3D printers might be
useful at making some objects, they're not good at making any kind of complete electrical
circuit. Yet, we need a substance that acts as an electric ink that can be used in 3D
printers to print electronic devices just as easily as we can print a yo-yo.
Imagine being able to print a complete calculator or cell phone on demand. Because of the significant
expansion in 3D printing in the past few years, with prices and availability dropping substantially,
perhaps the desire to print electrical devices will spur the development of electric ink.
Electrically conductive ink wouldn't just be useful in 3D printers. Any kind of writing
or printing can be made to conduct electricity. We already have ink that can be read magnetically.
In fact, many checks that we write off of our checking account have a series of numbers
on the bottom that are written in an ink that contains iron oxide, which can be detected
magnetically. But we don't have a good ink that we could
use to make electrical circuits that conduct electricity well. And by well, I mean that
can conduct enough of a current for modern applications on the order of one to two amps.
To give you an idea of how much current that is, consider that your standard compact fluorescent
light bulb uses about a quarter of an amp of current.
Let's consider our next wish. Science fiction is full of tiny robots cleaning
out our arteries or microscopic machines that assemble matter one atom at a time. Are these
technologies really possible? Maybe, but if they are, it's likely that they don't follow
the same rules as most materials do. The next wish is not so much a wish for a new
material as much as a better understanding of a whole class of materials, in this case
nanoscale technologies. We're used to dealing with objects in the
macroscale and microscale, but what do we mean by nanoscale? Nanoscale is when an object
is one to one hundred nanometers in size, or about thirty to three thousand billionths
of an inch wide. It turns out that this is only about two to two hundred atoms across.
That's right, at this scale we're actually entering the world of atoms.
This means that the laws of quantum mechanics become more important at that scale, so how
will those objects behave when they interact? It's virtually certain that they'll behave
completely differently from how they do at the macroscale, or even microscale.
See at this scale a single chemical bond can have a significant impact on the energetics
of the system. At larger scales individual chemical bonds can be ignored, but not at
the nanoscale. What will we discover when we start looking at matter in its nanoscale
forms?
We've already seen some hints of what we'll find with the discovery of the quantum dot.
A quantum dot is a tiny crystal about one ten millionths of an inch on a side. It's
so small that the rules of quantum mechanics, rather than Newtonian physics, control how
it behaves. The most obvious and striking behavior of quantum dots is how they glow
when they're excited by ultraviolet light or electricity. The color they glow depends
on their size, too, so we can actually tune the quantum dot to give off just the right
color of light. In 2013 the first flat screen TVs using quantum dots were sold, so we're
already using this technology to make products.
One possible use of quantum dots is quantum computing, which uses the rules of quantum
mechanics instead of microprocessors as the basis of a computer. We're not at that point
of development yet, but it's an illustration of the new frontiers that are possible when
we get to the nanoscale.
The next wish is to live forever. Well, maybe not that, but at least to live in good health
for as long as possible. We rely quite a bit on the field of medicine for that, and on
medicines as well. You might not think of medicine as a material, but it is.
A medicine, also called a drug or a pharmaceutical, is any substance other than food whose intended
use is for diagnosis, cure, prevention, or treatment of disease. Because food is excluded,
the technical definition of a medicine leaves out things like vitamins, the lack of which
can actually cause certain diseases, or minerals like calcium whose deficiency is related to
certain structural or metabolic problems in the body.
A pharmaceutical can be as simple as sodium bicarbonate to ease indigestion, or a small
molecule like aspirin whose molecules contain only 21 atoms, or even a large biological
molecule, even entire cells like those found in some vaccines.
What we really want is a drug that targets a particular disease but has absolutely no
negative side effects. The phrase that exemplifies this desire is magic bullet. Probably no
disease needs a magic bullet treatment more than cancer.
In cancer, a group of diseases that involves uncontrolled cell growth, the goal is to kill
off the cancer cells without killing off healthy cells. Needless to say, this is a difficult
task. A proper cancer drug would target the cancer cells and only the cancer cells, leaving
the healthy cells alone to continue their proper metabolic function.
Let's see, what else? Well, matter behaves differently in a magnetic field, differently
in ways that can actually be useful. For example, when a person gets an MRI done, the first
thing that happens is that they're placed inside a very large magnet. Atoms in a magnetic
field can absorb radio waves that they can't otherwise, and we could use this behavior
for medical purposes. But let's put magnetic fields into perspective.
The Earth generates a magnetic field that has a value of about one-half of a unit called
a gauss. A common refrigerator magnet has a magnetic field of about 50 gauss, which
is 100 times that of the Earth's magnetic field. There are magnetic fields in the human
brain that are only a billionth of a gauss. On the other end, the most powerful magnetic
field produced by humans is about half a million gauss. That's a range of 15 orders
of magnitude. Now, while that sounds impressive, it's actually one of the smallest ranges
of fundamental physical effects we can experience. Our experiences with gravity span more than
30 orders of magnitude, the same with electricity. With light, we can detect a single light wave.
With a laser, we could produce a million, billion, billion light waves per second, spanning
23 orders of magnitude. With magnets, our ability is 100 million times less in range.
What would be nice is if we could produce much, much stronger magnets than we have now.
The strongest permanent magnets we have are made from elements that are relatively rare,
whose suppliers controlled by only a few countries. Stronger magnetic fields can be produced by
electromagnets, but for that, you need electricity. No, what would be most convenient would be
to have much, much stronger permanent magnets.
Magnetism and matter is caused by unpaired electrons, which is one reason why many permanent
magnets are composed of metals like iron, cobalt, and nickel. But modern materials have
only begun to consider other molecules that might have unpaired electrons. In fact, might
organic molecules, molecules based on carbon, be able to support unpaired electrons and
generate magnetic fields. We wouldn't have to rely on foreign countries for raw materials
if we could produce magnets like leaves on a tree. There's a lot about magnetism that
has yet to be explored.
Finally, we need to recognize that nature produces materials whose properties far outshine
the properties of man-made compounds. Consider, for example, the spider web. Spider silk,
as it's properly called, has the strength of high-performance steel, but only one sixth
the density. Pound for pound, that makes it six times stronger than steel, and it comes
from the glands of an arachnid. Just think of what we could build if we could produce
synthetic spider silk commercially. Did I mention that it could also be stretched up
to five times its original length before breaking?
Consider to the lovably barnacle, a relative of crabs and lobsters, that sticks itself
to surfaces as an adult. It's the sticking that's interesting. The glue that barnacles
produce to anchor themselves to surfaces is strong enough to withstand a force of twenty
times atmospheric pressure. Granted, this is only one-tenth of the strength of the best
cyanoacrylate glues, but it's produced by a crustacean.
There are many materials that are produced naturally by plants and animals whose properties
far outshine the properties of man-made objects. The intentional imitation of naturally occurring
behavior or materials for human application is called biomimicry. By studying the properties
of naturally occurring materials, especially materials produced by other living things,
scientists and engineers hope to create new materials that can make our lives even better.
In fact, we've already done it. Airplanes copy the flight of birds, bats and insects.
Beltrow mimits the hooks and wires of seed pods from certain plants. Engineers even develop
robots that mimic the human body in some cases.
But there's so much more we can learn. We can get better ceramics by studying seashells.
We can use the model of hollow polar bear fur to develop better insulators for our homes,
cars and clothes. The hydrodynamic propulsion system used by Octopi and Squid can inspire
new ways to move boats and submarines, and perhaps the airplanes and helicopters of the
future will resemble the bumblebee instead of the eagle.
It's very likely that plants have natural pesticides and other biochemical weapons that
will be future wonder drugs, just as the ancestor of aspirin was found in Willowbark.
We may even be able to climb walls like a tree frog. Nature itself provides one of the
greatest laboratories for new materials. All we need to do is properly study it.
Like I said at the beginning, yesterday's science fiction is today's science fact.
Things like computer notepads, GPS locator chips, and laser weapons were once the province
of Star Trek, Star Wars, or Doctor Who, but now they exist. The really fun part about being
a scientist is taking part in making science fiction, science reality.
I mentioned at the start that there was one invention that relies on man-made matter.
It's the smoke detector. A central part of the smoke-detecting circuit is a small amount
of the element americium, which doesn't exist naturally. Instead, it's produced in nuclear
reactors, extracted, and ultimately used to save lives.
A typical smoke detector has about 100 millionths of an ounce of americium in it, encased in
solid plastic. To date, it's the only synthetic element that's seen in commercial applications.
What that means is that everything else we make comes from naturally occurring materials.
And although chemistry is a science, it's only about 350 years old, although the concept
of atoms only recently had its 200th birthday, and we've barely gone a century with a good
understanding of how atoms behave, we're still learning what happens when we put matter
together. Barely a decade goes by that we don't discover some new, unusual material
that might or might not have a huge influence on our lives.
To give you some examples, consider that the application of semiconductors is only barely
60 years old, and now we have integrated circuits barely larger than atoms in virtually all aspects
of our lives. On the other hand, in the 1980s and 90s, we discovered that the element carbon
can form spherical molecules that we named buckyballs. As interesting, beautiful, and
fascinating as these molecules are, they have yet to find a single significant practical
application.
As a scientist, part of my own research has been the development of new high-energy materials,
which is a fancy way to stay explosives and fuels. In my case though, we use computer programs
to calculate the energy content of these molecules, instead of making them in the lab where they
might explode in our faces.
We've studied molecules that have never been synthesized in the laboratory, but with a
computer, we can get a very good idea of their properties. It's by doing investigations
like this that scientists and engineers can push back the barrier between ignorance and
knowledge, and make contributions of their own to the development of future materials.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
