You
You
Your lecture is Dr. David W. Ball. Dr. Ball is a professor of chemistry at Cleveland State University in Ohio.
He received his bachelor's degree from Baylor University and his master's and doctoral degrees from Rice University.
Dr. Ball teaches various types of entry level chemistry and physical chemistry in the undergraduate and graduate programs.
He has authored or co-authored a number of books including a physical chemistry textbook and a book on math review for introductory chemistry students.
Dr. Ball has received accolades for his teaching at the department, college and university levels and recently served as a distinguished visiting professor at the United States Air Force Academy.
Welcome to this course on the nature of matter, a key component of the universe we live in.
Part of our development as a species has been manipulating matter to our benefit and in order to do that well we need to understand how matter behaves.
Although we've been adapting matter for thousands of years, would you believe that we've only been doing this particularly well for just a few centuries?
In this course I'll discuss how and why this has been the case and I'll talk about some of the ways we've modified matter to improve the human condition.
Let's start with some basics. What happens when you take a new pack of playing cards and throw them in the air like this?
Let me see if I can describe what happened. The cards went up, then turned around and fell to the ground.
At the same time all the cards separated and hit the ground in one big mess.
In one quick demonstration you've just experienced the three major components of our physical universe, matter, energy and entropy.
Now what do I mean by the physical universe? Generally it's everything that's happening around us, either naturally or caused by our efforts.
Anything that can be measured, tested, re-measured, that's the physical universe. It doesn't include things like ideas or feelings, although granted feelings can be measured.
The physical universe is what we interact with every day, the ground, the air, books, computers, each other. All this is the physical universe.
The job of the scientist is to study the physical universe. The job of the engineer is to take what the scientist learns and make something useful out of it.
But it's only been the last few hundred years that science has gotten its act together and engineers have been able to adapt what we've found.
This is pretty evident when you look at the progress that society has made in the last few centuries.
We've gone from horse-drawn carriages to cars to airplanes to satellites that are even now orbiting other planets in the solar system.
We've gotten some other interesting things out of the physical universe. We've turned matter into semiconductors, colorful food additives, synthetic fabric, and bulletproof vests.
We've got batteries the size of a dime that can last for ten years and contact lenses to make you look like a cat.
We have reusable sticky notes and protective tiles that keep spacecraft from burning up when they re-enter the atmosphere.
How do we get all of that out of the universe around us?
Well, it's all about matter and energy, the two chief components of our universe.
How matter interacts with matter and how matter interacts with energy is what defines our universe.
Not just the whole universe, but even the tiny part of it you're looking at right now.
And it's our ability to manipulate, to change matter and energy that allows us to take advantage of its wonderful properties,
giving us products and capabilities that would astound our grandparents.
And there's one more thing that impacts us every day. It's a little understood idea called entropy.
While it's often misunderstood, entropy can be as important to our everyday lives as matter and energy.
Things that can't be understood in terms of matter and energy.
For example, the simple dissolving of salt and water can be understood in terms of entropy.
In this course, we'll talk about matter and some of its wonderful forms and functions.
We'll see some examples of how we've been able to manipulate matter to do things unimaginable only a few decades ago,
like using individual atoms to draw out corporate logos.
Some of the materials we'll talk about have molecules that are composed of thousands, millions of atoms,
while some substances depend on the presence of a single atom in space.
And most of the time, energy will be hiding somewhere in the background, exerting its unwavering influence.
Every once in a while, entropy will be the driving force for matter's behavior, so we'll see that pop up a few times.
But throughout this course, we should always keep in mind that it's the interactions of matter, energy and entropy
that govern the nature of the universe.
So what is matter anyway?
Matter is anything with mass that takes up space.
Most of what we see is matter, and a lot of what we don't see.
Many people forget that the air we breathe is matter.
The whole concept of matter has changed in the past few years, as astronomers are hypothesizing that a visible so-called dark matter
may actually make up more of the universe than the visible matter we could see.
For now, we'll stick with the matter that we see and are familiar with.
A rock, a book, a video screen, the human body.
All matter.
The study of matter and how it interacts with other matter and energy is, of course, chemistry.
Chemistry will underlie everything in this course, one reason why I, a chemist, am here today.
The nature of matter is controlled by three things, matter itself, and the two other concepts will be defining energy and entropy.
The interaction of energy or entropy with matter determines how matter behaves, as we'll soon see.
Energy has a technical definition, the ability to do work.
Perhaps a better way to think of it is that energy is the ability to move matter around.
Think about it, electrical energy moves electrons around in electronic circuits.
Mechanical energy moves gears and levers and screws and wheels.
Gravitational energy moves mass towards the center of another mass.
Wind energy moves great big windmills.
With energy, we can't move matter, we can't manipulate matter.
Energy is extremely important.
Political alliances, wars, the prices at the supermarket are all impacted by energy.
Many of the reasons matter acts the way it does have to do with energy,
so how energy behaves is going to be very important as we consider the nature of matter.
Entropy is a little harder to define.
Imagine if you will a box with five light bulbs in it with a certain specific amount of energy for the lights.
You have a choice. How do you distribute the energy among the five light bulbs?
Do you give all the energy to one bulb of making it glow bright?
Or do you distribute it among all the light bulbs, making them glow dimly?
Entropy is a measure of the distribution of energy.
Putting all the energy into one light bulb, that's low entropy.
Distributing the energy among all the lights, that's high entropy.
All other things being equal, the universe prefers high entropy, the wider distribution of energy.
The problem is that most of the time all other things aren't equal,
so it's sometimes difficult to see how entropy by itself affects the behavior of matter.
Again, consider our deck of cards. When we throw it into the air, we give energy to all the cards
and let them do as they please, subject to the laws of physics.
So they end up all over the ground.
That's high entropy, a state the universe prefers.
Maybe it's not difficult to see how entropy affects matter,
especially when you know that the energy of the cards will not cause them to come back together into one neat stack,
a state of low entropy.
One begins with matter, energy, and entropy interact.
Then we see some fascinating things happen.
In fact, in order to understand the nature of matter, we need to understand how matter interacts with matter and energy and entropy.
Some behavior is based solely on matter itself, no interaction at all.
Iron is heavy, for example. Lead is even heavier.
And that heaviness is a property of the matter itself,
and we use some of those properties because of its inherent behavior, like lead weights at the end of a fishing line.
Color is another example.
Lemons are yellow, limes are green, oranges are, well, orange.
These fundamental properties are fundamental to the matter and not based on how matter is interacting with other matter or energy.
Some behavior is based on the interaction of matter with energy.
Think of an egg in a frying pan.
Left alone, the egg just sits there.
But if you add a bit of heat, a form of energy, at a certain temperature, the clear stuff turns white,
and the yellow stuff gets solid, and you have a fried egg.
But it wouldn't have become a fried egg without the energy.
Temperature is a basic measure of the energy of a substance.
Add energy, and it gets hotter.
Remove energy, it gets colder.
Add or remove a lot of energy, and other things can happen.
We'll talk about some of those things in later lectures.
But what about the interaction of matter and entropy?
Let's try a simple thought experiment.
Take a small cup of water with about an inch of water in it.
Place a single sugar cube in the bottom of the cup,
and then put the whole thing in an insulated container, like a thermos.
The insulated thermos keeps energy from moving in and out.
That's why it's insulated.
But what happens anyway?
In a few minutes, the sugar dissolves in the water.
Why?
We gave it no energy to dissolve.
It turns out, though, that the dissolving process was driven by the distribution of energy
to as many of the sugar molecules as possible.
Hey, that's entropy, the distribution of energy.
So dissolving the sugar was an entropy-driven process.
Entropy shows itself in other ways, too, as we'll soon see.
Let's take something a little more grand.
Consider a speeding car running into a thick brick wall.
To keep it clean, let's assume no one was in the car.
The speeding car made of matter has energy, kinetic energy, which is energy of motion.
When the car hits the wall, this energy of motion is distributed to all the matter of the car,
which generally distorts and misshapes, gets all bent out of shape,
sometimes spreading pieces of the car in all directions.
The wall forced the energy of the car to redistribute to the unfortunate detriment of the car itself.
And although modern automobiles are engineered so this doesn't happen,
imagine if the gas tank explodes during the collision.
What are we seeing?
We're seeing a chemical reaction between gasoline and the oxygen in the air,
and during this chemical reaction a lot of energy is being released.
This sudden release of a lot of energy causes pieces of the car to be thrown everywhere.
This means that entropy is present as well.
When pieces of the car were flung off in various directions,
energy was distributed into these pieces, thereby increasing entropy.
All three fundamental aspects of the universe – matter, energy and entropy –
manifest themselves in this fiery car crash.
How about something a little less violent?
A liquid crystal is a substance that has both liquid and solid properties.
In the liquid state, the molecules are ordered randomly with various energies – a state of high entropy.
In some cases though, the application of the tiniest amount of electrical energy
causes the molecules to line up, making a state of lower entropy.
In many cases when this happens, there's a certain optical effect.
The liquid crystal has a different color.
It may just be a darker shade of gray, but that's enough.
Put some liquid crystals in between some filters and polarizers,
and you can control the red and green and blue combinations that may color.
And what do you have?
A liquid crystal display, or LCD.
An LCD is one of the major types of flat screen displays
used on televisions, computer screens and other video devices.
They have the advantage of using very small amounts of energy,
and so they're more efficient than the older cathode ray tubes.
But they also show how matter, energy and entropy all come together
to make a product that impacts our everyday lives.
Before we can describe how matter behaves,
we must be able to describe matter itself.
That is, describe the properties of the matter.
Generally speaking, there are two types of properties,
physical properties and chemical properties.
Physical properties are properties that describe the matter's very existence.
We've already mentioned that iron was very heavy.
Well, heaviness is a physical property of iron.
Lead is heavier than iron.
That's a physical property of lead.
How sticky is something?
That's a physical property.
Something bounce when you drop it.
That's a physical property too.
Color, density, shininess, roughness,
all of those properties that you use to describe the physical appearance
or behavior of matter, those are physical properties.
Even the way matter interacts with energy can be a physical property.
When you add enough energy to liquid water, it boils to become steam.
That's a physical property of water.
Chemical properties are more complicated.
A chemical has a certain composition of atoms.
The fancy name for a chemical is a substance.
When a substance changes its composition of atoms in the presence of another substance
or in the presence of energy, that's called a chemical change.
For example, hydrogen gas interacts with oxygen gas
to change these two substances into a new substance called water.
This behavior of hydrogen towards oxygen, or oxygen towards hydrogen,
is called a chemical property.
Now, other chemicals react with oxygen too.
Natural gas, mostly the chemical methane, also reacts with oxygen.
But it makes different substances when it reacts.
So its chemical property towards oxygen is slightly different than hydrogens.
Hydrogen reacts with other chemicals too.
Nitrogen, iron, sodium, ethylene, benzene, and others.
It also reacts with energy.
Take enough energy away, and hydrogen gas turns into a liquid.
Heat hydrogen to about 6,000 degrees,
and the individual atoms will break apart and form a type of matter called plasma,
which is how matter exists at the surface of the sun.
All of these are chemical properties,
and the entire set of chemical properties is unique to hydrogen.
In fact, every chemical has its own unique set of physical and chemical properties.
That's what ultimately distinguishes one form of matter from another.
And that's why it's important to understand the properties of all forms of matter.
Some of these properties can be pretty useful.
Although modern chemistry is only about 200 years old,
we now know enough that we can make chemicals that have certain desired properties.
Suppose, for example, we want a new dye that looks red.
We know about what size and other properties a molecule needs to have a red color.
We can synthesize it in the laboratory and test it.
Does it look red?
If so, we can test it for other properties like stability and toxicity and such,
and see if it works.
We just may have invented a new food coloring.
But why do we have to test it?
Why can't we know for sure that our new substance will look red?
Two reasons.
First, matter is complex.
Although all matter is made up of 100 or so different kinds of atoms.
When these atoms do come together, their properties aren't always predictable,
even when the same atoms are involved.
Let me give you an example.
The element carbon has two major forms.
The most common form is called graphite.
Graphite is a black flaky solid that crumbles pretty easily.
In the mid-1500s, a deposit of graphite was found in northern England
and was used to mark sheep by the shepherds.
Back then, chemistry wasn't even a real science,
and the Englishmen thought there was a type of lead that they called plumbago.
A few years later, a wooden handle was invented,
and the pencil was born, complete with the pencil lead.
Of course, pencils never contained real lead, just graphite,
but the old name sticks with us even today.
All because of graphite's soft and flaky properties.
Now, there's a less common form of carbon called diamond,
although it's been known for thousands of years.
High-quality diamonds are clear and very hard.
In fact, diamond is the hardest known naturally occurring substance.
Diamond has a very high dispersion, meaning it sparkles light very vividly,
making diamonds a desirable gemstone.
These properties are diametrically opposite to the properties of graphite,
even though the two substances are pure forms of the same element.
Why so different?
It's because of how the atoms are joined or bonded together.
If you take a look at the atoms in graphite,
you can see that they are arranged in sheets of six-sided hexagons,
looking a bit like a honeycomb, but in layers only one atom thick.
An actual sample of graphite is built from millions and millions of these layers
stacked on top of each other.
But a model of the atoms in diamond looks completely different.
It's a three-dimensional connection of carbon atoms
with one carbon atom connecting with four other carbon atoms
in an almost limitless three-dimensional structure.
Because the carbon atoms are bonded so differently in these two substances,
the resulting materials have completely different properties
that would be difficult to predict with certainty.
The point is, matter is complex, even if you're talking about a single simple element.
The second reason we need to test new materials
is because the influence of atoms on a new substance can be very subtle.
Another example, the element silicon does not conduct electricity very well at all.
Normally it's considered an insulator, not a conductor.
However, by intentionally adding an impurity
at the level of one atom per billion silicon atoms,
we get a slightly conducting sample of silicon called a semiconductor
that can be used to make electronic devices.
Now, how much is one part per billion?
It's about one person in all of China.
It's about 15 inches of distance on your way to the moon.
It's one ounce of water in an Olympic-sized swimming pool.
It's not a lot, but for a semiconductor,
one part per billion is enough of an impurity
to change the properties of silicon completely and support an entire industry.
These subtle effects require that we be careful when we test new materials.
The complexity and subtlety that accompanies the development of new materials
points out another factor, blind luck, also called serendipity.
As advanced as our understanding of modern materials is,
sometimes we discover something completely unexpected
that opens up a new world of discovery.
A classic example of this is the discovery of antibiotics.
In 1928, Scottish biologist Alexander Fleming
was studying bacteria cultures in Petri dishes.
After a brief holiday, Fleming returned to his lab,
only to find one of his cultures contaminated with a mold called penicillium.
Fleming noted that the bacteria around the mold were killed off,
while bacteria far from the mold survived.
His historic two-word response? That's funny.
Fleming speculated that the mold gave off a compound that killed bacteria,
and he set about testing what he called mold juice,
which he later named penicillin.
He tested the mold juice through the 1930s,
and in 1940, several chemists took on the challenge of isolating
and synthesizing the active compound.
By the end of World War II, enough penicillin had been isolated
to treat every injured Allied soldier on D-Day.
Almost by accident, Fleming revolutionized medicine by discovering antibiotics.
Today, millions of lives are saved with penicillin
and other natural and synthetic antibiotics.
But is there a more chemical example of serendipity?
Well, in 1938, New Jersey chemist Roy Plunkett
was trying to synthesize new refrigerants
for the growing refrigerator and air conditioning market.
One of the chemicals he was using was tetrafluoroethylene gas,
which has the chemical formula C2F4, a very simple molecule.
The chemical gas tank that he was using got clogged before it was empty,
and Plunkett knew this because he measured the amount of C2F4 he was using
by weighing the gas container, so he knew the gas container wasn't empty.
After sawing the container apart,
Plunkett found that the inside of the tank was coated with a white waxy solid.
Subsequent tests showed that this waxy solid was actually C2F4
that had polymerized into a plastic.
This plastic was very energetically stable,
meaning that it's chemically unreactive and it's very, very slippery.
The formal name of this plastic is polytetrafluoroethylene, or PTFE.
We know it better as Teflon.
It has some very interesting properties.
As I mentioned, it's very chemically unreactive.
Very few chemicals react directly with Teflon, making it a great protective coating.
Did I mention that it was very slippery?
It's actually one of the most slippery compounds known.
It's the only known surface that insects or a lizard can't climb up,
so it's occasionally used to line the tops of ant farms so the ants can't escape.
It's an excellent insulator, so much so that about half the annual Teflon production
is used for wire insulation.
It's also a rather soft material, so plumbers use Teflon tape to wrap pipe fittings
so they don't leak.
And of course, many pots and pans are coated with Teflon so the cooked foods don't stick.
Teflon is also very heat resistant, making it all the more useful for cookware.
It's even being used to make replacement veins for transplant into the human body.
All this from a material that was discovered accidentally.
And that's my point.
As we go forth, we're certainly going forth less blindly than we were in the past,
but we still don't know what wonders lie hidden in the universe around us.
Matter, energy, entropy, their presence and their interactions dominate our universe,
our very lives.
Matter is composed of about 100 different types of atoms.
There are several manifestations of energy, and there's only one entropy.
But from this relative small number of building blocks, our entire physical universe is built.
But it's only been in the last 200 years or so, since the Industrial Revolution
when we started building machines to do the work of humans and animals,
that we've had the freedom to study how matter and energy and entropy interact
and learn how we can manipulate them to our advantage.
A lot of progress has been made in that time, and there's certainly a lot more ahead.
But there may be a limit.
In the last few decades, we've gone from macro scale to micro scale,
and lately we've been going into the nano scale.
Now, think about these different scales.
The macro scale is what you could hold in your hand.
The micro scale is what you could hold in a pair of tweezers.
But the nano scale, the nano scale you could only see with the most powerful microscopes,
because the nano scale is only slightly larger than atoms and molecules themselves.
What's beyond the nano scale?
Well, it's the atomic scale, and that's where our story of materials has to end.
See, there's nothing smaller than an atom when it comes to chemical substances.
Sure, there are protons and neutrons and electrons and other subatomic particles,
but that's the domain of particle physics, not chemistry.
No, chemistry and materials must stop, has to stop, at the atom.
If we're already exploring the nano scale today,
that means that there's not much farther to go until we reach the limit of matter itself,
at least from the chemical and materials perspective.
Now, this sounds like a gloomy ending, but it's not.
We've only begun to explore the nano scale and have discovered some new and interesting behaviors,
some of which I'll talk about in this course.
I can't predict the future, but I'm pretty sure I can guarantee that as we move forward,
we will discover unexpected, unusual, exciting materials
that will propel new technologies, build industrial empires, and create the future.
It's a future that I, as a chemist, am helping to create.
It's a future that you can support as a citizen and a consumer,
and it's a future that you can appreciate as you act as a decision maker, a taxpayer, and a voter.
So let's revisit our deck of cards.
The cards themselves are matter, right?
When I throw them up in the air, their energy increases as they go up in gravity
and then decreases as they fall down to the floor.
And all that energy that they gained when they dropped
was distributed among the 52 cards as they landed in a random mess
as the universe worked to increase entropy.
Matter, energy, entropy.
All fundamental elements of our universe.
And all that from a simple deck of cards.
Thank you.
