Do you know that you do chemistry experiments almost every single day, maybe without realizing
it?
You mix chemicals together and make them react.
You observe the outcome of those reactions, and in some cases, you make notes to do it
differently the next time.
These chemical experiments of yours are very personal.
You cook.
You usually eat and drink what you cook, too, and there's chemistry in that as well.
But there's no need to mince words.
Many of us play amateur scientists every day as we mix ingredients, react them in the presence,
or even absence of heat, and then enjoy the visual and olfactory presentation before we
gobble up the results.
Let's face it.
All cooks are amateur scientists, at the very least.
Eating and drinking is something that virtually all of us do every day.
We eat and drink to survive, to enjoy each other's company, to experience other cultures,
to celebrate events in our lives.
Whole industries are built around our need to eat, as are magazines, websites, and even
entire television networks.
That is, as I said, a very intimate part of our experience.
But not only that, our need to nourish ourselves defined humanity as a civilization.
The transition from hunter-gatherer behavior to a system of domesticated agriculture about
12,000 years ago represented a landmark event in the history of humans.
Rather than depending on the luck of the hunt, or finding a supply of fruits and vegetables
by accident, people were able to intentionally raise their own food.
Make no doubt about it, the ability to grow our own food led to the development of communities,
an increase in population, the concept of land ownership, the differentiation of responsibilities
and jobs, and it promoted the formation of governments.
Just you think that there were only positive impacts, there were also negative impacts,
as the ability to grow our own food led to more diseases, because people lived more closely
together with domesticated animals.
It led to dietary deficiencies, as communities depended largely on one crop.
It caused wars as more aggressive groups fought to take over the fertile lands of others,
and it promoted the formation of governments.
Many of these pros and cons still exist today, although it's likely that few people want
to go back to the hunter-gatherer stage, except possibly as a field trip.
But let's get back to food and drink.
The materials that we eat and drink have some interesting properties, otherwise they wouldn't
be such tasty morsels.
But what separates these materials from other interesting materials?
I mean, rock is certainly useful.
You could build with it, or throw it at your enemies, but we don't usually eat it.
Actually, as it turns out, there are two rocks that we do eat, and a large part of what we
drink is just a tasteless, colorless, odorless liquid.
But most everything else we eat comes from other living things, either plant or animal.
As Star Trek's Mr. Spock once said, in the strict scientific sense, we all feed on death.
And it's true, it's all part of the cycle of life that we all experience.
So, let's talk about the materials we eat, and I think we'll start with breakfast.
Many people start their day with a glass of orange juice.
Have you ever really thought of what juice is?
Technically speaking, juice is the liquid that comes off of a fruit or vegetable when
it's pressed, but not heated or dissolved in some other solvent like alcohol.
Nor do we ever really think of meat juice, although we do talk about cooked meats being
juicy.
Orange juice then comes from squeezed oranges.
Orange juice is actually pretty acidic.
It's about one hundredth as acidic as stomach acid.
Its acidity comes from a compound called citric acid, which gets its name from the
genus of these fruits, citrus.
Other fruits from the genus citrus, named of course, citrus fruits, have certain characteristics.
They're very fragrant, can be very sour tasting because of the presence of acid, and are rather
juicy.
We get juice from them too.
Lemon, lime, and grapefruit juices are well known in the kitchen.
These fruits also contain a healthy amount of vitamin C.
Vitamins are essential nutrients that we need in tiny amounts but cannot synthesize in our
own bodies, so we must get them from our diet.
As evidence for them was discovered, they were given letters of the alphabet in order,
so vitamin C was the third one investigated.
Vitamin C was important because it cured a disease called scurvy.
Eating fruits and vegetables has long been recognized as healthy, but sometimes they're
not readily available.
In some circumstances, people became afflicted with this disease called scurvy.
Although known since ancient times, it became rampant with the development of long term
sea voyages.
On these voyages, fresh fruits and vegetables didn't keep, so sailors lived on cured meats
and dried grains.
Over time, these sailors got tired, got spots on their skin, started bleeding from the mucus
membranes, got open sores, lost their teeth, got high fevers, and then died.
This was not good.
Eventually it was found that eating citrus fruits or drinking citrus juice prevented
scurvy, but no one knew why.
The name Limes as a nickname for British sailors came from the habit of issuing every British
sailor a lime ration, limes being more plentiful in the British Empire at the time than any
other citrus fruit.
Citrus fruits and other fruits that prevented scurvy were called anti-scorbutix, but again,
no one knew why they worked.
After a significant amount of study, a research team led by Hungarian physiologist Albert
Zent-Giorgi identified the anti-scorbutix activity in certain foods.
It was a rather simple chemical that has the fancy name of 2-oxo-L3O-hexano-1-4-lactone-2-3-ine-dial.
This may not sound like a simple name, but for organic chemicals, believe me it's a
rather easy one.
Zent-Giorgi and his colleagues proposed the common name of a scorbic, ultimately a scorbic,
acid.
Now we also refer to it as vitamin C.
Vitamin C is very important biochemically, especially in the production of connective
tissue.
Most forms of life can synthesize vitamin C themselves.
Many guinea pigs, some bats, a few species of birds and fish, monkeys and apes, including
humans, cannot and must get it from the diet.
Moving on with our breakfast, do you eat eggs?
Many people do.
So many, in fact, that U.S. production tops over 80 billion eggs per year.
They're one of the most versatile foods we eat.
We can eat them cooked as is, scrambled and fried and poached and boiled and deviled.
We mix them in pancake batter, their ingredients in some breads and cakes, we whip the whites
for meringue and use the yolks to make Hollandaise sauce.
Most of the eggs eaten in the U.S. are chicken eggs, but we also eat the eggs of ducks, quail,
goose, even ostrich.
Fish eggs are a delicacy.
The general name for fish eggs is roe, but the roe of certain fish, especially sturgeon,
is called caviar.
Did I mention it's a delicacy?
It's an expensive one.
Good caviar can set you back over $3,000 a pound.
For now, we'll stick with eggs from birds.
An egg has an interesting structure.
From our perspective, we usually simplify the egg into three parts, a shell, the white
and the yolk.
Chemically, the shell is almost pure calcium carbonate, with a bit of protein mixed in
to keep the shell from getting too brittle.
Because of the spheroidal shape of the shell, it's fairly strong so it can protect the
growing embryo inside.
In fact, three eggs can support the weight of a big book, which is over 7 or 8 pounds.
The complete shell has a multi-layered structure that has certain specific functions, but is
mostly unimportant from the standpoint of eating.
Ironically, because the structure includes protein, an eggshell is sometimes considered
undesirable waste because the proteins would attract vermin.
Only when the protein membrane is removed can the eggshell be used without fear of accidental
infestation, and of course that's expensive.
The color of the eggshell has nothing to do with what's inside the egg.
It's solely determined by the species of bird that lays the egg.
Contrary to some beliefs, brown eggs are no more or less nutritious than white eggs or
green eggs or blue eggs.
I myself have had some green eggs, but that was the color of the eggshell, not the insides.
Check your nearby farmer's market for locally raised eggs and see what colored shells you
can find.
Now let's talk about the inside of the egg.
What we call the white of the egg is actually a clear liquid material that's 90% water
and 10% proteins, mostly a protein called albumin.
The job of the white in the egg is to cushion the yolk.
Curiously, the egg white contains virtually no fat, a fact considered important by some
on a low-fat diet.
Even like your orange juice, egg whites are slightly alkaline.
And remember the temperature, 143 degrees Fahrenheit.
That's the temperature where the egg white starts to coagulate or, to use a technical
term, denature.
Denaturing is the process in which proteins lose their structure, usually due to heat
or chemicals.
When the proteins lose their original structure, they can cross link and form a solid mass
trapping the water inside.
And now it turns white.
For egg proteins, this process is irreversible.
Cooking the white until it's hard makes the protein more digestible and kills some,
but not all, microorganisms.
The yolk of the egg is the food source of the embryo if the egg were ever fertilized.
It contains vitamins, minerals, proteins, fat, and cholesterol to support a growing
animal inside the egg.
The yellow color comes from pigments called xanthophils that are present in the chicken's
diet and have little nutritional value.
Chickens with different diets can have radically different colored yolks, but again, the nutritional
difference is negligible.
When cooking, the yolk starts to denature at 148 degrees Fahrenheit, a slightly higher
temperature than the white.
This is why we can have sunny side up eggs with a solid white and a runny yolk.
Hard boiled eggs are one common preparation, but sometimes people notice a greenish tinge
around the edge of the yolk.
Well, that's because they've been slightly overcooked.
An iron sulfide formed a thin layer around the yolk.
It may be unsightly, but it's perfectly harmless.
Maybe you eat toast for breakfast?
Most of the breads we eat for breakfast are yeast breads, which use yeast as a rising or
leavening agent.
Yeast are actually fungi that could live without the sun.
There are many different kinds of yeast, and the species of yeast used in cooking converts
carbohydrates into carbon dioxide and alcohol in a process known as fermentation.
Even though fermentation wasn't fully understood until the mid-1800s, it's one of the oldest
known biochemical processes intentionally applied to foods, essential for both the baking
industry and the production of all alcoholic beverages.
Yeast can metabolize carbohydrates either aerobically, that is, with oxygen, or anaerobically,
without oxygen.
In the presence of oxygen, the overall chemical reaction that the yeast undergo is the same
as the combustion of glucose.
Glucose plus oxygen react to make carbon dioxide and water.
This is the initial reaction that occurs as the yeast and bread dough starts working to
produce carbon dioxide gas to puff up or leaven the dough.
When oxygen runs out, the overall chemical reaction is a bit different.
A glucose molecule is converted by the yeast into carbon dioxide, an ethyl alcohol, or
ethanol.
This is the second reaction that occurs as the yeast works to leaven the dough with carbon
dioxide that's formed.
Yes, alcohol is produced, but very little, and it evaporates upon baking.
You can't get tipsy by eating bread.
Yeast aren't the only microorganisms that cause fermentation.
Some bacteria do it too.
One particular bacterium is used in the wine industry for a process called malolactic fermentation,
which converts harsh malic acid into smoother lactic acid, giving off some carbon dioxide
and making the wine taste better.
But back to bread.
Not all breads rise because of yeast action.
A bread formed using some other leavening agent, other than yeast, is called a quick
bread.
Most quick breads use some sort of chemical reaction that generates carbon dioxide gas.
Usually this entails using some carbonate compound and reacting it with some weak acid,
like citric acid, tartaric acid, or the acids in buttermilk.
The reaction of the carbonate and the acid yields carbon dioxide.
One common carbonate compound is sodium bicarbonate, which in the kitchen we call baking soda.
We could also use baking powder, which is a combination of sodium bicarbonate and some
solid acidic compounds that, when dissolved with a liquid, can react to give off carbon
dioxide.
Using these leavening agents, we can make pancakes, muffins, non-yeast breads like banana or zucchini
bread, cookies and brownies, not all of which we normally eat for breakfast.
Certain quick breads use whipped egg whites as their leavening agent, with the air in the
whipped egg providing the leavening.
Usually the most common bread product that does this is Belgian waffles.
Toasting bread for your breakfast is a very interesting chemical process.
While many foods turn dark and eventually burn when exposed to high heat, certain foods
experience a so-called browning reaction that occurs prior to burning.
In these cases, the amino acids from proteins in the food react with sugar molecules to
make brown and occasionally flavorful products.
The reaction between amino acids and sugars is called the Maillard reaction, and occurs
not only in breads, but in meats as well.
Now let's talk bacon.
Lots of people love bacon, so much so that there are even food trucks that specialize
in serving bacon dishes.
Bacon can come from many parts of the pig, but in the United States it's almost exclusively
from the pork belly.
First, the pork belly is cured, which means that it's soaked in a salt water, called a
brine, or packed with salt.
This is the means of preserving the meat for long-term storage.
Other ingredients like nitrates, nitrites or sugar can be used in curing to add other
flavors.
Then it can be smoked, which gives even more flavors to the meat.
The use of nitrates and nitrites in the curing of bacon is a bit controversial.
When these compounds interact with proteins at high temperatures, like those found in
cooking, new compounds called nitrosamines are formed.
Nitrosamines are known to cause cancer in laboratory animals, so some people have argued
for the removal of nitrates and nitrites in the curing process.
However, they do decrease the chance of botulism, so instead of removing nitrates and nitrites,
many countries regulate the amount that can be used.
There are some products out there that claim to be bacon, but from other sources.
Turkey bacon is commonly available, and some fancy restaurants may offer veal bacon, bison
bacon, even ostrich or vegetarian bacon.
To be blunt, not the same.
Do you drink milk with breakfast or have it on your cereal?
It's a simple white liquid, right?
Not really.
Milk is actually a complicated mixture of water, protein, vitamins and fat.
Milk is a liquid secreted by the mammary glands of mammals that's used to feed their
young, as many human mothers do.
The secretion of milk is one of the primary identifying characteristics of mammals.
Humans can consume the milk of several animals, including cows, goats, buffalo, sheep and
even reindeer.
Most of the milk we drink, however, comes from cows.
Technically, milk is a colloid, a dispersion of fat globules and an aqueous solution of
other stuff.
The white color of milk is caused by the scattering of light by these fat globules.
Milk is actually a bad colloid, because given time, the fat globs rise to the top to become
a layer of cream, which can be removed and processed separately.
To prevent this, much milk is homogenized.
In this process, the fat globules are broken up into smaller globules that don't rise
and separate.
Because milk is a natural product, it also contains natural bacteria, some of which may
be harmful.
So milk is flash heated to high temperatures to kill this bacteria.
This process is called pasteurization.
Some think that pasteurization changes the taste of milk for the worse, but the U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention recommends pasteurization for all milk, noting that in
the first decade of the 21st century, almost 80% of dairy-related illnesses involved unpasteurized
milk products.
Milk that hasn't been pasteurized is called raw milk, and its sale is regulated in many
countries.
For example, in the United States, only 28 states allow the sale of raw milk while it's
not allowed at all in Canada.
Milk is almost the perfect food.
It has to be if young mammals are expected to survive and even thrive on a diet of milk
alone.
Its exact composition depends on the species of mammals, but generally cow's milk contains
about 3% protein, 4% fat, 4% of a sugar called lactose or milk sugar, a small amount of cholesterol,
and a wide range of vitamins and minerals, including calcium.
Two important nutrients that milk doesn't have are iron and vitamin D. Newborn human
babies have enough iron to last for several months, and after the first six months or
so, many babies are expanding their diets, so iron deficiency is seldom a problem.
If iron deficiency is a problem, however, supplements are available.
Vitamin D is important for absorbing calcium and phosphorus, two elements needed for bone
growth.
Even human breast milk contains little vitamin D, so most pediatricians recommend a supplement.
Vitamin D is synthesized in the skin upon exposure to sunlight, but parents are understandably
wary of exposing a newborn child to lots of sun.
When children grow up, a good diet provides most of the vitamin D we need, but children
are notorious for having a diet of only chicken nuggets and hot dogs.
They do drink a lot of milk, so most milk is actually fortified with vitamin D.
When treated with acid or enzymes, the fat and solids in milk coagulate together.
They curdle.
The small bits of solid, called curds, are the start of making cheese.
And if you skim off the cream layer from unhomogenized milk and mix it for a while, the small globs
of fat will coalesce into larger globs, eventually making one single large chunk of fat that
we call butter.
Go milk really is a versatile part of our breakfast.
If you are at a really fancy breakfast, you might have a drink, a Bloody Mary, a Tequila
Sunrise, or maybe a Champagne Cocktail.
All of these drinks have alcohol, specifically ethyl alcohol, in them.
Commercially, all drinkable ethyl alcohol is made using anaerobic yeast fermentation,
following the same chemical reaction that yeast perform when making bread.
Only in this case, the alcohol isn't baked off.
Instead, it's allowed to accumulate to a certain percentage that defines the beverage.
About 5% for beer and cider, and around 10% for wine.
Of course, these values vary, some wines can be up to 15% alcohol.
Around that percentage of alcohol, the yeast cells start to be killed off, so naturally
fermented alcoholic beverages can't get more concentrated than that.
However, there is a way to get stronger alcoholic beverages, and that's to distill your original
mixture.
See, ethanol has a lower boiling point than water, so if you heat a solution of alcohol
and water, the alcohol evaporates off first, remove this vapor, condense it, and it becomes
a solution that's even more concentrated in alcohol, as much as 95% alcohol.
This process is called distillation, and your final product is called a Distilled Spirit,
otherwise known as liquor.
Any naturally fermented liquid can be distilled to make liquor.
The interesting thing is, usually the original liquid is rather complex, so when it's distilled
alcohol and water aren't the only compounds that evaporate.
Other compounds are also distilled at the same time, so the final liquor has a smell,
color, and taste that's characteristic of the original fermented stuff.
Additional flavorings and colors can be added after the fact as well, or the distilled spirit
can be stored in wooden barrels for a period of time, which also imparts color and flavor.
In the end, depending on the original fermented material and how it was treated after distillation,
we get liquors like rum, gin, whiskey, brandy, tequila, and others.
Notice I didn't say vodka.
That's because vodka is supposed to have no flavor or aroma.
In its most basic form, vodka should be just ethyl alcohol and water.
In order to get that, manufacturers sometimes have to purify the distilled alcohol by redistilling,
or by using filters or activated charcoal to remove any substance that isn't alcohol or water.
Because of this, manufacturers use the most readily available fermentable product that's
close by – wheat, potatoes, rice, molasses, corn, you name it.
Now, having said that, vodka should be tasteless and odorless if you went to a vodka tasting
and tasted vodkas distilled from other sources, you'd probably notice a difference in the
taste of the vodka.
And there are some vodkas that are intentionally flavored with things like lemon, orange, cinnamon,
or even pepper.
The alcohol content of alcoholic beverages is listed as a percentage by volume, but proof
is also an indication of the amount of alcohol.
The current American definition of proof is that it's twice the numerical value of the
percent alcohol by volume.
Thus, pure alcohol is 200 proof, while many liquors that are 40% alcohol are 80 proof.
The concept of proof is almost exclusively restricted to liquors, not wine or beer.
The science of food and drink is fascinating and very personal.
Most of us are exposed to it two or three times a day.
And why do we do this?
In a word, energy.
Eating and drinking are the ways we fuel ourselves for everyday life.
In addition to providing us with the raw materials we need to grow and replenish our bodies,
food provides us with the energy we need for our cells, muscles, and organs to work.
Without food and drink, we'd die.
But as our body works, it uses energy, so we have to replenish it, usually by eating
every day.
If we bring in too much energy, eat too much food, the body converts that additional energy
to energy-dense fat and stores it.
If we bring in too little energy, the body converts some of its fat storage into energy.
Anybody trying to control their weight needs to keep this fundamental fact in mind.
Energy in equals energy out, or it's fat on or fat off.
One reason why so many fad diets fail is because they don't even consider this basic idea.
Which brings me to the so-called energy drinks.
They should be more properly called stimulant drinks, because most of them contain stimulants
like caffeine.
Energy stimulants may make you feel more alert for a time, but that's an effect of
a stimulant and not really energy in so many words.
You can get the same effect by having a reasonably strong cup of coffee or tea with a few lumps
of sugar.
You want more energy, get a few more minutes of sleep, and have a good breakfast of the
things I just talked about.
By the way, did you figure out what rocks you eat?
I've actually mentioned them several times, so let's see if you remember.
The easy one is salt.
That's right, salt is nothing more than sodium chloride rock that's been mined from the
ground.
It's cleaned and purified before it gets to you, so no worries, but most salt is dug
up from the ground.
Some salts come from the evaporation of saltwater brines, and are usually intentionally sold
impure as a delicacy.
But they're much more expensive, of course.
In my neighborhood, I can buy a pound of plain iodized table salt for less than a dollar
a pound.
I could also get a pound of sea salt evaporated from Atlantic ocean water for $24 a pound.
The other rock you eat is called shrona, a mineral that's dug out of the ground in
various places around the world.
It's processed to make baking soda and baking powder, both of which are used to make quick
breads.
So let's see.
I talked about juice, eggs, bacon, toast, milk, gee, we didn't even get beyond breakfast.
Thank you.
