I once said that we live in an electrical society.
We do, but let's be more specific.
We also live in an electronic society.
What's the difference?
Well, an electrical society uses electricity, and we certainly do that.
About 15% of the world's energy comes from electricity.
Electricity is probably the most convenient power source,
available in just about every room of a modern household,
and even available in those portable devices known as batteries.
Electronics are components that modify current to perform a specific function,
rather than simply use current as a power source.
Diodes, vacuum tubes, and transistors are all components of electronics
and take active roles in modifying the currents passing through them.
Electronics has a century-long history,
with a lot of technology directly connected to electronics development.
Most modern electronics are based on the semiconductor.
In fact, I'd go so far as to say that without the semiconductor,
modern electronics wouldn't exist.
Instead of having desktop computers, portable phones, and electronic book readers,
we'd be stuck with computers the size of whole rooms,
rotary telephones that have to be wired to the wall,
and televisions that take a long time to warm up.
Not only do semiconductors overcome these limitations,
but they use significantly less energy than early electronic devices.
So, let's talk about semiconductors.
Hopefully by the end, we'll have a better appreciation
for how a tiny piece of impure silicon has such a huge impact on our lives.
An electrical conductor, or just conductor, is a material that conducts electricity.
An electrical insulator, on the other hand, does not conduct electricity.
The problem with these two definitions is that there's no good dividing line
between a conductor and an insulator.
For example, we could use a physical property called conductivity
to express how well a conductor, or how badly an insulator, conducts electricity.
In standard units, the element silver is the most conductive metal,
with a conductivity value of about 63 million.
Copper is just slightly less conductive at 60 million,
and many of our homes are outfitted with copper wiring because of this.
But aluminum metal is much less expensive, and with a conductivity of 35 million,
many homes have aluminum wiring instead of copper wiring.
People are nervous about mixing water and electricity, and rightfully so,
but it's the impurities in water that make the two dangerous together.
Curiously, pure water without the impurities isn't that good of a conductor.
On the same scale as silver and copper, pure water has a conductivity of about 1 millionth.
Drinking water out of your tap may be only 10 or 100 times this.
Even seawater, with all the salt dissolved in it, only has a conductivity of about 5.
Glass has a conductivity of about 100 billionth of a unit,
while Teflon's value is staggeringly low at a billionth of a billionth of a billionth of a unit.
My point is that the ability to conduct electricity is a wide range,
and there's no absolute way to separate conductors from insulators except by comparison.
Materials that have an intermediate conductivity are called semiconductors.
The element germanium, for example, is a well-known semiconductor, and has a conductivity of about 2.
Pure silicon, the major basis of semiconductors, has a conductivity of about 1,000th,
but as we'll see shortly, we actually have the ability to modify conductivity.
What makes a material a conductor, or an insulator, or even a semiconductor?
The model that we use is called band theory. Let's start at the beginning with an atom.
The electrons in an atom have certain specific energies. We call them energy levels.
When two atoms come together to make a molecule, their energy levels merge and even multiply,
because the more electrons you have, the more energy levels you need to hold them.
As more and more atoms combine, more and more energy levels come together.
Now, by the rules of quantum mechanics, every energy level has a specific energy value,
but there comes a point when you have so many atoms, so many energy levels,
that there's no real separation between one energy level and the next.
What you have ultimately is an energy band, effectively a continuous range of energies for the electrons.
Electrons typically occupy the lowest energy states in the energy band.
If a sample were at absolute zero, then all of the electrons would be in the lowest possible energy states,
with a maximum of two electrons per state. This is a consequence of electrons being fermions,
which remember are subatomic particles that have a half integer spin.
The highest energy state that's filled in this case is called the fermi level,
and the energy of the fermi level is important when a material acts as a conductor or an insulator.
And although I made the point that the value of the fermi level is technically measured at absolute zero,
it won't change much with temperature, so a material's fermi level can be thought of as a property of that material.
However, the population of the energy states changes with temperature.
At absolute zero, only the lowest energy states are filled, but at higher temperatures,
the energy from temperature itself can move some of the electrons to higher energy states.
That's right, in addition to the lowest energy states that can accommodate electrons,
there are also higher energy states that are unoccupied at absolute zero,
but can become occupied when the temperature increases.
We say that these higher energy states are thermally occupied, or occupied with thermal energy.
In fact, just like with the lower energy states, these higher energy states aren't individual energy levels,
but energy bands that have varying populations of electrons.
If the energy bands near the fermi level are only partially filled with electrons,
or if there is an overlap between the fermi level and the lowest energy unoccupied bands,
then the electrons can move easily among the bands, and we have an electrical conductor.
Metals are good electrical conductors.
If there's a large gap between the fermi level and the unoccupied band,
so large that there are virtually no thermal population of the band, the material is an electrical insulator.
Nonmetals like the element sulfur, or covalently bonded compounds like water,
whose electrons are fixed between the bombs, are good insulators.
If the gap between the fermi level and the unfilled band is small,
then there's some chance that some electrons can bridge that gap and move among the bands.
In this case, we have something called a semiconductor.
A material that is a naturally occurring semiconductor is called an intrinsic semiconductor.
Ultra pure silicon is an intrinsic semiconductor with electrical conductivity close to that of tap water.
The issue with intrinsic semiconductors is that their conductivity is fixed.
It's a property of the material.
A material whose semiconducting properties can be modified by the addition of intentional impurities
called dopants is an extrinsic semiconductor.
Here, we have more possibilities because we can adjust the amount of dopants to adjust the conductive properties of the material.
The amount of doping can vary from one part per 100,000 to one part in 10 billion,
so there's a huge range in the conductivity of semiconductors, and that's what makes them so useful.
Most of what I'll be talking about next will focus on extrinsic semiconductors.
So, what is it about the structure of silicon that makes it a semiconductor when it's doped?
First, we have to look at the chemical bonds in pure silicon.
Silicon has four electrons in its highest energy shell called the valence shell.
These valence electrons can make covalent bonds with four other silicon atoms.
A simple two-dimensional model shows silicon atoms at the corners of a square,
each corner making four lines or covalent bonds to four other silicon atoms.
In reality, the silicon matrix is a three-dimensional arrangement, but the two-dimensional model works just fine for us.
The point is that in pure silicon, the valence electrons are confined to these covalent bonds.
Well, not exactly confined, give them a small amount of energy,
and a few of these electrons will break free and travel freely as a current,
but only a few, which is why pure silicon is a semiconductor, not a conductor.
Now, suppose we dope our silicon with a very small amount of a different element, phosphorus.
A phosphorus atom has five valence electrons, so when it makes four covalent bonds to surrounding silicon atoms,
it has one electron left over.
It's a lot easier for that lone electron to move around in energy bands because it isn't part of a covalent bond.
Because of this, the conductivity of the material rises.
Because the electron has a negative charge, we call this an n-type semiconductor, n for negative.
The actual conductivity of the semiconductor depends on the amount of dopant used,
so as you might expect, we can control the conductivity by controlling the amount of phosphorus we use as an intentional impurity.
There's another way we can affect the conductivity of silicon, and that's by adding a dopant like aluminum.
Aluminum only has three valence electrons, so when it gets inserted into the silicon lattice,
it's missing an electron, and there's an opening where the electron would normally be.
This opening is called a hole, and a hole affects conductivity of the silicon just like an extra electron does.
Because the lack of a negatively charged electron is in that positive charge,
we call this a p-type semiconductor, p for positive.
Again, we can adjust the actual conductivity of the silicon by varying the exact amount of dopant aluminum.
One thing to note about both n-type and p-type semiconductors is that while we're changing the electrical conductivity of the silicon,
the piece of doped silicon does not have an overall electrical charge.
Semiconductors can be used as conductors or resistors if you need a weak example of either one,
and that's the whole point of a semiconductor. They're rather poor conductors of electricity left by themselves.
It would be like making an electrical circuit out of wood, which, by the way, is not known for conducting electricity well.
Things start getting interesting when you layer a p-type semiconductor and an n-type semiconductor together,
and then try to send a small electrical current through the p-type layer.
Not much current flows. The p-type layer is, after all, only a semiconductor.
But if you attach an electrode to the n-type layer and charge it up with even a small voltage,
some of the charge from the n-type layer, which has excess electrons, will spill into the p-type layer.
This spillage will dramatically increase the current flow through the p-type semiconductor.
What we've just done is made a very sensitive switch.
We can significantly increase the conductivity of the p-type layer by adding a small extra charge to the n-type layer,
essentially turning the p-type conductivity on and off by placing a small charge on the n-type layer.
This type of construction and the verification that it would act like a switch
was first made by physicist John Bardeen, William Shockley, and Walter Brattain in 1947 and 48 at Bell Laboratories.
It was called the transfer resistor, shortened to transistor by the team,
who went on to win the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on semiconductors.
The transistor, with its layers of semiconductors, ended up having a huge impact on the development of electronics all over the world.
In a transistor like this, the incoming electrode attached to the p-type layer is called the emitter,
while the outgoing electrode is called the collector.
This type of transistor is more specifically called a bipolar transistor,
because it relies on both n-type and p-type semiconductors.
Another type of transistor is called the field effect transistor.
In this case, there are two sections of n-type semiconductor mounted in a block of p-type material.
Between the two sections is an electrode called the gate that can be charged up just a little bit.
The current that passes between the two n-type sections depends on the distance between them as well as the charge on the gate.
Once again, the current is very sensitive to the charge on the gate,
allowing for a very small voltage on the gate to have a large impact on the current passing through the transistor.
Transistors eventually replaced vacuum tubes in applications, but why?
Three major reasons.
First, they're smaller, much, much smaller.
I'll return to this point in a few minutes.
But this means the ability to build electronics much smaller than before,
what once took up an entire room, can now fit in your lap or even your hand.
Second, they use much less electricity than vacuum tubes, which means less excess heat generated.
Many devices could now be powered by a single small battery instead of a small power plant.
Finally, transistors are what we call solid state.
There's no vacuum to worry about, no glass tubes to break, no moving parts.
Because of this, they're rugged and longer lasting than vacuum tubes.
Overall, they're not only a preferable technology, but their invention changed the entire landscape for electronic devices.
Transistors are the basis of modern computing, and this is why.
At their basic level, computers are binary.
They process zero and one, up and down, on or off.
With transistors, a small amount of charge applied to a gate can make the difference between conducting something or not at all.
These two conditions, conducting something or nothing at all, can be electrically interpreted as on or off,
allowing the transistor to act in a binary fashion.
Computer engineers take advantage of this to construct computer processors which control the entire computer function.
Thus, all of those advantages of transistors, low power, low waste heat, ruggedness, now apply to modern computers.
There's one other advantage. The smaller the transistor, the faster they react, so the faster the computer works.
All of these advantages have had significant impacts on our daily lives.
Let me say a few words about transistor sizes.
The first transistor embedded in 1947 was a few inches on the side.
However, as transistors found more uses in electronics, they got smaller and smaller.
While some are still a decent size, others have gotten so small that they're not even visible to the naked eye.
Transistors at the tiniest scale aren't made mechanically.
They're actually made photographically in a process I'll describe shortly.
Transistors this small aren't made individually and then wired together.
Instead, entire circuits made of transistors, wires, and other components are made simultaneously.
Such a construction is called an integrated circuit.
In 1971, transistors were only 10 micrometers in size.
That's only one 25 thousandths of an inch.
By 1985, it was one tenth that size.
As transistors got smaller and smaller, integrated circuits got faster and more powerful.
In 2007, a transistor could be as small as 45 nanometers, or one six hundred thousandths of an inch.
And by 2011, they were half that size at 22 nanometers.
To give you an idea of how small this is, a line of 260 silicon atoms is about 22 nanometers long, and they're getting smaller still.
In 1965, the co-founder of Intel, Gordon Moore, put forth the idea that transistors will continue to get smaller,
and even stated that the number of transistors in an integrated circuit would double every two years.
This statement was remarkably prescient, and is sometimes called Moore's Law.
As our technology has gotten better and better, we've been able to put more and more transistors into an integrated circuit,
with corresponding increase in speed and efficiency.
But it won't. It can't go on forever. After all, what's the minimum number of atoms you need to make a transistor?
Some electronics experts suggest that we're already near the limit, and that increases in transistor density and speed are already slowing.
Other experts think we still have two or three decades of improvement left,
while even others suggest that transistor density will continue to increase as new ways to engineer integrated circuits are developed.
Making integrated circuits is a very delicate process.
Understand that the amount of intentional impurities in the semiconductor, the dopants,
must be rigorously controlled in order to get just the right level of conductivity.
In order to do that, you have to start with very ultra-absolutely pure silicon.
One way to do this is to get a very pure silicon compound, like SiH4, SiCl4, or SiHCl3,
and decompose it to make pure elemental silicon.
How pure? 99.9999999%, or 9-9's worth of purity.
Then, this very pure silicon is melted in a quartz crucible at 2600 degrees Fahrenheit,
and the exact quantity of dopant is added to the liquid silicon.
Then, a seed crystal of silicon is inserted into the molten solution and slowly removed while constantly rotating.
Now, by slowly removed, I mean a few millimeters per hour.
Silicon atoms slowly start depositing on the seed crystal, making a larger crystal.
Once the diameter of the crystal is large enough, typically 200 or 300 millimeters, about 10 inches, in diameter,
the removal is sped up a bit and a long cylinder of perfectly crystalline dope silicon is drawn out.
This cylinder is called the bull. Bulls can be several meters long and weigh several hundred pounds.
The bull is then sliced using diamond saws into wafers that are about one millimeter thick.
After they are cleaned and washed, a process called photolithography is used to build the circuits components.
Photolithography involves covering the silicon wafer with a thin layer of light-sensitive chemical called a photoresist.
Then, the wafer is exposed to a bright light that projects the proper pattern on the photoresist.
This bright light, typically from a laser, chemically alters the photoresist where the light shines,
and where there's a shadow in the pattern, the photoresist doesn't change.
After exposure, the wafer is developed, much like an old-style photograph has developed,
with either the exposed photoresist removed chemically, or the unexposed photoresist removed chemically, depending on the design of the circuit.
Then the wafer can be mechanically etched with a plasma, removing a little bit of the wafer where the photoresist is absent.
A second development with other chemicals removes the remaining photoresist,
and what remains is a pattern in the wafer that can act as parts of transistors, wires, or other components.
Then, thin layers of other materials like aluminum can be sprayed on,
or the wafer can be heated in oxygen to make a thin silicon oxide.
The photolithography process is repeated, building layers upon layers until the entire integrated circuit is complete.
Depending on the application, a given wafer can be made into as few as one, or as many as several hundred individual integrated circuits,
when ultimately containing billions of transistors all built from semiconductors.
As you might expect with transistors so small, not all of them work perfectly,
and after testing, as much as one-third of the integrated circuits are discarded and recycled because of failure to perform.
Silicon is by far the most common basis for a semiconductor, but not the only one.
In fact, one of the first semiconductors studied was copper oxide,
which is ironic given that some modern high-temperature superconductors are based on copper oxides.
Another common basis for semiconductors in modern use is germanium,
which the element underneath silicon in the periodic table.
And speaking of the periodic table, one other tactic to getting a semiconductor
is to make a compound of one element that has one less electron than silicon,
plus one element that has one more electron than silicon.
And it works. Compounds like gallium arsenide and gallium nitride are used for semiconductors,
and in fact represent the primary industrial use of the element gallium.
And if silicon and germanium are natural semiconductors, what about mixtures, alloys of these elements?
In fact, a mixture of the elements silicon and carbon called silicon carbide is used as a semiconductor.
And while I'm talking about semiconductors and their uses in transistors,
you should know that semiconductors are used for purposes other than integrated circuits.
Perhaps the most important non-transistor use of semiconductors is the light-emitting diode, or LED.
When certain n-type and p-type semiconductors are joined and a voltage applied,
the electrons in the n-type layer combine with the holes in the p-type layer
and give off energy in the form of light.
The exact wavelength of light emitted depends on the materials used in the semiconductor layers.
These LEDs have the same advantages as light sources as transistors have over vacuum tubes,
much smaller, much less energy use, much less waste heat generated, much, much cheaper, and much more rugged.
As production increased since the late 1960s and through the 1970s,
LEDs found more and more applications until today, LEDs are being marketed as replacements for incandescent and fluorescent light bulbs.
While their upfront costs are still rather high, because of their long lives and low energy usage,
they're less costly to operate over the lifetime of the light, which for LEDs could be decades.
I mentioned that the wavelength of the light emitted depends on the materials used.
Early LEDs gave off low energy infrared light, and these LEDs are still used today in remote controls for televisions and cable boxes.
The earliest visible LEDs were in the red portion of the visible light spectrum.
This explains why classic LED displays were red, it's the lowest energy of visible light.
As technology improved, the colors of LEDs edged into the higher energy parts of the visible spectrum.
It was only in the mid-1990s that the first effective blue LED was constructed out of indium-galium nitride semiconductors.
To give you an idea of how important this was, the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics
was awarded to three researchers who helped develop the blue LED.
More recently, a white LED was finally developed, but you can say that its inventors kind of cheated.
It's not really a white LED.
See, white light is a combination of all colors of the rainbow.
What we see as a white LED is usually a combination of yellow and blue emissions that appears to be white.
Another type of so-called white LED is actually giving off ultraviolet light that's causing a compound called a phosphor to glow white,
which is the same mechanism used in fluorescent light bulbs.
Of course, if you engineer your light source properly, you get light amplification by simulated emission of radiation, a laser.
Light-emitting diodes can be fashioned into lasers, which are called diode lasers.
Diode lasers are the most common form of laser, in part because they have all the advantages of a solid-state semiconductor device.
How common?
In 2004 alone, over 700 million laser diodes were incorporated into a variety of electronic devices.
They're used in fiber-optics communications in the World Wide Web, in rangefinders, in computer mice, in laser pointers, in copy and fax machines.
They're used in scanners to scan the ever-present barcodes that are showing up everywhere, not just on consumer products.
And they're what's used to read CDs, DVDs, and Blu-ray discs.
The blue in Blu-ray comes from the fact that a violent, not really blue, laser is used to read data from the disc.
They're even used in laser surgery and dentistry, where their small size makes positioning them in and around the body very easy.
It's probably pretty safe to say that the Internet has been one of the most profound influences on our society in a generation.
With the connection of fast computers into a network that is literally worldwide, the ability to gather, transfer, and use information is unparalleled in history.
But let's be clear, it wouldn't have happened without semiconductors.
They make up the microchips that serve as the brains of each computer.
They give off the laser light into fiber-optics that allow one computer brain to talk to another, and if you have an LED monitor, they even make up the screen you use to look at your results.
And there's a certain irony here.
Semiconductors aren't very good conductors, and they aren't very good insulators either.
But because of their mediocre electrical properties, they've proven indispensable into changing our world into a very electronic society.
Thank you.
