Certain prepared foods that we eat, like bread and cereal, are fortified with iron.
Iron deficiency is a very common problem around the world, especially so because iron is necessary
to form proper red blood cells.
Notice how that food is fortified, with very tiny particles, or filings, of actual iron
metal.
That's right, in some foods you're eating iron metal, but the filings are so tiny you
don't even notice them when you chew, you're more likely to notice a piece of shell in
your scrambled egg.
Iron and food is called a mineral, and like vitamins, minerals are an essential part of
a healthy diet.
Vitaminins and minerals, do you take a pill for them?
Many people do, because they have either real or perceived deficiencies in their diets.
Most people who eat a balanced diet don't need vitamin or mineral supplements.
Exactly what are they though?
Well vitamins are substances that your body needs in tiny amounts for its chemical reactions
to go properly.
Minerals are substances that our body needs to build structural parts like bone and muscle,
or to provide ourselves with something called electrolytes.
But do you know that there's a chemical difference between vitamins and minerals?
See, there are several different major types of compounds in the world around us.
It turns out that vitamins are one type, and minerals are another type.
But before we can explain these two types of compounds, we have to remind ourselves
of how atoms are put together to make other materials.
Recall that electrons are organized into shells and subshells around atoms.
The energy of the electrons depend largely on the shell number, and somewhat on the
type of subshell.
The higher the shell number, the higher the energy of the electron.
At this point though, I should probably explain what I mean by the higher the energy.
Electrons are negatively charged, while atomic nuclei contain the protons that are positively
charged.
Positive and negative charges attract each other, and the conventions of physics state
that attractions cause the energy of a system to go down, that is, get more stable.
What scientists typically do is consider the zero point for energy, at that point where
the electron and the nucleus are very far away.
As the electron approaches the nucleus and takes its place in a subshell, its energy
goes down, that is, it gets negative.
What's this?
Negative energy?
Well, it's not energy that's negative, it's the change in energy when electrons join
the atom that's negative.
When an electron is in the 1s subshell, it's in the lowest energy, that is, the most negative
energy with respect to being apart from the nucleus.
When electrons occupy higher numbered shells and subshells, their energy is higher, which
is to say, less negative.
The higher the energy of an electron is, the easier it is to remove it, which is what we
know about electrons in shells and subshells.
And that'll be important in a few minutes when I start talking about compounds.
But it's important to understand that lower energy and higher energy actually means more
negative energy changes and less negative energy changes.
Although the exact energy of an electron depends on both the shell number and subshell type,
the most influence on the energy of an electron is the shell number.
Remember that the highest numbered shell of electrons in an electron configuration is
called the valence shell of electrons.
Electrons in the valence shell are easiest to move around among atoms because they need
the least energy to move, while electrons closer to the atomic nucleus require more
energy to move around.
This means that when atoms interact with each other, the interactions occur through the
valence electrons, leading to the idea that virtually all chemistry is caused by valence
electrons.
See the impact that energy is having on chemistry?
A compound is a chemical combination of two or more elements to make a form of matter
that has its own chemical and physical properties.
For example, the elements sodium and chlorine can combine to make the compound sodium chloride,
which has completely different properties from the elements it came from.
Now there are two major ways that elements interact to make compounds.
They can either transfer valence electrons or they can share valence electrons.
First we'll talk about transferring valence electrons.
When electrons are transferred, charged atoms called ions are formed, so the resulting compounds
that are formed are called ionic compounds.
During some chemical reactions, atoms can either lose or gain electrons.
When an atom loses one or more electrons, it loses negatively charged particles, and
so becomes positively charged.
A positively charged ion is called a cation.
When an atom gains one or more electrons, it becomes negatively charged, and is called
an anion.
Electrons typically lose or gain a characteristic number of electrons, and thus take on a characteristic
charge.
But how do we know how many electrons an atom gains or loses?
It helps to look at the original electron configuration of the neutral atom.
Take sodium, for example.
Sodium atoms have 11 electrons, 2 in the 1s sub-shell, 2 in the 2s sub-shell, 6 in the
2p sub-shell, and the final 1 in the 3s sub-shell.
Overall then, the electron configuration of sodium is written as 1s2, 2s2, 2p6, 3s1.
When sodium loses one electron in a chemical reaction, it loses the single 3s electron
in its valence shell.
When it does, it takes on a net positive charge, and we give it the symbol Na+, to represent
this cation.
When we lose that single 3s electron, what's left over is the remaining electron configuration
1s2, 2s2, 2p6.
Now, can sodium lose another electron?
Yes, technically.
If there's enough energy available.
See, it always takes energy to remove an electron from an atom.
The problem is, now we're going to a lower numbered shell, and when we go to a different
shell, the energy change gets much larger.
In the case of sodium, it takes 9 times as much energy to remove a second electron as
it does the first.
This amount of energy isn't usually available during the course of a chemical reaction,
so sodium loses one, and only one, electron.
The sodium cation has a characteristic charge of plus one.
Now, notice that the sodium atom starts with a single valence electron in the 3s shell,
and loses only that electron to make an ion with a plus one charge.
Because elements in the same column of the periodic table have the same valence electron
shell configuration, can you figure out what charge the elements lithium, potassium, rubidium
and cesium take?
If you thought plus one, you're correct.
They too lose only their original valence electron to make cations with a plus one charge.
All of the elements in that first column of the periodic table make plus one charged
cations when they lose a single electron.
Losing any more electrons is just energetically too expensive.
What about the elements in the second column of the periodic table?
Well, they start out as neutral atoms with two valence electrons in the s sub shell.
The first electron comes off easily, just like in the sodium atom.
It takes about twice as much energy to remove the second electron, and now we've completely
removed the original valence shell of electrons.
The third electron comes from the next shell lower, and it takes about eight times as much
energy to remove this third electron as it did to remove the first, and that's too expensive
in energy.
So easy removal of electrons stops here, and because those atoms have lost two electrons,
the resulting cation has a two plus charge.
Elements in the second column of the periodic table typically form cations with a plus two
charge.
We also have some cations that have plus three charges, but not many common ions with charges
higher than that.
Just because even if you have enough valence electrons, you're still removing the electrons
from a cation that is getting more and more positively charged.
The attraction of the cations positive charge in the electron eventually makes taking additional
electrons from the atom too energy expensive, no matter how many valence electrons the atom
has.
We do know of a few plus four cations, but only a few.
Mostly we see cations with plus one, plus two, and plus three charges.
Well, what about gaining electrons?
Let's consider the fluorine atom.
Fluorine has nine electrons, two in the 1s sub-shell, two in the 2s sub-shell, and five
in the 2p sub-shell.
This electron configuration is 1s2, 2s2, 2p5.
The fluorine atom can accept one additional electron into its 2p sub-shell, giving the
atom six p-electrons and now making the 2p sub-shell completely full.
With an extra electron, the fluorine atom takes on an overall negative charge, which
we represent as f minus.
Can we give the fluorine anion a second electron?
Well, technically we can, but now that the 2p sub-shell is filled, the second electron
has to go into the 3s sub-shell, which is much higher in energy than the number two
shell.
Actually, it's too high in energy for the fluorine atom to accept under normal chemical
conditions, so it doesn't.
The fluorine atom stops at accepting one extra electron, taking on a minus one charge after
having completely filled its valence shell.
Fluorine atoms take on a characteristic minus one charge.
Again, consider all the elements in that column of the periodic table.
They all start out with five p-electrons in their valence shell, can accept another, but
then the second electron, if there is to be one, always goes into a higher shell, and
that takes too much energy.
Fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, all of them make anions with a minus one charge.
Go one more column to the left to the column of elements with oxygen, sulfur, and selenium.
These elements have valence shell electron configurations that have four p-electrons,
and by adding two more, we completely fill the p-sub shell.
Atoms of these elements can take on a two minus charge before energy considerations come
in.
Notice a trend here, a trend that the periodic table helps us understand.
The first column of elements makes ions with a plus one charge.
The second column makes ions of a plus two charge.
The third column, well, you get the idea.
On the other side of the periodic table, the next to last column of elements makes ions
having a minus one charge, the second to last column makes ions having a minus two charge,
and so on.
Again, there aren't many anions with charge higher than three minus, but there are a few
with a three minus charge.
I'd be remiss if I didn't mention the last column of elements in the periodic table,
the noble gases.
All of the noble gases have S and P subshells completely filled with electrons, with the
next electron going into the next shell.
What we say is that the noble gases have a completely filled valence shell.
Completely filled valence shells require a lot of energy to either remove or add an electron,
so these elements typically don't form ions easily.
That's one reason they're called noble.
They demonstrate a sort of chemical snobbery that keeps them from associating with other
less noble elements.
In the case of helium, it too has a complete valence shell, but the valence shell for helium
has only one subshell, the S subshell, which holds only a maximum of two electrons.
So helium has a complete subshell as well, and that's hard to break open too.
Finally, you may notice a tendency towards stable ions having complete valence shells.
Because a complete valence shell has two S electrons and six P electrons, or a total
of eight electrons, this tendency is called the octet rule.
Although there are common exceptions to the octet rule, the concept is a nice rule of thumb
for helping us figure out what ionic charges can form.
Public physics says that opposite charges attract.
Well, when some atoms lose electrons and other atoms gain electrons, ions of positive and
negative charges are formed.
These oppositely charged ions attract each other, and when they do so, they make an ionic
compound.
That's all an ionic compound is, a combination of positively and negatively charged ions.
Carbon table salt is an example of an ionic compound made up of positive sodium cations
and negative chlorine anions, giving table salt its chemical name of sodium chloride.
Calcium oxide is an ionic combination of calcium cations and oxygen anions that also
goes by the name lime, something we use to make concrete.
Ionic compounds are typically very hard and brittle, they usually have very high melting
points and many of them dissolve in water.
One last thing about ionic compounds, the total positive charge is equal to the total
negative charge, so that overall, any sample of an ionic compound is electrically neutral.
Yes, this sample is composed of positive and negative ions, but overall, their charges cancel
out.
Another way to say this is to note that the total number of electrons lost to make cations
is exactly equal to the total number of electrons gained to make anions.
Because of these ideas, it may be difficult for people to realize that one major class
of chemical compounds is actually composed of charged particles.
In fact, it wasn't until the 1880s that scientists realized that certain classes of electrically
neutral matter were composed of oppositely charged atoms.
One interesting thing is that it's not proper to talk about molecules of ionic compounds.
See, ionic compounds exist as ions that are held together by electrostatic attraction.
In a solid state, the ions alternate.
First positive ion, then negative ion, then positive ion again, then negative ion, and
so forth.
This goes on in all three dimensions, making something called a crystal.
So the ionic compound exists as a certain ratio of cations and anions that can be listed
to make a chemical formula, like NaCl for sodium chloride or MgO for magnesium oxide.
But there are no discrete NaCl or MgO molecules.
They're just alternating positive and negative ions.
Sometimes we use the term formula unit for ionic compounds instead of the word molecule.
Let's get back to the octet rule, which says that atoms tend to want eight electrons in
their valence shell.
Of course, atoms don't want electrons.
I'm personifying atoms a little bit.
It's really all about trends in energy.
When atoms have eight electrons in their valence shell, changing that number of electrons requires
so much energy that it doesn't normally happen in everyday chemical reactions.
For ionic compounds, we see that one way for an atom to get eight valence electrons is
to either lose a few to become a cation, or gain a few to become an anion.
There's another way for atoms to have a filled valence shell and satisfy the octet rule,
by sharing electrons.
When atoms share electrons, they stick together, making a chemical bond.
This type of chemical bond is called a covalent bond, and compounds formed with covalent bonds
are the second major type of chemical substance we recognize.
To illustrate a covalent bond, let's look at a fluorine atom.
It has seven valence electrons in its electron configuration.
We can represent these electrons using dots, two on each side, top, bottom, left, right,
except that one side has only one dot.
We can also imagine a second fluorine atom also having seven dots for its seven valence
electrons.
Suppose we bring the two one dot sides of the atoms together, and have both atoms sharing
these unpaired electrons.
When we do that, we see that the first fluorine atom now has eight valence electrons around
it, while the second fluorine atom also has eight valence electrons around it.
The two atoms are sharing a pair of electrons.
In a shared pair of electrons, it was what bonds the two atoms together, and we say that
the fluorine atoms make a covalently bonded fluorine molecule.
By the way, we use molecular formulas to represent the composition of the molecule, and in this
case, the molecular formula would be F2.
This is actually how the element fluorine exists naturally, as a two-atom molecule with both
atoms satisfying the octet rule.
Sometimes, rather than drawing all the dots for the electrons, we simply use a dash to
represent the covalent bond.
Notice that I'm using the word molecule now.
That's because, unlike ionic compounds that I talked about earlier, in covalently bonded
compounds individual molecules do exist, so it's proper to use the word molecule in
molecular now.
This is another big difference between ionic and covalent compounds.
Not only are the ways of making octets different, but how the very compound exists is different.
Ionic compounds exist as oppositely charged ions making a three-dimensional crystal, while
covalent compounds exist as discrete molecules.
Let's get back to fluorine.
Because all of the elements in fluorine's column have the same electron configuration,
they can all form two atom, or diatomic, molecules in their natural state.
They all share a single pair of electrons in order to complete the octet.
This single pair of electrons is also called a single covalent bond.
For some circumstances, more than one pair of electrons can be shared.
Take the oxygen atom, for example.
It has six valence electrons in its outermost shell.
If we take a second oxygen atom and allow the two atoms to share two pairs of electrons,
a total of four electrons, then we could show that each atom now has eight electrons around
it, satisfying the octet rule.
Having two pairs of electrons leads to what we call a double covalent bond, or just double
bond for short.
In other circumstances, three pairs of electrons can be shared.
We see this with nitrogen atoms.
Each nitrogen atom has five valence electrons.
If two nitrogen atoms share six electrons, we could then count eight valence electrons
around each nitrogen atom, satisfying the octet rule.
The sharing of three electron pairs, or a total of six electrons, makes a triple bond.
Double and triple bonds can also be represented by dashes, using two or three of them stacked
on top of each other.
We typically don't see anything more than a triple bond in common covalent compounds.
Hydrogen can form diatomic molecules as well, but it's a little different because the hydrogen
atom only has a 1s orbital, which can only hold two electrons.
In the case of hydrogen, when it has two electrons, its valence shell is full.
That could happen when two hydrogen atoms get together and share each of their single
electrons to make a single covalent bond.
Different bonds can exist between different atoms as well.
Indeed, this is where the vast number of covalent compounds comes from.
Take an oxygen atom, for example.
Again, it has six valence electrons and needs to share two more to have an octet.
Suppose it shares one electron each from two different hydrogen atoms.
Then the oxygen atom has eight electrons around it, while each hydrogen atom has two electrons
around it.
We've just constructed a stable covalent molecule of water, H2O.
We can make even larger molecules.
If for instance we start with a nitrogen atom with five valence electrons and combine it
with three hydrogen atoms, we can satisfy all the valence shells and get a molecule of
ammonia, NH3.
Or we can combine a carbon atom with four hydrogen atoms and get CH4, which is methane,
the principal component of natural gas.
Another variation, we needn't limit ourselves to single covalent bonds.
Many covalent compounds have double or triple covalent bonds when necessary to satisfy the
octet rule.
One example is the formaldehyde molecule, whose molecular formula is CH2O.
The only way to satisfy the octets of carbon and oxygen is to have a double bond between
these two atoms.
Another example is carbon dioxide, a gas that's an important part of our atmosphere.
The only way to satisfy the octet rule in all the atoms is to assume that the central
carbon atom makes two double bonds, one to each oxygen on either side of it.
Because the octet rule is a guiding principle in making covalent bonds, we find that certain
atoms make a certain characteristic number of bonds, much like atoms make only certain
charges when they form ions.
Again, the periodic table helps us.
Most of the elements that make covalent bonds are in the right section of the periodic table.
Moving from the rightmost column, the noble gases, we note that they usually make zero
covalent bonds.
They usually don't make covalent compounds.
In some unusual circumstances they do, but most of the time they don't, so we count them
as making zero covalent bonds.
Moving over one column to the left, the halogens column, we usually find these elements making
a single covalent bond.
Moving over one more column to the one with oxygen on the top, we see these atoms generally
making two covalent bonds, then three bonds for the next column, and then finally four
covalent bonds for the column of elements starting with carbon.
Now, there are exceptions to these rules, but the periodic trends in the number of covalent
bonds preferred is a useful rule of thumb in figuring out the covalent bonds in a molecule.
Using this rule of thumb, it's possible to make large and complicated covalent molecules,
especially when using carbon atoms as a backbone.
Carbon is unique among elements by making good, strong covalent bonds with not just other
carbon atoms, but with atoms of other elements too.
This allows us to make large, complicated, three-dimensional covalent molecules like
cholesterol, for example.
Cholesterol is a covalent molecule whose formula is C27H460 for a total of 74 atoms all bonded
together by covalent bonds.
In fact, assuming I counted right, there are 74 single bonds and one double bond in a single
molecule of cholesterol.
And cholesterol is a relatively simple molecule as molecules go.
The DNA molecules in our cells, responsible for the genetic code of all living organisms
on this planet, are built using covalent bonds.
Most of the proteins, carbohydrates, and fats in our bodies are covalent compounds as well.
Finally, you should be aware that there are compounds that are both covalent and ionic
in character.
There are some ions that are themselves stable combinations of covalently bonded atoms, except
that in these cases, the covalently bonded combinations have a net overall positive or
negative charge.
These so-called polyatomic ions can make ionic compounds like any other ion, forming
substances that have both ionic and covalent bonds.
One example of this is an ionic compound called sodium bicarbonate, which is composed
of sodium cations and bicarbonate anions.
But the bicarbonate anions are themselves a covalently bonded combination of hydrogen,
a carbon, and three oxygen atoms with a minus one charge.
It's likely that you're already familiar with sodium bicarbonate, but maybe by another
name.
It's baking soda, usually found right in your kitchen.
So let's go back to our vitamins and minerals question from the beginning of my lecture.
I asked, what's the difference between them from a chemical bonding perspective?
Actually, it's quite simple.
Virtually all the vitamins we ingest are covalent compounds, while virtually all the minerals
we take in are ionic compounds.
There are exceptions, of course.
Some of the vitamins may exist as ionic-covalent combinations of chemical bonds, like the b
vitamin thiamine hydrochloride.
But let's get back to the iron metal, the iron filings that are in our food.
Do our bodies really use iron metal?
Well, not in that form.
We actually use it in its ionic form.
But the iron metal chemically reacts with acid in the stomach, converting the iron to
an ionic form so our bodies can absorb it.
Other fortified foods have iron already in its ionic form.
Thank you.
