In the movie The Graduate, recent college graduate Benjamin Braddock, played by Dustin
Hoffman, was receiving some impromptu advice from a party goer, Plastics.
Just that one word, as if it would make the life of the new college graduate.
Well, the well-intentioned Mr. McGuire wasn't far off.
Plastics have certainly become a major part of our lives.
It's been estimated that over 30% of all chemists in the United States work for the
polymer industry, which generates most of the plastic in our lives.
It's the largest concentration of chemists in any industry in the country.
Plastics represent an almost $400 billion industry a year in the United States alone.
Many people think polymers and plastics are the same thing, but they're not always interchangeable.
A plastic is any material that is moldable.
Indeed, when used as an adjective, that's what the word means, moldable.
Chewing gum, for example, is plastic, but we don't always think of it as A plastic.
Still, plastic and polymer have come to largely mean the same thing.
As I suggested earlier, there's a lot of plastic in our society.
A lot of it gets thrown away, but there's a problem with that.
Unlike a lot of household waste, most plastic doesn't decompose very easily.
In nature, most decomposition is done by microorganisms, and there are very few natural organisms
that evolved to digest plastic.
So plastic trash tends to accumulate, breaking down over periods of thousands of years or
more compared to less than a year for composted yard waste.
But there's an option, recycling.
We can take at least some of the plastic and recycle it into a second useful item, or
a third, or a fourth.
And recycling is not limited to plastic.
We can recycle metals, concrete, rubber, and other materials.
Recycling isn't new.
A few seconds ago I mentioned composting.
That's recycling of a sort.
When you let grass clippings, leaves, kitchen waste, even certain animal manure decompose
and sterilize, eventually to be added back to your garden.
It's a way of returning vital nutrients back to the soil.
Humanity has been composting for more than 2,000 years.
But the application to materials like plastic and concrete is rather new.
Each type of material is recycled in different ways, involving different reasons and principles
of science.
So let's talk about how our society recycles materials.
Some of what we recycle may surprise you.
Let's start with plastic.
There are two types of plastic, thermoplastics and thermoset plastics.
Thermoplastics can be melted and reshaped without decomposing them, so they can be collected,
sorted, and sent to factories to be remade into different objects.
Thermoplastics do tend to degrade a bit with each reuse, so we need to be selective in
how a thermoplastic is used a second or third time.
An entire recycling industry is grown around recycling plastics, many of them community-based.
The single biggest obstacle to recycling thermoplastic is that it's labor-intensive, even though
there are machines that can help with the job.
The different plastics must be separated into different types before they can be recycled
properly, and the human touch is needed for that.
How do we know what thermoplastic an object is, and if it's recyclable?
Well, in 1988, the Society of the Plastics Industry developed a symbol and number system
to indicate which of the seven common thermoplastics an object is.
You've probably seen the familiar triangle with arrows around it, indicating that a plastic
object is recyclable.
Inside the triangle is a number, and this number is specific to the particular plastic.
Sometimes there are also a few letters that tell you what type of plastic the symbols
refer to.
Number one stands for polyethylene terephthalate, also known as PET, or PETE.
It's the plastic used to make soda and water bottles.
It's also used in certain clothing, furniture, and carpeting.
In the United States alone, almost 25 billion, that's billion, plastic bottles are used every
year, and only about one in six of them are recycled.
But when they're recycled, they're separated by color, washed thoroughly, and then cut
up into smaller pieces called flakes.
These flakes are then used to make new products, like carpets and even polyester fabric.
All PET that is intended for reuse as food or soda containers needs to undergo an additional
washing step, because PET tends to absorb a little bit of liquid over time.
In 2011, over seven and a half million tons of PET were recycled for reuse.
Number two stands for high-density polyethylene, abbreviated HDPE.
It's used to make milk jugs, which are its most common application.
It gets recycled into plastic lumber and similar products, where its resistance to wear is
a crucial property.
Number three stands for polyvinyl chloride, or PVC.
Pure PVC is fairly rigid.
Alternatively, additives called plasticizers can be added to make it more pliable.
When it's recycled, it's chipped into small pieces, purified when possible, and then remelted
into new parts.
Number four plastic is low-density polyethylene.
Its most common use is the plastic bag, seen in grocery stores and supermarkets, in the
produce aisle and in checkout lanes.
It's also used for containers where some flexibility is needed, like squeeze bottles
and snap-on lids for containers.
It's not often recycled, but because of an increased social awareness of single-use plastic
bags from stores, many of these same stores are collecting them for recycling.
Number five is polypropylene, abbreviated PP.
Polypropylene is pretty sturdy, so it's used to make plastic furniture and caps for bottles
and jars.
Many laboratory and medical tools can be made with it because it can be sterilized in an
autoclave without melting or decomposing.
Similarly, eating utensils can be made from it because it won't melt in the microwave
or dishwasher.
But it does melt at higher temperatures, like about 320 or 340 degrees Fahrenheit, so it
can be recycled and remelted into new objects.
Number six is polystyrene, which also goes by the symbol P.S.
Polystyrene is used to make food containers, CD and DVD cases, plastic lab equipment and
disposable razors.
It's also very easy to make into a foam that has thermal insulating and shock-absorbing
properties.
Because of that, polystyrene foams are used to make cups for hot and cold liquids and
packaging materials for shipping fragile objects.
You've probably heard of Styrofoam, that's one major brand of foamed polystyrene.
When recycled, polystyrene is remelted and used for insulation, plastic coat hangers,
toys and other small plastic items.
Finally there's number seven.
Number seven is for other plastics not covered by the first six categories.
It includes acrylics, nylon, polycarbonates, artificial rubbers and fiberglass.
Because it covers a wide range of possible plastics, typically anything with a number
seven isn't recycled, but either thrown out or incinerated.
Why recycle plastics?
Well, there's the obvious goal of reducing the waste stream that we create, but there
are two other major reasons.
The first is to reduce energy use.
In most cases recycling uses up to 50% less energy than making the new plastic from scratch
and because energy costs money, recycling plastic can be less expensive than making new material.
The second is related to that from scratch that I just mentioned.
Almost all plastics are products of crude oil, which is refined to produce the monomers
that are turned into plastics.
Estimates of how much crude oil remains vary, but the reality is that crude oil is a limited
resource and humanity will eventually run out of easy to obtain petroleum.
Recycling and reusing plastics is one way to diminish our dependence on crude oil as
well as saving energy and money.
At some point in the future, and grand it may not be soon, but the day will eventually
come, we will have to learn to live without petroleum as a source of raw materials and
recycling plastic is one option.
Although most people are aware of plastic recycling through curbside recycling services,
recycling also goes on at community collection centers and within individual industries.
Finally, let me mention the other type of plastic, thermoset plastics.
Thermoset plastics like polyurethane and epoxies are molded at high temperature and then cured
by a chemical reaction within the plastic itself.
They cannot be remelted without decomposition.
Recycling these is more challenging.
Most recycling of thermoset plastics involves shredding them into tiny pieces and using the
pieces as filler where needed.
There's a lot of current research into the development of recyclable thermoset plastics,
but currently none of them have a significant presence on the market.
As familiar as we are with plastic recycling, it's not the most recycled petroleum product.
That honor goes to asphalt concrete.
Although some asphalt occurs naturally like at the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles, most
of it comes from crude oil.
It's the last part of the petroleum.
The leftovers after all the other volatile components or fractions have been removed.
Technically, asphalt is the fraction that boils above 500 degrees Celsius, which is 930
degrees Fahrenheit.
At room temperature, asphalt is either solid or very, very thick.
It's composed of very large hydrocarbons of various sorts, depending on the source of
the petroleum.
Another name for asphalt is bitumen, and you may have heard the word pitch for a thick
tar-like substance.
That's asphalt.
It's used for waterproofing and for making shingles for roofing.
But its largest single use is to make asphalt concrete for road surfaces, where it's also
called pavement, blacktop, tarmac, or just simply asphalt, although this last term is
technically incorrect.
Asphalt concrete is a mixture of about 5% asphalt with 95% gravel, sand, and crustone.
Created to several hundred degrees, the asphalt coats the stones in a thick, gooey black layer,
which can be spread onto the ground like icing on a cake.
As it cools down, it hardens into a solid road, driveway, or airport runway.
Of the 2.6 million miles of paved roadways in the United States, it's estimated that
93% of them are covered with asphalt concrete.
However, these roads don't last forever.
Over time, they crack under the sun, get exposed to rain and snow and ice, and have tons of
cars and trucks running over them.
They get cracks, potholes, and generally start breaking apart.
These roads need to be repaired.
So the asphalt concrete is removed, and guess what?
Recycled, sometimes even on the spot.
The asphalt concrete can be scraped up, heated, sometimes mixed with additional new asphalt,
and relayed on the road.
Asphalt concrete recycling is so good that it's estimated that only 1% of asphalt ever
gets thrown away in landfills.
This makes it the most recycled material we use, and it isn't even plastic.
By the way, in case you're wondering, asphalt shingles from your rooftops don't get recycled.
Most shingles are actually composite materials of fiberglass or paper coated with asphalt,
and there's no good way to separate the asphalt from the other materials after they're manufactured.
There are some efforts underway to develop recycling procedures for asphalt shingles,
but older shingles may be contaminated with asbestos, which complicates any recycling process.
Right now, most asphalt shingles are disposed of in landfills.
But now let's get away from petroleum products and turn our focus to metals.
One of the most important metals in society is aluminum.
Although it's the third most common element in the Earth's crust, it virtually always
exists in chemical combination with other elements, especially oxygen and silicon.
If we want to use aluminum, the metal, we have to refine it from its ores.
The most common ore of aluminum is called bauxite, most of which is mined in Australia,
Brazil, India, and China.
Aluminum can't be smelted like iron can.
The chemical reactions that occur in smelting just don't work the same way for aluminum.
Because of this, historically aluminum was a very rare metal, and very costly.
In the early 1880s, aluminum was as expensive as silver, and so precious at the time that
the capstone of the Washington Monument is a hundred ounce pyramid of aluminum.
It was the largest piece of aluminum ever made to that point, and represented one-fifth
of the entire U.S. production of aluminum for that year.
It's ironic that these days, aluminum is almost as cheap as dirt.
In the late 1880s, American scientists Charles Martin Hall and French scientist Paul Hurot
independently invented a way to extract aluminum using electricity.
Electricity just started being produced in large quantities in the United States, so
it was a relatively inexpensive source of power.
Because of that, the production of aluminum was relatively cheap, and its price dropped
rapidly, less than one-sixtieth of its previous cost.
Combine that with aluminum's rather desirable chemical and physical properties, and aluminum
began to be used to make a variety of products.
Before I talk about those products, I should mention that Charles Hall started a company
to refine aluminum, originally called the Pittsburgh Reduction Company.
In 1907, it was renamed the Aluminum Company of America.
Today we know it as Alcoa, a Fortune 500 company still going strong.
So we use electricity to make aluminum.
The process is called electrolysis.
The thing is, though, that we use a lot of aluminum in our society, and making aluminum
from bauxite uses up about 5% of all the electricity this country produces, and it accounts for
almost half of the cost of the metal product.
We use aluminum for lots of things, cars, trucks, airplanes, trains, boats, windows,
doors, streetlight poles, electrical lines, heat sinks, pots, pans, baseball bats.
It's even used as a powder in paints and fireworks.
And cans.
Lots and lots of soda and beer cans.
In the United States alone, a little over 100 billion aluminum cans are used every year.
At half an ounce of aluminum per can, that comes out to just under 2 million tons of
aluminum metal used for cans every year.
And that's just for the United States, which accounts for about half of the aluminum can
usage in the entire world.
Production of aluminum cans accounts for about 7% of the total world production of aluminum,
taking up a lot of electricity.
And this is where recycling comes in.
Because aluminum is an element of pure metal, it's almost infinitely recyclable.
The same sample of aluminum can be used over and over again, being reformed and reused,
and never losing its mechanical and chemical properties.
In that regard, it's superior to plastics, which degrade slightly with each recycle.
And then there's the energy savings.
Recycling aluminum is rather easy.
Simply melt it, remove the small amount of stuff called dross that isn't aluminum, then
test the aluminum for the presence of other metals, then add any additional amounts of
metals to get the specific alloy you want.
If you need very pure aluminum again, you could use electrolysis again, but in most
cases, that's not necessary.
It may seem that melting a metal uses a lot of energy, but aluminum melts at about 1200
degrees Fahrenheit.
By contrast, iron melts at 2800 degrees Fahrenheit, so melting aluminum takes a lot less energy.
In fact, recycling aluminum by melting takes only one twentieth the energy as does refining
aluminum from bauxite.
Yet, despite this, in the U.S., only 31% of manufactured aluminum was recycled, while
other countries recycle more than 90% of their aluminum.
Other metals can be recycled, especially metals that have a lot of iron in them.
These are called ferrous metals, and they're used to make appliances, automobiles, steel
cans, and building materials like the I-beams used to construct skyscrapers.
Over 90% of the ferrous metals in these materials are recycled, and for the same reason as for
aluminum, it costs much less in terms of materials and in terms of energy, even if you do have
to heat it to about 3000 degrees to melt it.
Other metals like copper, lead, silver, and gold can be recycled, but there's little
of it happening because they're not as common in our lives as aluminum and steel.
However, there are recyclers that will accept any metal for recycling.
It shouldn't take much effort to find one in your own community.
Another commodity that's recycled is paper.
As much as our communications is based on electronics these days, it seems we'll never
get away from using paper.
Paper is great stuff, lightweight, inexpensive, plentiful, and rather strong.
When it's dry that is, get it wet and it can fall apart like mush.
In fact, that's a large part of the recycling operation.
Paper is a thin material of compressed cellulose fibers, usually obtained from wood pulp or
other plant fibers like cotton.
Paper to be recycled comes from many places, newspapers and magazines, home and office
waste, books, cardboard, egg cartons, and even discarded mail.
Initially, the paper to be recycled is separated into types like newsprint and cardboard.
Then, the paper is added to a huge vat of water and blended to break the paper up into
small pieces and eventually into a thick slurry of individual cellulose fibers.
This process is called pulping.
After pulping, the slurry is screened to remove non-cellulose material like staples
and paper clips, small pieces of plastic, or globs of adhesives from those sticky notes
that we all love.
But the slurry also contains tiny particles of ink that have to be removed in a step called
de-inking.
These ink particles are removed by washing or flotation, sometimes both.
Because the particles of ink are much smaller than the cellulose, by rinsing the slurry
with large amounts of water, much of the ink can be washed away.
Another method of de-inking, flotation, involves adding a detergent to the slurry and then
bubbling air through it.
A foam of these bubbles, called a froth, is formed at the top of the slurry and the particles
of ink adhere to the bubbles.
The froth is skimmed off, removing the ink.
This process can be repeated in stages to get the slurry cleaner and cleaner.
Once the proper level of cleanliness is achieved, the slurry is bleached with chlorine or oxygen
containing chemicals, washed one last time, then laid out and compressed and dried into
new sheets of paper.
A lot of recycled paper is used to make packaging products like egg cartons, produce containers,
and cardboard for boxes or other containers.
Because of the mechanical breakdown of the original scrap paper, the cellulose fibers
get broken each time they're recycled, so recycled paper doesn't have the strength
of paper made directly from wooden plant fibers.
Around the industrialized world, countries recycle 50 to 75 percent of paper, saving
an average of 17 trees per ton of paper recycled.
Paper recycling also reduces water consumption, energy use, and landfill space.
Many manufacturers boast of their level of environmentalism by actually labeling their
products with the amount of post-consumer recycled paper there is in their products.
The last material I'll talk about recycling is glass.
A major disadvantage of glass as a packaging material is that it's heavy.
In part because of that, it's more expensive to transport because of increased fuel costs.
Despite this, glass retains some of its consumer appeal, probably because of its transparency
and historical usage.
Glass is largely silica, which is a chemical, silicon dioxide, and is the main component
of sand.
The most common type of glass is called soda-lime glass because, in addition to silica, it has
soda, the common name for the compound sodium carbonate, and lime, the common name for calcium
oxide.
It also has small amounts of magnesium and aluminum oxides, too.
Making glass is relatively straightforward.
You put all the ingredients in a furnace and you melt them down.
But you need a hot furnace, about 3,000 degrees Fahrenheit, to melt everything.
After the mixture has the proper mix of ingredients and is melted down, it can be formed into
plate glass, bottles, or whatever other consumer product is needed.
Glass used for containers, like bottles, has a slightly different recipe than flat glass
because it needs to withstand the presence of water for long periods.
Recycling glass is very straightforward.
Simply melt it down and reform it into new recycled product.
Glass recycling is much like aluminum and steel recycling in that the recycled product
is just as strong as the original, so glass can also be recycled indefinitely.
The biggest problem with glass is that colored glass can't be uncolored, so recyclers need
to separate glass by color before remelting.
That makes it labor-intensive, just like the recycling of other materials, like plastic.
Typically, glass is separated into clear glass, green glass, and amber glass before remelting.
Now, it may seem that if you have to reheat glass back up to 3,000 degrees, you're not
saving much in the way of energy costs.
But you are, because you're saving yourself the need to mine and transport silica sand,
the mineral soda and lime, and any other minerals that are part of the glass recipe.
The second biggest problem with glass is that not all common forms of glass are recycled.
Typically, only glass containers are recycled.
Flat glass windows and light bulbs, even though they're also made of soda-lime glass, are
typically not recycled.
Neither are drinking glasses nor glass kitchenware like baking dishes.
Laboratory glassware is a special type of glass that contains boron oxide, which is why it's
called borosilicate glass.
Some specialty labware manufacturers may recycle it, but your normal neighborhood curbside
recycler doesn't accept it.
Red crystal glass contains a significant amount of lead oxide in it, and while it's eminently
safe to drink from, it's also not accepted in recycling.
Remelting glass isn't the only way to reuse glass.
It can be broken up into smaller pieces and used in place of gravel, saving the expense
of having to buy rocks.
In this form, the glass pieces can be used in concrete, asphalt, and other building materials,
in mortar to help cement bricks, and in composite countertops to give a sparkly effect.
It can also be ground very fine to be used as an abrasive for grinding softer materials.
In all instances, recycling saves on resources, energy, and cost.
The single biggest impediment to recycling is that it takes effort.
Frankly, it's easier to simply throw something out.
But in the long run, that's not good for our society and our environment.
Because let's face it, most of the materials I've talked about are made from natural resources
that are limited.
While we can continue to regrow trees to provide pulp for paper, the net deforestation of our
land around the world suggests that some societies value crops and husbandry other than trees.
Other raw materials, like sand and petroleum, are limited.
In fact, there will likely come a day when humanity has to recycle everything, because
there will be no new raw materials to make new products.
To some extent, we're already seeing that in crude oil production, and we know that
there are fewer and fewer acres of trees every day.
At some point, our society is going to be forced to recycle and reuse as much as it
can, because it will have no choice.
Perhaps because of that, now is the time to get into the habit.
Thank you.
