Isn't swimming fun? That is, if you know how to swim. You can cool off, get some low-impact
exercise, splash water around with your friends and family. Diving, too, could be fun. Very
artistic if performed the right way, and a great way to get into the water and cool down.
Unless, of course, you do a big belly flop. That hurts. Why is it that when you do a perfect
swan dive, it's the picture of grace, but a belly flop stings like the dickens? Because
you've just had the wrong kind of interaction with a surface.
We normally think of solids and liquids as having surfaces, but not gases. We can talk
about the surface of a gas, but that situation is trickier than talking about the surface
of the other two so-called condensed phases. But try telling that to the astronauts re-entering
the atmosphere in their spacecraft.
Basecraft returning from orbit generate a lot of heat as they re-enter the atmosphere,
so the astronauts are well aware that the Earth's atmosphere, a gas, has a surface.
Still, when we talk about surfaces, we're almost always referring to the surface of
a solid or a liquid.
Surfaces are all around us. Because of that, it's difficult to remember that some of them
show special properties. Although the surfaces of most solids are constant, indeed, that's
partly what defines a solid after all, surfaces of liquids are flexible, can be changed, they
move around. A lot of liquid surfaces are under the influence of gravity, which determines
their shape. But again, surfaces have some interesting properties that make them worth
talking about.
A surface is a discontinuity, or interface, between one phase of matter and another. As
I said before, almost all of the time when we're talking about surfaces, we're talking
about solid or liquid phases. We really don't talk about the surface of a gas. As it turns
out, surfaces can have some unusual properties.
Think of a glass of liquid water. The molecules of water are all interacting with each other,
right? If you're thinking of a molecule of water in the middle of the glass, then those
interactions are going on all around the molecule, top, bottom, left, right, this side, that
side.
But now, think of a water molecule that's at the surface. There are interactions left,
right, side, underneath, but not on the top, because there aren't any water molecules on
the top, because you're at the surface. Because of this, there is an imbalance of forces on
the molecules at the surface, leading to a sort of tension at the surface. In fact, that's
what it's called, surface tension. Generally speaking, the stronger the inner molecular
forces, the stronger the surface tension.
Surface tension can impact the bulk properties of the liquid, even though it's a property
of the surface. Because surface tension has units of energy per unit area, surface tension
is also referred to as surface energy. Remember, too, that objects tend to go to states of
minimum energy, so in some circumstances a liquid will try to minimize its surface area.
It turns out that a sphere is the shape that contains the most volume with the lowest surface
area, so if no other forces act on a liquid, it tends to form a sphere. Small drops of
water look like spheres, as do droplets of mercury. A large sample of water and zero
gravity, like in a space station, will also take on a spherical shape. However, anything
but the smallest droplets of water flatten out because of gravity.
Because surface tension is also known as surface energy, there are some energy considerations
about surfaces. It takes energy to increase the surface area of a surface, and as I already
mentioned, surfaces tend to decrease their surface area as much as possible. One way
to demonstrate this is to consider a circumstance where there are two parallel surfaces very
close together, that is, a film. One kind of film that is very easy to play with is
a soap film. A rectangular soap film tries to adopt a minimum area. In a rigid frame,
the soap film stays stretched out flat because any bend would increase its surface area and
its surface energy. If one part of the frame moves easily, then it will move to decrease
the surface energy by decreasing the surface area. I could demonstrate this very easily
by using a wire contraption that has a movable rod in the middle. If I dunk the frame into
soapy water and remove it, the frame has a soap film on either side of the divider. If
I pop the film on one side, the divider moves to decrease the size of the remaining side.
This is showing how the soap film wants to minimize its surface energy by minimizing
its area.
Films can also be made when two liquids don't dissolve in each other, but do wet each other
to some degree. When two liquids don't dissolve in each other, we call them immiscible. Water
and oil are examples of two liquids that are immiscible. I'm sure you've seen puddles
of water that have films of oil, usually waste motor oil on them. The oil makes a thin film
that looks all rainbow-like. Well, why does that happen?
Well, it turns out that this film of oil is so thin, it's about the thickness of a wave
of visible light. Each surface of the film is acting like a partial mirror reflecting
light. Because of its wave properties, the reflected light can experience constructive
and destructive interference, depending on the viewing angle, the exact thickness of
the film, and the wavelength of light. These conditions combine to give you a rainbow effect
when you look at the oil film.
Thin films can also be used for intentional purpose. When they are, they're called coatings.
One example is the thin coating of epoxy inside most food and beverage cans to keep the food
from reacting with the metal can. Paint is a coating used for protective and decorative
purposes, and the primers underneath them are coatings too.
Most mirrors are just pieces of glass with a thin coating of aluminum or silver on the
backside. Sometimes films are used intentionally for their optical properties, as with anti-reflection
and ultraviolet protecting coatings on sunglasses for better and safer vision.
But let's get back to soap films. Of course, most of us are familiar with soap films because
they make bubbles. Not just bubbles in your kitchen or your bathroom sink, but bubbles
that you blow with that little plastic wand. Individual bubbles are always spherical, right?
That's because, again, the sphere is the shape that has the lowest surface area, and
the surface tension, surface energy, encourages liquids to minimize their area.
What happens when two bubbles of similar size come together? You've probably seen it happen.
The connection between the two bubbles is flat. Again, this is a consequence of minimizing
surface energy. The flat surface between two bubbles is less area than the curved portion
of the two individual bubbles.
But what if two differently sized bubbles meet? Well, it turns out that the inside of
a bubble has a higher pressure than the outside. After all, that's how we make bubbles, right?
We blow extra air through the little hole in the wand, and that makes higher pressure that
forces the bubble to form.
Well, it turns out that the internal pressure is inversely related to the size of the bubble,
so a smaller bubble has a higher internal pressure. That means that when bubbles of different
sizes merge, the smaller one has a higher pressure and pushes into the larger one. That means
that the interface isn't flat. The smaller bubble actually bulges outward a bit.
Bubbles are usually very thin films, but what happens if we imagine the bubble's film
getting thicker and thicker? Eventually we get to the center of the bubble, and we have
something else. We have a droplet.
Curiously, the pressure inside the droplet is higher than the pressure outside the droplet,
which has some interesting effects on evaporation.
Remember though that the smaller the size, the larger the pressure difference. This means
that the smaller the droplet, the more pressure there is to drive liquid molecules into the
gas phase. That is, smaller droplets evaporate faster than large droplets. This idea has
implications for issues as diverse as spraying on perfume and cologne, to supplying gasoline
for your car's engine, and all this from thinking about surfaces.
The surface tension of all liquids also manifests itself in other ways. Have you ever looked
at a pond or lake and seen small insects floating on the top of the water? Well, they're not
floating. They're actually walking on top of the water because of surface tension.
In order to fall into the water, we have to break the surface. But that takes energy.
That's what surface tension is all about. Where does this energy come from? In most cases,
it comes from gravitational potential energy as the object moves down. Think of a diver
moving down and using gravity's energy to literally punch a hole in the surface of the
water. But if the energy isn't enough, the object doesn't have to sink. Of course,
one has to be very careful, but it can be done. For example, if I use a fork to carefully
lower a sewing needle onto a glass of water, the needle will actually float on the water
because of surface tension. Basically, the needle is so light that it doesn't have enough
gravitational energy to break through the water's surface.
And as a foreshadowing of my next topic, what happens if I drip a small drop of soap solution
off to one side of that needle? The needle moves away from the soap because the soap
changes the surface tension, the surface energy of the water. Now there is an unbalanced force
acting on the needle, and according to Newton's laws of motion, if there is an unbalanced force,
there has to be movement.
Insects walk on water for the same reason. Their weight isn't enough to provide energy
to break the surface.
Why did the floating needle move when soapy water was added to one side of it? It all
has to do with surface tension and a behavior called wetting. If the attraction between
a liquid and a solid surface is stronger than the attraction within the liquid itself, then
a liquid will spread out on the surface. This is what's meant by wetting.
One way to express the wetting is to measure the angle between the edge of the droplet
and the solid, called the contact angle. If this angle is less than 90 degrees, we say
that the liquid wets the surface. If the angle is greater than 90 degrees, then the liquid
does not wet the surface.
A liquid that wets a solid also shows capillary action. A capillary, remember, is simply a
very thin tube. If a liquid is attracted to the tube itself, like water is attracted
to glass, it literally gets sucked up the capillary. However, after reaching a certain
height, gravity takes over and the rise of the capillary stops.
The surface tension is really a surface energy, and it takes energy to rise up against gravity.
The amount that a liquid rises up in a capillary can be used to measure the surface tension
of a liquid.
But let's get back to wetting. Wetting is favored when a liquid has a low surface tension.
That's because, again, surface tension is actually surface energy, and when such a liquid
spreads out, the energy of the new surface is lower. See how it's all about energy?
Well, what's the most common liquid around us?
If you said water, then you're right. Well, as it turns out, water has one of the highest
surface tensions of any pure liquid, over three times that of rubbing alcohol. It's
because of the strong interactions between water molecules that it has such a high surface
tension. Does this have any impact on us?
Actually it does in our washing machines. The better that water wets our clothes, the
better it can clean them. But if water has such a high surface tension, there might be
limits to how well we could use water for washing.
Enter soaps and detergents, which are substances that have the property of, among other things,
lowering the surface tension of its solution in water, thereby making the water more wettable.
Both soaps and detergents have a polar or hydrophilic end that interacts well with polar water molecules,
and a non-polar or hydrophobic end that doesn't interact well with water molecules.
Because of this, the soap or detergent molecules tend to concentrate themselves near the liquid
water surface, and in doing so they disrupt interactions between water molecules.
But because these strong interactions between water molecules are the root cause of surface
tension, by disrupting them soaps and detergents decrease the surface tension of water, allowing
water to wash clothes, dishes, and hands better. The molecules also help dissolve grease and
oils, because their hydrophobic ends are more soluble in grease and oil, helping them wash
away the dirt.
A molecule that affects the surface properties of a solvent like this is called a surfactant,
a contraction of surface reactant. Surfactants can be used as emulsifiers, which keep two
or more liquid phases from separating, like the oil and vinegar and salad dressings. Egg
yolks contain a natural emulsifier called lecithin, which explains the use of egg yolks
in some recipes. Surfactants can also act as foaming agents, because lowering the surface
tension makes it easier to make all the tiny bubbles in a foam.
One interesting medical use of surfactants is for premature babies. If the baby is too
premature, the lungs aren't fully developed yet. Doctors will spray a surfactant into
the baby's lungs. The surfactant lowers the surface tension of the alveoli, the tiny
sacs in the lungs, where oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange with the bloodstream. This
allows the alveoli to expand and contract more easily, allowing the baby to breathe easier.
Now, how does soapy water containing the surfactant affect the needle floating on the water? Well,
if I drip some soapy water off to the side of the needle, I decrease the surface tension,
the surface energy, of that side of the water surface. Remember that matter tends to prefer
lower energy? The side where I drip the soap increases in size to minimize the overall
energy, pushing the needle away from where the drop dripped.
So far, I've focused mostly on liquid surfaces. Even films and bubbles are liquid surfaces.
Very thin liquids, grant you, but still liquids. What about solid surfaces? Do they have anything
to contribute to our discussion? Well, yes they do, but first we need to understand
how we describe solid surfaces. A surface that's smooth to the touch may not actually
be smooth at the atomic level. Our sense of touch is limited to about one micron, or
about a thousandth of an inch, under ideal conditions, meaning that any irregularity
smaller than that is undetectable to us, and we're not always under ideal conditions.
Think of it this way. The average human hair is about 100 microns in diameter, or about
one 250th of an inch, and most people can feel that with little trouble. But any surface
feature much smaller than a hundredth of a hair in size would be missed by our fingertips,
and we would judge that surface as smooth. But at the atomic scale it's still very rough.
One micron is the equivalent of about 5,000 atoms, so from the atomic perspective things
are still pretty rough. Here's an analogy. If an atom were a size of a two-story house,
which is about 30 feet tall, then the bumps in the surface could be up to 150,000 feet
high, five times taller than Mount Everest. Put in reverse, if the earth were the size
of the billiard ball, it would be smoother than an actual billiard ball. The lesson is
that even surfaces that seem smooth to us are still very, very rough on the atomic scale.
Not only are surfaces very rough, but they're dirty. For example, if a surface is exposed
to air at normal pressure, then what we think of as a solid surface is actually being bombarded
with molecules of nitrogen, oxygen, water vapor, carbon dioxide, and argon gases. Any
pollutants that might be in the air are also hitting the surface. It's estimated that
at normal atmospheric pressure, if every air molecule were to stick to a surface when it
hits, we would build up a layer of about 6 inches per second. So it's pretty clear
that a lot of these molecules are simply bouncing off the surface. But some of the molecules
are sticking, making the surface rather dirty at the atomic scale. We say that the molecules
are adsorbed onto the surface. In some cases, actual chemical reactions can occur. For example,
if hydrogen sulfide gas, which smells like rotten eggs, gets adsorbed onto a silver
metal surface, it can react to make silver sulfide, which we call tarnish.
Scientists and engineers can make surfaces that are atomically smooth, or practically
so. They have to do it under conditions of very high vacuum, but this can be done rather
routinely. On such smooth surfaces, the atoms and molecules are lined up precisely, making
a sort of two-dimensional crystal of atomic particles. It's likely you've seen similar
macroscopic level surfaces. Ever notice a nice, neatly stacked collection of oranges
in the grocery store? Imagine that instead of oranges, you're looking at atoms all
organized the same way. Scientists can make and study surfaces this organized. But at
the atomic level, the organization of the atoms depends on the angle of the surface cutting
into the bulk. Take a diamond, for example, a beautiful example of crystalline carbon.
A nicely cut diamond has surfaces at all sorts of angles to make it sparkle brilliantly.
But because these surfaces are at all different angles, the arrangements of carbon atoms
are all different as well, even if each surface is atomically smooth. The atoms are at different
distances from each other and make different angles that can be different surface to surface.
Well, why do we need to worry about this? One of the reasons is that certain surfaces
can affect chemical reactions by speeding them up. A substance that does this is called
a catalyst. Catalysts are very important in our society. They promote desirable chemical
reactions to save us money, allow us to synthesize valuable products, and even reduce pollution
in our cars. The problem is not every surface is a catalyst.
Only certain elements or compounds behave like catalysts. More importantly, in some cases
only certain surfaces with certain arrangements of atoms at the surface will be a catalyst.
And at that, only for certain chemical reactions.
For example, one application of catalysts is the catalytic converter in your car. When
your engine burns gasoline, a small amount of nitric oxide is formed from the oxygen
and nitrogen gases found in air. A nitric oxide molecule contains one atom of nitrogen
and one atom of oxygen, and is considered an environmental pollutant contributing to
the formation of smog and acid rain. The catalytic converter promotes the decomposition
of nitric oxide back into elemental nitrogen and elemental oxygen, both of which are not
pollutants. The thin film of palladium atoms in your catalytic converter is what causes
the nitrogen and oxygen atoms in nitric oxide to break apart.
And imagine this. In the nitric oxide molecule, the two atoms are a certain distance apart.
What if the palladium atoms also have to be the same distance apart in order to catalyze
the reaction to nitrogen and oxygen? Then, depending on the angle of the surface with
respect to the three-dimensional structure of palladium, only certain distances between
atoms, only certain angles of surfaces would work as a catalyst.
Now, it's certainly possible that the exact mechanism of palladium catalysis doesn't
work this way. There are many mechanisms of catalysis. But hopefully, you understand
the point. The exact angle of the surface gives arrangements of atoms that can be different,
and these surfaces do in fact have different chemical and physical properties.
There's even some exciting artistic work happening on atomic and clean surfaces. Using
an ultra-fine metal needle, in the last few years, scientists have been able to move individual
atoms around and place them at specific points on a surface.
In 1990, researchers at IBM were able to move atoms around an atomically flat surface and
were able to spell out the letters, you guessed it, I, B, and M. In 1999, scientists were
able to move individual iron atoms around on a copper surface to spell out the Japanese
word for atom, as well as individual carbon monoxide molecules into a shape of a stick-figured
person. What this suggests is that technology has gotten
to the point that we can assemble any molecule we want to on a surface one atom at a time.
Well, we're not exactly there yet. Scientists who work with surfaces have only just started
no pun intended scratching the surface of using these surfaces as canvases for their artwork.
Still, the potential is there, and it's exciting to think of what will emerge.
Surfaces are all around us. Liquid, solid, rough, smooth, painted, varnished, or shellacked.
Their properties influence the behavior of films and bubbles, and they participate in
chemical reactions that, among other things, make our environment less polluted.
Generally speaking, surfaces tend to form that have the lowest surface energy. We saw
that with bubbles forming spherical shapes. But it works with surface films as well. The
well-known non-stick surface Teflon has a very low surface energy, which is why cooked
foods tend not to stick. Food usually has a higher surface energy, so it doesn't wet
the Teflon.
But the idea of surface films and surface energy extends into other aspects of our daily lives.
Think about that kitchen countertop. Is it really clean? Well, grease and oil have rather
low surface energies, so if you're doing much cooking in your kitchen, and you're
splattering butter and oil around, chances are that your countertops are covered with
a thin layer of low energy grease.
You may not even be able to see it during many cooking processes that involve oils.
Tiny minute oil droplets evaporate or sputter from your pots and pans. If you don't have
a good ventilation system or range hood over your stove, those vapors or droplets will settle
on surfaces all over your kitchen, forming a low energy film that collects more dust
and grease and dirt. Not a very pleasant thought, unfortunately.
Similar circumstances occur elsewhere, like in your car. These days, many automobile parts
are made of plastic. Probably not pure plastic, but plastics with additives called plasticizers
that help modify the physical properties of the plastic to the right level. It's the
plasticizers, a wide variety of organic chemicals, that account for that new car smell that many
people enjoy.
Unfortunately, the new car smell goes away, and many of the plastic pieces inside our
cars get brittle, dry up, and break. The reason is that plasticizers eventually evaporate,
especially if you're in a very warm area and park outside in the sun a lot.
But because these plasticizers are similar to grease or oil, they form surfaces of low
surface energy. One can imagine that the entire world is, or will be, covered with a thin
layer of plasticizer from our cars, decreasing the surface energies of surfaces everywhere,
and giving everything that wonderful new car smell. Thank you.
