As we consider the nature of materials, one issue is how materials interact with each
other.
Not necessarily in a chemical reaction, but a physical interaction, as one material simply
touches another.
Behold a pet lizard.
Lizards are common in the United States and the Caribbean, and some people even keep them
as pets.
A few species of lizards and frogs share an interesting trait.
They can walk up walls, just like the ones seen here.
And not just walls made of wood or brick, but nice smooth walls of glass or plastic.
We may be used to seeing insects and spiders walking the walls, but relatively large animals
like lizards?
They don't even have claws like the squirrels that climb up and down our trees.
How do lizards stick to a smooth glass surface?
Do they have suction cups or glue on their feet?
And if they do, how do they unstick themselves?
And is there something we can learn from these animals that we might be able to use to make
a real-life Spider-Man?
Science only recently learned the answer to the Lizard on the Wall riddle and it's fascinating.
It's all about how materials interact with themselves and with other materials.
Not necessarily at the atomic or molecular level, but at the bulk or macroscopic level.
And by copying nature, modern technology is inventing new products that may very well
help us walk up walls.
Intermolecular interactions are interactions between atoms and molecules.
There are several types of interactions, but they all work at the atomic and molecular
level.
With our lizard, what I'm talking about now is interactions at the macroscopic level,
using amounts of matter that are visible to the naked eye, or at least nearly so.
At the macroscopic level, there are two basic interactions to define.
Cohesion is a measure of how strongly a sample of matter interacts with itself.
Sometimes the term cohesive force is used.
Think about when two droplets of water on your freshly waxed car come together to make
a single drop, that's cohesion.
Adhesion, or adhesive force, is a measure of how strongly a sample of matter interacts
with other substances.
Think how adhesive tape, for example, makes things stick together.
It's not called an adhesive, or nothing.
Now, these attractions are ultimately caused by intermolecular interactions, but because
we're talking about bulk matter, it's not proper to say intermolecular anymore.
Here's the key.
A material behaves a certain way based on which is stronger, adhesion or cohesion.
We'll always have to consider both types of interactions.
Consider water, for example.
It has fairly strong cohesive forces, as I just hinted.
In zero gravity, water forms a sphere, because the interactions between water molecules are
fairly strong.
Put a few drops of water onto a glass, though, and the water spreads out over the glass.
That's because the adhesion between water and glass is stronger than the cohesion within
water itself.
Now, suppose we take that glass and wax it, like we might wax our cars.
Now if we put a few drops of water inside the glass, it beads up into an almost spherical
shape.
That's because the adhesion between water and wax is much lower than the cohesion within
bulk water.
This is, by the way, exactly why we wax our cars, to keep the water from spreading out
over the car's surface.
It turns out that water is necessary for the formation of rust, so by inhibiting the ability
of water to wet our metal car, we can slow down the rusting process.
The element mercury also has strong cohesive forces.
Mercury is one of the few elements that's a liquid at room temperature, and it's likely
that many of us have played with small droplets of mercury when we were kids.
The reason the mercury stayed in small droplets was because of the cohesive forces in the
liquid.
Put some mercury drops in the bottom of a glass, and unlike water, the mercury doesn't
cover the bottom of the glass.
That's because the adhesive forces between mercury and glass are weaker than the cohesive
forces.
Mercury only covers the glass when there's enough mercury for gravity to pull it out
of its spherical shape.
The adhesion-cohesion balance has some major impacts on our lives that we rarely recognize.
Let's go back to our water in a glass.
Because of adhesion, the water tends to spread out over the bottom of the glass container.
If you fill the container with enough water and look closely, you'll see something interesting.
At the interface between the water and the glass, the water actually curves up a bit
from the rest of the liquid surface.
What's happening here is caused by adhesion.
The water is attracted to the glass so much that it rises ever so slightly up the side
of the glass.
We actually have a word for this rise.
We call it a meniscus.
The meniscus effect is seen only next to the glass.
The rest of the liquid surface is nice and smooth.
Now imagine that our glass gets narrower and narrower.
As it does, the meniscus becomes a larger and larger proportion of the width of our glass.
Eventually we get to the point where the curvature of the meniscus covers the entire width of
our glass, the entire surface of the liquid water.
At this point we call our glass a capillary, which is nothing more than a very thin tube.
Something interesting happens to our water in the capillary though.
Because the adhesive force is pulling the edge of the water up a bit, when the capillary
is thin enough, the level of the water actually rises in the tube.
This effect is called capillary elevation, one type of behavior generally called capillary
action.
It has some important consequences in our lives.
You've seen capillary action if you've ever had your finger pricked as part of a blood
test.
The healthcare professional stabs your fingertip with a sharp lancet and touches the end of
the thin tube to the blood droplet.
What happens?
Push up the tube goes the blood, ready for testing.
That's capillary action in action.
But you may not realize that you're taking advantage of capillary action when you towel
off after a bath, a shower, or a swim.
The towel that you use to dry off is actually a textile composed of tiny fibers that are
woven together.
The tiny spaces between the fibers act like little capillaries, and as we use the towel
to dry off, these capillary spaces suck up the water away from you.
A chamois is similar.
It's a piece of leather made from sheep antelope or goat skin that has lots of tiny pores
in it.
These pores can suck up water through capillary action, and chamois have been used to dry cars
and make small towels for use in sports.
The imitation chamois can also be made from polymer fibers, but only if the polymer itself
shows good adhesion towards water.
The best towels are made of textiles that show good adhesion for water, and most commonly
that's cotton.
In fact, you could argue that the entire basis for the cotton industry is simply adhesion.
With the applications of cotton go beyond towels, it includes clothing as well.
Many of us wear cotton clothes, especially shirts.
Ever wonder why?
If you've ever heard the idea that cotton clothing breathes, then you're actually
talking about the capillary action of the cloth.
See, we normally sweat a small amount even under normal circumstances, but especially
so when we exert ourselves.
The capillary action of the cotton clothes allows the material to wick away the sweat
to the outside surface of the cloth, where the sweat can evaporate and help keep us cooler.
If we wore something that did not have good adhesion, say certain polyesters, we would
find that our sweat would collect inside our clothing and not evaporate easily, making
us more uncomfortable.
The adhesive property of cotton toward water helps us feel more comfortable, especially
on hot days or when we're exercising.
This type of capillary action is also enforced when we use paper towels to mop up a spill
or in paint brushes when we paint.
Those of us who use fountain pens, capillary action is at work.
The point, or nib, of the pen has a very thin slit in it, and the ink from the reservoir
gets sucked up into the slit and travels to the point of the pen due to capillary action.
Our eyes are constantly draining tears through two little ducts called lacquerable ducts,
again because of capillary action.
In part because of capillary action, water gets absorbed into dirt, and any other material
that's composed of small particles that show adhesion forces for water.
This can be problematic for certain building materials like brick, concrete, and plaster.
If too much water gets absorbed into the building material, problems can occur with the environmental
conditions of the building, or when the weather changes from liquid to freezing cold.
Because water expands when it freezes, if too much water has been absorbed because of
capillary action, the building materials can be broken apart or fractured.
It's well known in areas that experience ice and snow that roadways and sidewalks suffer
damage because of the water absorbed by the pavement.
Many drivers have suffered flat tires because of potholes, ultimately caused by ice formed
from water absorbed through capillary action.
Along with osmotic pressure effects, capillary action is primarily responsible for how water
gets to the very tops of plants.
Most of the water transported from the roots to the leaves of a plant occurs through a layer
of cells called the xylem.
The water brings dissolved nutrients with it so that photosynthesis can occur in the leaves.
Under photosynthesis, water with other nutrients returns to the roots through a layer of cells
called the phloem.
While capillary action is important to us and for plant life, there are circumstances
when the cohesive forces are larger than the adhesive forces.
One example of this is mercury in glass, where the cohesive forces in mercury are larger
than adhesive forces towards glass.
In this case, when mercury is introduced into a capillary, an upside down meniscus is formed
and the level of mercury is actually forced down from its surface.
This type of capillary action is called capillary depression.
Although there seems to be no known practical use of capillary depression in nature, humanity
does use the general concept in products like water repellent clothing, which is either
made from coated materials or materials that have a low adhesion for water.
Polyester clothing can be uncomfortable in the summer, ultimately because of capillary
depression.
I can't let a talk on adhesive forces go without talking about adhesives themselves.
An adhesive is any substance applied to the surface between two objects with the purpose
of keeping those two objects together.
It's synonymous with glue or cement.
An older word is musilage.
The oldest adhesives were based on tar or plant gums, and they date back tens of thousands
of years ago.
Over time, milk proteins and products based on animal proteins, eggs and beeswax were
used.
In the 20th century, advances in chemistry and the growing availability of petroleum
as a source of raw materials allowed for the development of synthetic adhesives with properties
far surpassing natural glues.
A special type of adhesive is called a mortar, which is a mixture used to hold rocks, stones
or bricks together into some structure.
The oldest mortars were clay and mud-based mixtures, which were used in the earlier Egyptian
pyramids.
Gypsum and lime mixtures, known as plaster of Paris, were used in the later pyramids.
Cement was developed around 500 BCE in Greece, and today it's the most common mortar.
Portland cement is the most common, named after the Isle of Portland just off the southern
coast of England.
Mourners dry out and become solid, becoming part of the structural support of a building.
However, by definition, they're weaker than the components used to construct the building,
so that in the event of an accident, it's the mortar that breaks apart instead of the
stone or brick.
This type of injury to a building or wall is much easier to fix than if the stone or
brick itself is broken.
An adhesive has several advantages over other methods of bonding, like sewing or mechanical
attachment.
Perhaps the most important advantage is that it's unnecessary to penetrate the objects
with a needle, a screw, a nail, or some other tool in order to join them.
Dissimilar materials can be joined with adhesives.
Drying adhesives is quick and cost effective, and adhesives can be manufactured to have
certain specific properties, like electrical conductivity.
Disadvantages include the fact that many adhesives don't adhere well at higher temperatures,
and the need for large surface contact areas for adhesives to perform.
There are several types of adhesives.
Drying adhesives are liquid-based glues that have a solvent that evaporates, and the remaining
material forms a bond between the objects.
Common white glue used by school children around the globe is one example.
So is model cement, whose solvent is an organic liquid.
Pressure-sensitive adhesives are the adhesives used for labels, tape, temporary skin connections
like the sensors used for heart monitors, and those little sticky notes that we now
see everywhere.
You have to apply a little bit of pressure to make your label or tape stick, and the
stickiness ranges from easily removable, like those ubiquitous sticky notes I just mentioned,
to permanent, like certain bumper stickers we now regret putting on our cars.
And while we're on the subject of tape, I've gotta mention duct tape.
Duct tape is a cloth-based tape that's well-known for its durability and wide range of applications.
Some people actually call it duct tape, D-U-C-K, not D-U-C-T.
And you know what?
That's actually not incorrect.
The first duct tapes were actually called duct tapes because their cloth backing was
a material called cotton duck, or just duck.
Coming from the dutch word that means canvas, duck the fabric is a tightly woven canvas
used to make canvas sneakers, work clothes, tents, hammocks, and even sandbags.
The transformation to the word duct, that's D-U-C-T, started in the 1950s as the tape
found application in post-war construction.
Recently, a manufacturer of the tape trademarked the named duck tape, and now sells a virgin
that has, what else, cute yellow ducks printed on it.
You may laugh, but some industry estimates suggest that this cute yellow duck has about
40% to the U.S. domestic use market.
Now back to adhesives.
Hot adhesives, like the type we find in hot glue guns, are simply low melting plastics
that can be melted, applied, and then let harden and bond by just cooling down.
Many simple home repair jobs use hot glue, although the bond that hot glue makes isn't
very strong.
There are multi-part adhesives, which are typically two liquids that, when mixed together,
chemically react to form a solid.
Epoxy is a common example of this type of adhesive, as are a variety of resins collectively
known as polyurethanes.
Some of these types of adhesives use a solvent that needs to evaporate or dry before a bond
is made.
If an adhesive doesn't use a solvent, then the chemical reaction that occurs to form
the solid is called curing, not drying.
These adhesives are fairly strong and are used where strength is needed, like in the
construction of aircraft, cars, boats, and even sporting equipment where high stress
is common.
Finally, there are some single component adhesives that rely on a chemical reaction that
started by heat or UV light or exposure to air or water.
Cyanooacrylate glues, the so-called superglues, polymerize in the presence of water to make
a strong bond to many materials, including skin.
These types of adhesives are useful when quick and strong bonding is needed.
They have good tensile strength, that is, glued pieces are hard to pull apart, but they
have low shear strength, meaning that if you use some to fasten a nut and bolt, you could
still unscrew them with reasonable force.
An adhesive works by one of several methods.
A common one is by having the liquid adhesive fill the tiny nooks and crannies that make
up a surface, no matter how smooth.
When the adhesive hardens, a solid bond is formed.
Another common mechanism for sticking is the intermolecular forces between molecules at
the molecular level.
These forces are called dispersion forces, or van der Waals forces, and are quite simply
one of the physical properties of a substance.
The molecules of the adhesive can be polar or even ionic, meaning that the mechanism
of sticking is ultimately the attraction of opposite charges manifested on a bulk scale.
Before we leave adhesives, the story of the sticky note is worth telling, because it's
another example of an accident in science that turned out well, known as serendipity.
In 1968, a scientist at the 3M company named Spencer Silver was trying to invent a new
super strong adhesive, but instead created a low stick adhesive made of tiny spheres
of acrylic that could be actually used over and over again.
For several years, Silver failed to convince anybody at the company that this adhesive
had any practical value.
Finally in 1974, a colleague named Art Frye suggested that the adhesive be used to make
reusable bookmarks.
Silver and Frye used yellow paper, because at the time it was the only scrap paper available.
After some test marketing, 3M launched post-it notes in the U.S. in 1980, and the rest has
been adhesive history.
So let's get back to our friend the lizard.
How is it that a lizard can climb up a smooth glass surface without claws, without any obvious
glue sticking to its toes?
It wasn't until the year 2000 that scientists had a clue, and the answer lies in the structure
of the lizard's toe.
The bottom of the toe is covered in tiny hairs called C-tie.
Each of the C-tie is about 100 micrometers long, or about the width of a human hair.
But the width of the C-tie themselves is much smaller.
You could fit about 14,000 C-tie in a square millimeter, or about 9 million of those hairs
in a square inch.
And the ends of these tiny hairs also branch out into dozens, even hundreds of smaller
hairs called spatulae.
These spatulae are very short, about 5 micrometers or less, and only about 200 nanometers wide.
To put that in perspective, it would take 5 million of these spatulae to make a line
about 1 meter long.
Each spatula widens a bit at its end, making it look a tiny bit like a pyramid stuck onto
this tiny hair.
The C-tie and spatulae are composed of beta keratin, the same material that makes up turtle
shells, the scales of reptiles, bird feathers, and even the krills of porcupines.
As the lizard walks, the ends of these spatulae come into contact with the surface.
Now, here's where intermolecular forces come into play.
The very basic van der Waals force of attraction, which all substances have at the atomic or
molecular level, occurs between the ends of millions of spatulae in the surface, generating
enough attraction that the entire lizard sticks to the surface, even a very smooth surface
like glass.
How much attraction?
Well, direct experimental measurements using lizard feet have shown that if all the spatulae
come into contact at just the right angle, a small lizard can withstand about 300 pounds
of force.
How then does a lizard remove its foot, especially if it's being held on by hundreds of pounds
of force?
Curiously, the answer is all about mechanics.
When a lizard walks, it positions its foot at just the right angle for the spatulae to
adhere.
When moving its foot, the lizard twists the foot in such a way that the spatulae pry apart
from the surface.
It's very much like removing a suction cup from the window.
You can pull and pull and pull, but a good suction cup will stay stuck on the window.
If you pry it up from its edge, it's easy to remove the suction cup.
By manipulating the angles of its feet, the lizard can easily remove its foot and take
another step.
And it does it very well.
Lizards can take as many as 30 steps a second, attaching and detaching each foot amazingly
fast, despite the adhesive properties of their toes.
And there's another issue.
Everyone knows that tape, even sticky notes, can't be reused forever.
The sticky surface gets dirty and eventually loses its power to stick.
Well, don't lizard feet have the same problem?
Ultimately, the answer is yes, but scientists have discovered something else interesting.
Apparently, these sea-tie and spatulae are self-cleaning.
What they've discovered is that so few spatulae stick to tiny dirt particles that these dirt
particles are easily wiped off with each step.
What's interesting to realize is that there are no new principles of science involved
in the lizard's walk.
Adhesion and cohesion, Vanderbals' forces, the prying off of suction cups are all basic
chemical and physical principles known by scientists for decades, even centuries.
All we needed to do was to study what evolved to see how nature did it.
And with that understanding, we can try applications.
Even today, scientists are making artificial lizards that successfully walk on walls by
applying the mechanisms behind natural lizard's feet.
Can a modern-day Spider-Man be far behind?
So the balance between adhesion and cohesion is fundamental to a lizard's footsteps, as
it is in other interactions of matter.
Let's get back to adhesives again for a minute.
There are other naturally occurring adhesives, some of which cause problems.
For example, several species of barnacles glue themselves to ship hulls, which cause
drag and waste fuel.
Other mollusks, like zebra mussels, attach themselves to water intakes and pipes, making
obstructions that have to be cleared out regularly.
But by studying the natural glues that these animals produce, scientists may be able to
develop new materials that could serve as a new surgical glue, or as an implant for drug
delivery, or as an adhesive to replace nails and screws in construction.
Of course, there's another reason to study the biological glues, so scientists can figure
out how to keep them from sticking.
Let's expand on that idea a bit.
The study of natural materials like bioglues and their behavior, and our ability to replicate
nature with technology, is called biomimicry.
Human flight is an example of biomimicry, and has been with us for barely a century.
Velcro is a product inspired by the ability of some seeds to hook themselves to animal
fur or people's clothing.
New plastics based on fingernails and artificial silk stronger than steel are both products
that have been inspired by nature.
So can biomimicry be used to climb walls like Spider-Man?
That's a real possibility.
Recently, engineers at Stanford University constructed microfibers out of a polymer called
PDMS, or polydimethylsiloxane.
This polymer has strong adhesion to glass, and when mounted onto several plates that
were about 25 inches square, the engineers were able to hold the plates with handle and
actually climb up a vertical glass surface.
There are limitations, of course.
The plates only worked on a smooth glass surface, and the surface has to be dry.
But it's a start.
But given the fact that the mechanism of the adhesion was inspired by a lizard, I think
the name Gekoman is more appropriate for our modern superhero.
Thank you.
