Do you know that there's an element that's been the subject of two Nobel Prizes?
That a worldwide cartel currently controls almost half of a desirable form of this element.
Now one form of this element conducts electricity, even though it's not a metal.
That this element is both one of the hardest and one of the softest minerals known?
That an entire branch of science is dedicated to this one chemical element.
Of course, it's carbon.
In its elemental form and its compounds, carbon demonstrates a chemical versatility unmatched
by any other element.
And that's good, because we wouldn't be here otherwise.
It's been speculated that life itself wouldn't exist without carbon, although many science-fiction
stories pretend otherwise.
Curiously, despite its importance, carbon is relatively rare.
If you were to look at a list of the most abundant elements on this planet by mass,
do you know where carbon would be?
In 14th place.
Phanganese is more common than carbon, phosphorus is more common, sulfur is more common than
carbon.
Yet none of these elements is as important to us as carbon.
It's the element carbon that is essential to life, and it has such interesting and extreme
properties as a material.
Why?
Why is carbon so versatile and irreplaceable?
Well, it turns out that the element carbon has a collection of properties that makes
it unique among all the elements in the periodic table.
In this lecture, I'm going to talk about carbon the element and try to persuade you
how unique it is.
I'll save a discussion of carbon's compounds for another time.
One of the reasons carbon is so versatile is because of the number of chemical bonds
it makes.
Unlike many elements in the periodic table, carbon rarely makes ions, either positive
or negative.
Instead, carbon tends to form covalent bonds.
Because the carbon atom has only four valence electrons, it needs four more valence electrons
to satisfy the octet rule.
It accomplishes this by making four covalent bonds with up to four other atoms.
It can make four single bonds to four other atoms, but carbon is one of those elements
that can make double and triple bonds, too.
One of the keys in understanding the versatility of carbon is in recognizing the structure
of the bonds around the carbon atom.
When we typically draw the bonds around a carbon atom, we usually draw it flat with
the four covalent bonds pointing in the shape of a square.
But this isn't how carbon's bonds point.
In reality, a carbon-making covalent bonds to four other atoms has those bonds pointing
towards the corners of a tetrahedron in a three-dimensional shape.
It does this because the electrons in the four covalent bonds repel each other, and
in this geometry, the four bonds can get as far apart from each other as possible.
It's this three-dimensional shape that gives carbon atoms some additional complexity in
the way they bond with other atoms.
But this is when carbon is bonding to four other atoms.
Is it still a tetrahedral shape when it makes double or triple bonds?
No, it isn't.
When a carbon atom makes a double bond, the double bond and the two remaining bonds make
a triangular shape, with the bonds being about 120 degrees apart.
This way, the repulsion of the bonds is minimized.
For example, we see this in the ethylene molecule, or in formaldehyde.
When a carbon atom makes a triple bond, there is one additional bond to be made, and the
triple bond and that final bond make a 180-degree angle, pointing in opposite directions to
minimize repulsion.
One example is the acetylene molecule, where all the atoms are in a straight line because
of the carbon-carbon triple bond.
Because of the effects of quantum mechanics, the bonds that a carbon atom makes adopt different
shapes if a double bond is an ethylene, or a triple bond as an acetylene is formed.
That's because while the first bond a carbon atom makes forms a head-on overlap with another
atom, the second and third bonds are always formed by a sideways overlap with the other
atom.
The result is that when a carbon atom makes covalent bonds with three other atoms, one
of the bonds being a double bond, the other atoms make a planar triangular shape around
the central carbon atom.
When a carbon atom makes covalent bonds with two other atoms, one of the bonds being a triple
bond, the other two atoms line up on either side of the carbon atom, making a straight
line.
These types of bonding patterns add to the different ways carbon atoms can bond with
other atoms.
But I'm going to talk about elemental forms of carbon here, so let's assume we're just
talking about carbon, the element.
For starters, you may think that we're just talking about one type of substance, the element,
but it's actually more complicated than that.
You see, even though we're only talking about one type of atom, it turns out that in many
cases we can arrange those atoms in different ways, into different structures.
Each type of structure that a pure element can have is called an allotrope.
Carbon has several allotropes, each one with rather different properties.
The most common, energetically stable allotrope of carbon is called graphite.
Graphite is a shiny black solid that's rather soft and flakes apart easily.
It's this last property that made graphite the writing part of a pencil, which we call
the lead of a pencil, even though it never ever contained the element lead.
However, the word graphite comes in honor of this use because it comes from the Greek
for to write.
The structure of graphite explains a lot of its properties, so let's look at that first.
Graphite is composed of flat sheets of carbon atoms that are bonded in a honeycomb pattern.
Each carbon atom is making two single bonds and one double bond to a total of three other
carbon atoms, which in turn are bonded to three other carbon atoms and so forth.
The layers are not directly bonded to each other.
Instead, the layers attract each other due to the constant movement of the electrons
in the layer.
Normally such forces of attraction are very weak, but because the layers are so large,
the overall attraction keeps the layers stuck together.
The distance between the layers is about twice as far as the distance between atoms within
a layer.
This type of layered structure is mimicked by only a few other naturally occurring substances.
It's this layered structure that explains many of graphite's properties.
For example, the flaky crumbling of graphite is because these layers are separating with
very little effort.
This makes graphite a very good solid-phase lubricant.
Graphite is one of the few non-metals that's electrically conductive.
That's because all of the carbon-carbon double bonds within a layer can conduct electricity
from one end of the sheet to the other, but only in that direction.
Electricity cannot conduct between the layers, only in the plane of the layers.
Graphite also conducts heat very well, but once again, only in the direction of the layers,
not between the layers.
By the way, substances that have different physical properties in different directions
are called anisotropic materials.
Despite this anisotropy, one major use of carbon is as an electrode in several electric
processes.
Many batteries use graphite electrodes.
In fact, in a high-tech lithium battery, there's usually twice as much graphite as
there is lithium.
Even your everyday alkaline battery uses a graphite rod as an electrode.
For these uses, however, compressed powdered graphite or polycrystalline graphite must
be used because of the anisotropy of the material.
This is because, in powdered form, the layers of graphite point in random directions, and
so the electricity can flow in any direction.
Graphite is also used in components of steel mills because graphite is very heat resistant.
It is still a solid even at temperatures as high as 6,500 degrees Fahrenheit, while iron
melts at 2,800 degrees several thousand degrees lower.
It's also used as electrodes in electric arc furnaces to melt scrap iron for recycling.
The second allotrope of carbon I want to mention is diamond.
That's right, diamond is a form of pure carbon.
This was experimentally established as early as 1772 when French chemist Antoine Lavoisier
purchased a diamond, set it in a closed glass container full of oxygen gas, and used a large
magnifying glass to concentrate the sun's rays on it.
The diamond quickly disappeared, and Lavoisier found that the container contained carbon
dioxide gas.
From this, he concluded the diamond was just a form of carbon.
Fortunately, Lavoisier married into a wealthy family and could afford a few experiments
like this.
Not many of us scientists can afford to burn diamonds.
Later experiments supported the idea that diamond is nothing more than a crystal of
the element carbon.
Diamond is energetically unstable with respect to graphite, and will decompose to graphite
over time.
But don't worry, under normal conditions, over time means millions and millions of years.
So if you have any diamond jewelry, it's safe.
Unlike graphite, the properties of diamond are largely caused by its molecular structure.
Unlike graphite, where the bonds of the carbon atoms are flat, in diamond, the bonds of the
carbon atoms are three-dimensional, and every carbon atom is bonding to four other carbon
atoms in an almost infinite network of covalent bonds.
In fact, a perfect diamond can be considered one huge molecule with only unbonded carbon
atoms at the surface.
Ironically, the individual carbon-carbon bond is weaker in diamond than it is in graphite.
But breaking or melting a diamond would require breaking a lot of these bonds all at once,
which would require a lot of energy.
So diamond is the hardest naturally occurring substance known.
This is the reason why your diamond doesn't convert back into graphite anytime soon.
It takes too much energy to rearrange the carbon-carbon bonds.
Industry takes advantage of diamond's hardness by using diamond dust and diamond powder as
a polishing compound.
You could actually go into any hardware store and get diamond-impregnated tools to use for
grinding or polishing, or find some diamond powder in a craft store to accent your scrapbook.
And it's not very expensive.
Only gem quality diamonds command high prices.
For example, five carats of diamond powder, about one-twenty-fifth of an ounce, sells for
less than ten dollars at craft stores.
A five-carat diamond gemstone will set you back forty-five thousand to seven hundred
and fifty thousand dollars depending on the quality of the stone.
I think I have an idea for my next birthday.
Diamond is also a very good conductor of heat.
In fact, it's the best heat conductor known, conducting heat five times better than copper
metal.
There are several industries, like the electronics industry, that would love to take advantage
of this property of diamond.
Imagine your computer processor never overheating because a layer of diamond literally wicks
away the heat.
Alas, diamond is too rare and expensive to be used like this, although research into
the production of inexpensive diamond films is currently underway.
The best gem quality diamonds are absolutely colorless.
Just because, in many substances, color is caused by unbonded electrons, and in a perfect
diamond crystal, all of the electrons are bound up in covalent bonds between carbon
atoms.
Most, but not all, colored diamonds are considered undesirable.
The colors are caused by impurities of non-carbon elements, or by defects in the crystal structure
of the diamond.
Nitrogen is the most common impurity, and it makes the diamond look yellow or brown,
depending on the amount.
Boron is another impurity, which makes the diamond blue.
The famous Hope Diamond is an example of a boron lace diamond, with the boron concentration
only about eight parts per million.
The rarest color of diamond is red, with the red color caused by crystal defects, not impurities.
In the United States, gem quality diamonds are graded by color and appearance, as well
as size and shape.
The most popular grading scale is put out by the Gemological Institute of America.
A diamond that is perfectly colorless is labeled with the letter D. As the color gets darker
and darker yellow, the letter label proceeds down the alphabet to Z.
These darker than Z are considered fancy colored diamonds, and are graded on the type
and quality of the color.
Appearance is judged by a separate label.
A perfect diamond shows no structural imperfections, like bubbles, cracks, cloudiness, or foreign
material.
Collectively, these imperfections are called inclusions.
If it's on the surface of the diamond, it's called a blemish.
The Gemological Institute of America has six categories, which themselves may be broken
down into two or three grades.
The term flawless is the highest category, and it's used for a diamond that has no visible
inclusions when viewed under a tenfold magnification.
Internally flawless is used to describe very fine diamonds that may have some surface blemishes,
like from the polishing process.
The label, very, very slightly included, is for diamonds that have barely visible inclusions
under magnification.
Then comes very slightly included, slightly included, and included.
This last category is for diamonds that have flaws that are visible without magnification.
All categories other than the two flawless categories are broken down into two or three
grades, allowing for a more precise description.
Needless to say, the better the diamond is graded, the higher the price it commands.
A diamond judged to be deflawless by a trained expert can cost five to ten times more than
a Z-included stone.
Fancy colored diamonds are graded on a different scale, and their pricing is much less standardized
than uncolored diamonds.
Diamonds are thought to be formed deep inside the Earth's mantle, where temperatures and
pressures are much higher than we experience here at the planet's surface.
Both organic and inorganic sources of carbon can be used to make diamond.
Eventually, through volcanic processes, diamonds find their way to the surface, looking very
unlike their polished versions.
With an understanding of the natural processes of diamond formation, over the years scientists
and engineers had tried to synthesize diamond from regular graphite.
Although concerted efforts started in 1941, they were interrupted by World War II and
the work was postponed.
Synthetic diamond was first made in December 1954 by dissolving graphite in molten nickel
and subjecting the melt to about 100,000 atmospheres of pressure at about 3600 degrees Fahrenheit.
Organic diamonds are typically black due to the presence of the metal impurities used
as a catalyst, but they are valuable industrially.
Of the approximately 50,000 pounds of diamonds mined annually, only 10,000 pounds are gem
quality, the rest are industrial diamonds, but over 200,000 pounds of diamond are synthesized
every year, virtually all of it industrial in quality.
The sale of diamonds is controlled worldwide to keep the prices artificially high.
This is coupled with an advertising campaign meant to convince the public that diamonds
are rare, precious, beautiful, and worth the price.
Given the hardness and durability of diamond, this may not be a total fabrication.
However, to give you an example of diamonds in advertising, recently there have been some
ads promoting so-called chocolate diamonds, which are nothing more than brown diamonds
that would normally command a low price.
Diamonds can also be used as a political tool.
In several African countries, civil wars have caused one side or the other to use the sale
of diamonds to fund weapons and other supplies in support of their cause.
These so-called blood diamonds, or conflict diamonds, are the focus of political maneuvering
by some countries around the world who don't want to be seen as supporting warring regimes
financially.
In the mid-1980s, researchers at Rice University in Houston, Texas, were studying the vapors
given off by laser-blasted carbon.
Under certain conditions, a cluster of 60 carbon atoms was a very popular product.
The only way this would happen, of course, is if this cluster were energetically stable.
The researchers proposed that these 60 carbon atoms took on the shape of a soccer ball and
proposed the fanciful name Buckminster Fullering for the cluster, after Buckminster Fuller,
the inventor of the geodesic dome.
In 1990, two German researchers successfully synthesized and isolated the C-60 molecule
from soot, no less.
Experiments indicated that the soccer ball structure of the molecule was correct.
The carbon-carbon bonds in the molecule showed the same pattern as the grooves on a regulation
soccer ball.
Essentially, Buckminster Fullerine, also known by its shorter name Buckyball, is composed
of 20 hexagonal six-membered rings of carbon connected by 12 pentagonal five-membered rings.
Each carbon is making two single bonds and one double bond to the three other carbon atoms.
Even though each ring is flat, the molecule looks spherical and can be treated as spherical
when modeling some of its chemical and physical properties.
Although the 60 atom molecule is the most stable, other distorted spherical molecules
similar to Buckminster Fullerine have also been isolated, including those with 70, 72,
76, and 84 carbon atoms.
As such, the class of carbon molecules with spherical or somewhat spherical shape is called
fullerines.
Fullerines have some interesting properties.
Perhaps the most obvious is that they surround a relatively large volume of empty space.
Subsequent research on fullerines has demonstrated that as many as four atoms can be encapsulated
inside a fullerine.
This does suggest that larger fullerines with hundreds of carbon atoms might be able to
trap other molecules like drugs and help transport them to their active sites in the body.
Use of fullerines with metals like potassium are superconductive at low temperatures.
By low, I mean about 400 degrees Fahrenheit below zero.
Bucky balls can also be reacted with hydrogen, enough so that there is speculation that fullerines
might be used for hydrogen storage in cars that run on fuel cells.
Three scientists from Rice University won the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the
study of discovery of fullerines.
As interesting and glamorous as fullerines are, to date, there aren't many practical
or commercial applications for them.
Scientists and engineers continued their work to see if these beautiful molecules might
have some way of enhancing our lives.
Suppose you take a bucky ball and add an additional ring of carbon atoms to it.
The spherical molecule grows a bit in one direction.
Now do it again, and again, and again.
Keep doing that until you have a structure that's long and thin and cylindrical.
You've just made a nanotube.
A nanotube can be thought of as a single sheet of graphite that's been looped into a tube.
They're considered part of the fullerine family but have some completely different properties.
Nanotubes were first investigated in the 1950s, but rose to more widespread knowledge after
the discovery of bucky balls.
Carbon nanotubes have some of the most extreme mechanical properties of any material measured,
which is what makes them interesting.
Scientists put them at over 300 times stronger than steel when trying to pull them apart,
a measurement called tensile strength.
To put this in perspective, this is the equivalent of being able to hold a full-grown male African
elephant with a wire one millimeter in diameter.
Nanotubes can be either electrical insulators or conductors depending on the size of the
tube.
Only conducting nanotubes can conduct almost a thousand times more electricity than copper.
They're also good thermal conductors, but like graphite, only in one direction, along
the long axis of the tube.
Other measurements of their hardness suggest that they're even harder than diamond.
There are two main problems with nanotubes.
First, it's difficult to make nanotubes of a given tube's size.
Second, most nanotubes are very short.
Although the longest one ever made was almost half a yard, most nanotubes are less than
50 micrometers, or about one-fifth-hundredths of an inch long.
That said, they can be made in large amounts by various methods, including laser vaporization
of graphite and arc discharges using carbon electrodes.
These can be made in large enough quantities to use them in certain specialized applications.
Unlike their fuller-in cousins, nanotubes do have some uses, mostly as components and
composite materials.
By virtue of the fact that bulk nanotubes are a mixture of various sizes of tube, the
overall mechanical properties don't come close to the extreme behavior of a single,
pure sample.
And so, the properties of these nanotubes can significantly enhance the properties of
the material.
Most of the current uses of nanotubes are for items that benefit from increased structural
strength.
Bicycles, tennis rackets and golf clubs, skis, baseball bats, skateboards and the like.
Let's get back to graphite.
All that is composed of flat sheets of honeycombed carbon atoms, weakly connected to each other.
Suppose you take those sheets apart so that you're working with a sample of graphite
that's one atom layer thick.
Then you've got something called graphene.
Graphene can be thought of as two-dimensional carbon.
Like carbon nanotubes, graphene was recognized for decades, but not created in large quantities
until the first few years of the 21st century.
Like a nanotube, graphene is strong, about a hundred times stronger than steel.
Yet, being only one atom thick, graphene is very light.
One analogy claims that a square yard of graphene can support the weight of an average cat but
way less than one whisker.
Curiously, graphene can be rather easy to make.
Take a sample of high quality graphite and place a piece of scotch tape on the top.
Heel the tape away and several layers of graphite come off.
Lay another piece of tape on the other side of the peeled graphite and separate the layers
some more.
Repeat this until you only have one layer left and you have a sample of graphene.
The fancy word for this technique is exfoliation, but others actually call it the scotch tape
method.
Graphene is the most chemically reactive form of carbon because the carbon atoms are uniquely
exposed to other chemicals from both sides.
In fact, graphene begins to burn at about 650 degrees Fahrenheit, the temperature of
a wood-burning pizza oven.
The electrical properties of graphene are still being explored, but measured properties
are already unusual because of the two-dimensionality of the substance.
Graphene's optical properties are unusual.
Although only one atom thick, graphene is visible to the naked eye because it absorbs
a small amount of light, making it appear ever so slightly gray.
Thermally, graphene is a better heat conductor than diamonds or nanotubes.
Like fullerines, graphene has yet to be developed into any commercial product, but there are
many suggestions being explored.
Electronics, composite materials, optical devices, even filters are being explored as
possible applications of graphene.
As with fullerines, the possibilities involving graphene are so groundbreaking that two researchers
from the University of Manchester in England won the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics.
The second time in 15 years, a Nobel Prize has been awarded for studies of elemental
carbon.
One of the recipients speculated that graphene might be central to constructing a very thin
flat-screen touchscreen for electronic devices.
Graphite, diamond, fullerines, nanotubes, graphene, all types of pure carbon.
It's amazing that one element can demonstrate so many different forms with such different
properties that this one type of atom can contribute to so many different materials.
And this is only carbon in its elemental form, we haven't even started talking about
the millions of compounds that carbon atoms can make.
Another unique property of diamond leads me to an interesting story.
Not only is diamond optically clear and visible light, it's also transparent to infrared
light.
Under certain circumstances, diamond is used to make optical components for instruments
that measure infrared light.
In 1978, the U.S. government used about 200 carats of diamond to make a window for an
infrared measuring device.
The device is no longer functioning, and the diamond window is just sitting there for anyone
to take, if you can get there.
You see, the device is on the surface of Venus.
The diamond window is not only strong enough to withstand the huge pressure of Venus'
atmosphere, but it's chemically unreactive in the corrosive sulfuric acid environment.
And it's closest, it's only about 25 million miles away, so your only problem is getting
there and back.
Thank you.
