We all know that fundamentally, matter is made up of atoms.
We also know that atoms themselves are composed of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
And that the protons and neutrons are located in a central region called the nucleus, while
the electrons are zooming around in orbit around the nucleus.
But is this the best way to describe the electrons around a nucleus just zooming around in orbit?
Is there some other order, some structure, to how electrons occupy the space around an atom?
Actually, there is some organization to the electrons and atoms and molecules.
The organization can be explained by the application of quantum mechanics.
They may seem like weird, almost arbitrary rules, but the mathematics of quantum theory
requires that electrons be organized in this way.
And what we'll eventually see is that the organization of electrons helps us understand
the properties of molecules and other matter, too.
What's interesting, though, is that by understanding this organization, we can actually understand
why atoms and molecules behave the way they do.
That is, we can describe a lot of modern chemistry just by understanding how electrons are organized.
Well, how are they organized?
Well, think of a two-story house.
Each house has floors, each floor has rooms, and each room has furniture.
How do you locate a person in this house?
You have to specify the floor, the room, and the piece of furniture they're sitting in.
It's sort of the same thing with electrons and atoms and molecules.
You have to specify their floor, their room, and the furniture they're in.
Only we don't call them floors or rooms or furniture.
We have other words to describe the arrangement of electrons and atoms and molecules.
One thing is for sure.
Electrons are not arranged at random.
Nor, unlike Bohr and Rutherford's simplistic planetary model of the atom, are they in fixed
orbits like the planets.
Let's consider our house analogy for the atom.
The floors for the electrons are called shells.
Shells are labeled with a quantum number, an integer that starts with 1.
This quantum number is called the principal quantum number.
The higher the quantum number, the farther the electron is on average from the nucleus.
Also, the higher the quantum number, the higher the energy of an electron in that shell.
And quantum mechanics states that the energy of the shell is restricted to certain values,
that is, energy is quantized.
In shell number one, the electron has the lowest energy.
In shell number two, it has a higher energy, and so forth.
Electrons can move from floor to floor, or from shell to shell, but only if they absorb
or emit energy in the form of light or heat.
But it has to be the right amount of energy.
Let's keep it simple, and assume that the energy involved is in the form of light.
In order to go to a higher energy shell, an electron has to absorb light, and in order
to go to a lower energy shell, an electron has to emit light.
In addition, the energy of the light absorbed or emitted must be exactly the same as the
difference between the energies of the two shells involved.
Different energies of light mean different colors of light, so electrons and atoms can
only absorb or emit certain colors of light.
This explains why the different atoms have different absorption or emission spectra.
You may recall that this was one of the problems that 19th century scientists couldn't explain.
Quantum mechanics explains it.
Hydrogen absorbs and emits certain colors of light because its electrons have certain
quantized energy values.
And that means that the differences in quantized energy values are also quantized.
Think of a staircase.
Not only are the stair heights at certain specific values, but the differences in the
stair heights are only certain specific values.
For example, a neon atom has electrons with different energies from hydrogen, so the changes
in energies and the light involved are different as well.
This is why a neon light has a different color from a hydrogen light, or an argon light, or
a mercury light, or a sodium lamp.
The different elements involved give off different energies or colors of light.
The hydrogen atom has only one electron.
For reasons we'll see shortly, because of this, the energy of the electron is determined
solely by the principal quantum number, by what floor the electron is on.
Earlier we used the analogy of a house to claim the presence of rooms and furniture,
but for hydrogen this isn't necessary.
The energy of the electron in hydrogen is determined only by this one quantum number.
This is why the spectrum of the hydrogen atom is so simple, and quantum mechanics predicts
the exact same expression for the energies of the hydrogen atom that Bohr's ideas did.
But quantum mechanics is a better model for electrons because it treats them as waves,
whereas Bohr's theory didn't.
When there's more than one electron in an atom, there's a new effect.
The negatively charged electrons repel each other depending on how far apart they are.
This means that even though the electrons may be on the same floor, that is, in the same
shell, if they're in different rooms, they'll have different energies.
Each individual room is called a subshell.
This can also be labeled with a second quantum number called the angular momentum quantum
number, because quantum mechanics predicts that the angular momentum of the electron
is quantized as well.
But for this second quantum number, rather than using numbers to label the value, we
use letters.
This keeps us from getting confused between the two separate quantum numbers.
The first four labels, which are the most common ones, are in order S, P, D, and F.
Within each shell, an S subshell has the lowest energy, a P subshell has the next lowest energy,
and so on.
Because of the mathematics of quantum mechanics, the first shell is limited to one subshell,
so shell number one has only an S subshell.
The second shell is limited to two subshells, so shell number two has an S and a P subshell.
The third shell has only three subshells, the fourth shell has four subshells, and so
forth.
Notice the trend here.
We could actually predict the number of subshells in a shell.
The 25th shell would have 25 subshells, wouldn't it?
It's worth pointing out again that this trend is established by the mathematics of quantum
mechanics, not because scientists want to make things confusing.
For atoms with more than one electron, the exact energy of the electron depends on the
shell and the subshell that the electron is in.
This is why the spectra of other atoms, other than hydrogen, are more complicated to explain.
But again, quantum mechanics explains this, so it's definitely a better model than Bohr's
model.
Now let's look at each subshell.
Going back to our house analogy, what we find from quantum mechanics is that each room
only has a certain number of pieces of furniture in it, depending on the type of room that
is the type of subshell.
In quantum mechanical terms, each piece of furniture is called an orbital.
Any S-subshell, no matter what shell it's in, has only one piece of furniture, one orbital.
Any P-subshell, no matter what shell it's in, has only three pieces of furniture, or three
orbitals.
A D-subshell has five orbitals, while an F-subshell has seven orbitals.
Again, we see a trend here.
So the total number of orbitals in a shell depends on the shell number, which determines
the number of subshells, each of which have a certain specific number of orbitals.
Each orbital in a particular subshell is slightly different, because it turns out that an orbital
in a subshell has a certain shape in three-dimensional space.
The S-orbital is spherical in shape.
A P-orbital looks sort of like a dumbbell.
Now there are three P-orbitals in any P-subshell, so what's the difference between them?
The three orbitals are oriented in three different directions in space, which we can arbitrarily
label the X, the Y, and the Z directions.
The orbitals themselves are identical to each other, just oriented differently in three-dimensional
space.
The D-orbitals have the shape of double dumbbells, or rosettes, and the five D-orbitals in the
D-subshell also have different orientations in space.
In principle, this idea continues into the F-subshell and so on.
There's one last thing to consider before we understand how electrons are organized
in atoms bigger than hydrogen.
All subatomic particles, protons, neutrons, electrons, and other particles, have a property
called spin.
It's not that we know they're spinning around like a top, we can't even see an individual
particle in order to tell.
No, it's that they're behaving like they were spinning, so we use the name spin to
describe this behavior.
Now different particles have different characteristic spins that can point in certain numbers of
directions.
In the case of an electron, its spin can point in two and only two directions.
We call them up and down, alpha and beta, it doesn't matter.
The only thing that's important is that an electron has two possible spin states.
In the 1920s, Austrian scientist Wolfgang Pauli proposed the idea that an orbital can
only contain as many electrons as there are directions of spin.
With an electron, that's two.
So each orbital can only hold a maximum of two electrons.
If an orbital were a piece of furniture in our house analogy, this piece of furniture
is a small couch or a love seat, seating only two people.
This understanding limits the number of electrons that could go into orbitals, into sub-shells,
and into shells.
For example, shell number one has one S sub-shell, which has one orbital.
This one orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons, leading us to the conclusion that
shell number one can only hold a maximum of two electrons.
Shell number two has two sub-shells, S and P. The S sub-shell, like all S sub-shells,
can hold a maximum of two electrons.
But the three orbitals in the P sub-shell can hold two electrons each, for a maximum
of six electrons possibly occupying that P sub-shell.
Add these six to the two in the S sub-shell.
Shell number two can hold a maximum of eight electrons.
In shell number three, add ten electrons that can occupy the five D orbitals for a maximum
possible population of eighteen electrons, and so forth.
With this understanding, let's see how electrons are organized into shells, sub-shells, and
orbitals for the first few atoms.
Hydrogen atoms have a single electron that goes into shell number one, the S sub-shell,
and the only orbital in the S sub-shell.
Helium atoms have two electrons, and both of them can go into shell number one, the S sub-shell,
and the only orbital in the S sub-shell.
How does this look, the electrons in the one S sub-shell and shell combination?
Here are some fundamental results from quantum mechanics.
The energy of the electron is quantized, and the angular momentum of the electron is quantized,
but the location of the electron is not.
That is, we don't know the exact X, Y, or Z coordinates of any electron in an orbital.
That's why the analogy of electrons behaving like planets around the sun doesn't work.
We cannot say exactly where an electron is.
All we could do is map out a region of space where the electron is most likely to be.
Rather than calling this an electron orbit, we call this an electron cloud.
Instead of saying where an electron is, all we could do is state a probability of where
an electron might be.
Quantum mechanics reduces our understanding of electron behavior to probabilities, not
certain deeds.
Now, if you think this is weird, you're not alone, even Einstein was uncomfortable with
this interpretation of quantum mechanics.
But think about it, an electron is a wave, right?
And where exactly is a wave anyway?
Modern scientists understand that this probabilistic nature of electron behavior is the best we
could do at this level.
Before we go to even larger atoms, I'm going to introduce a sort of shorthand that scientists
use to summarize the organization of electrons in an atom.
It's called an electron configuration.
Using this shorthand makes it easier for scientists to communicate what shell and sub-shell electrons
occupy, and what happens to electrons in atoms when chemical reactions occur.
An electron configuration is just a list of the quantum numbers that the electrons have
as they occupy shells, sub-shells, and orbitals.
Most electron configurations only explicitly list the principal quantum number and the angular
momentum quantum number, actually a letter, and have superscripts giving the number of
electrons and all the orbitals of the sub-shells.
For example, the electron configuration of hydrogen is 1s1.
The electron configuration of helium is 1s2.
The next element is lithium, which has three electrons.
We could try to put the third electron in shell number one, s-sub-shell, and the single
orbital of the s-sub-shell, but that would mean putting three electrons in one orbital,
and a single orbital can only hold two electrons at most.
Nor can we put that third electron in another orbital in shell number one.
Shell number one only has one sub-shell, which only has one orbital.
Now, shell number one is completely filled.
It cannot accommodate any more electrons.
That third electron has to be put in shell number two.
Shell number two is farther away from the nucleus than shell number one, so when going
from helium to lithium, the size of the atom makes a big leap.
Lithium atoms are about 30% larger than helium atoms.
Getting farther away from the nucleus, the third electron is much easier to remove from
a lithium atom than the first or the second electron.
This is what we mean when we say that the electron in the second shell has a higher energy than
the electrons in the first shell.
But the second shell also has two sub-shells, an s-sub-shell and a p-sub-shell.
Where does this third electron go?
It shows that the s-sub-shell is always lower in energy than the p-sub-shell in any given
shell, so that third electron goes into the s-sub-shell of shell number two.
So the electron configuration of lithium is one s-two, two s-one.
Because the two s-shell-sub-shell combination can hold up to two electrons, when we go to
the next element, beryllium, that fourth electron also gets a two s-label, and the electron
configuration of beryllium is one s-two, two s-two.
For the next element, boron, with five electrons, we needn't go up to shell number three yet.
That's because the number two shell has a second sub-shell, the p-sub-shell, which
can hold a maximum of six electrons.
The p-sub-shell is slightly higher in energy than the two s-sub-shell, but not as different
in energy as the one s-sub-shell.
As we progress through the next six elements in terms of electrons, boron, carbon, nitrogen,
oxygen, fluorine, and neon, each additional electron in the atom contributes to filling
that two p-sub-shell.
For the first time, though, we're filling a sub-shell that has more than one orbital.
How do the six electrons distribute themselves among the three orbitals as they're filled?
Experimental evidence, primarily measurements of magnetism, show that a single electron
occupies each individual orbital before a second electron pairs up with the first one
in one of the orbitals.
It's similar to strangers filling seats on a bus.
Each bus rider selects a seat to sit in by themselves until all the seats have one rider.
The next rider, though, has to sit with somebody else, and so it is with electrons filling
orbitals.
Eventually, however, we get to the element neon, and the two p-sub-shell is now filled.
We have an electron configuration of 1s2, 2s2, 2p6.
Now we have to move up to the shell number three, because shell number two only has two
sub-shells, and they're completely full.
Going to the next two elements, sodium and magnesium, we put electrons into the 3s-shell
sub-shell combination, and then with the next six elements, aluminum, silicon, phosphorus,
sulfur, chlorine, and argon, we put electrons into the 3p-shell and sub-shell.
So far, in case you're not keeping count, we've been able to accommodate a total of
18 electrons.
At this point, for the next element, potassium, we might expect the electron to go into the
3d-sub-shell, because shell number three has three sub-shells.
But this isn't what happens.
Experiments show that this next electron, the 19th one overall, goes into shell number
four, the s-sub-shell.
What's going on?
Well, it all has to do with energy.
It turns out that putting an electron into the 4s-sub-shell gives an atom that is lower
in energy than if you put that electron into the 3d-sub-shell, the third sub-shell of the
third shell.
Recall the importance of energy in the behavior of matter.
One of the most general concepts in science, and an essential concept in understanding the
nature of matter, is that when left alone, many systems tend to adopt the lowest possible
energy.
That's why a rock rolls down the hill.
It's trying to achieve the lowest gravitational potential energy.
Same thing for when you drop something and it falls, lowest gravitational potential energy.
Why does a compressed or an elongated spring sprang back to its normal distance, minimum
energy?
Well, it's the same thing for electrons and atoms.
The overall atom, with all of its electrons, wants to adopt the lowest overall energy.
It turns out that in order to do that, the 19th electron in potassium goes into the 4s-sub-shell
instead of the 3d-sub-shell.
We speak of the electron configuration for potassium as 1s2, 2s2, 2p6, 3s2, 3p6, 4s1,
not 3d1.
For the next element, calcium, the next electron also occupies the 4s-sub-shell, and now that
sub-shell is full.
Now the next electron, our 21st electron, goes into the 3d-sub-shell.
The 5 orbitals of the 3d-sub-shell can accommodate a maximum of 10 electrons, and over the course
of the next 10 elements, the 3d-sub-shell is filled.
Now that the number 3-shell is completely filled, electrons have no choice but to go
into the 4p-sub-shell, which covers the next 6 electrons, and now we're up to a total
of 36 electrons.
But now the break with the pattern is set.
Although there is a regular ordering of filling the shells and sub-shells with electrons,
the order now depends on the shell and the sub-shell type.
Frankly, it gets a little messy, but the trend has been all mapped out, and the electron
configurations of the remaining atoms are well known to scientists.
In a simple way, these electron configurations illustrate how electrons are organized in
atoms.
Well, what about molecules?
A molecule is two or more atoms connected together.
So how are the electrons organized in molecules?
Actually, they're organized in a way very similar to atoms, into orbitals, called molecular
orbitals.
In the case of molecules, though, the orbitals cover the entire molecule, they don't just
stay on any one atom.
We can think of a molecular orbital as being formed from combinations of atomic orbitals
from the atoms that make up the molecule, which in turn makes up matter.
Well, that's not always strictly true.
Many molecular orbitals are virtually identical to the original atomic orbitals.
But technically, they're no longer atomic orbitals, they're molecular orbitals.
One rule is that a molecule has as many molecular orbitals as their atoms have atomic orbitals
to hold their electrons.
For example, when we make a molecule of H2O, water, from two atoms of hydrogen and one
atom of oxygen, we need to count the atomic orbitals.
Each hydrogen has one orbital for its electrons, while the oxygen atom has electrons in a single
1s orbital, a single 2s orbital, and the three 2p orbitals, for a total of five orbitals.
One plus one plus five equals seven, so the water molecule needs seven molecular orbitals
for its electrons.
And another rule is the same.
Each molecular orbital can contain a maximum of two electrons, as long as the two electrons
have different spins.
If you were to look at diagrams of the molecular orbitals, you would see that some of them
resemble the spherical, or dumbbell, or rosette shapes of individual atomic orbitals, while
others cover more than one atom, sometimes the entire molecule, which is why they're
called molecular orbitals.
Because the water molecule only has ten electrons, only the five lowest energy orbitals have
electrons in them.
The other two are present, but empty, just like what sometimes happens in atomic orbitals.
One of the difficulties with molecular orbitals, though, is that they're different for every
molecule.
The molecular orbitals have to conform to the shape of the molecule, and because every
molecule is a different shape, molecular orbitals are unique to each molecule.
This makes it difficult to make a lot of general statements about molecular orbitals.
Investigating their properties is a focus of a lot of research among scientists, because
the properties of molecular orbitals tell us a lot about the chemical and physical properties
of the substance.
One interesting property that molecular orbitals give some molecules is demonstrated by the
molecule benzene, which has the formula C6H6.
The benzene molecule has its six carbon atoms in a ring, and the molecule has a shape of
a perfect hexagon.
If we take a look at one of its molecular orbitals, we can see why.
One of its molecular orbitals goes all the way around the ring, almost in a circle.
The word we use to describe this type of electron behavior is delocalized.
What we've discovered about delocalized electrons is that the more they're delocalized, the
lower in energy the more energetically stable they are.
As a molecule, benzene is rather unreactive towards other chemicals, and this delocalization
of the electrons is used to explain that.
Because it is so unusually stable, benzene typifies a class of compounds called aromatic
compounds.
The word aromatic was originally used because benzene and similar molecules were rather
stinky.
But now the word aromatic has a new scientific meaning.
It describes compounds that are more energetically stable than expected due to the delocalization
of electrons in rings of atoms.
As I mentioned, benzene is a typical aromatic compound with a single ring.
Other aromatic molecules can contain more than one ring, and so are called polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, abbreviated PAH.
Even PAH molecules are formed in the charring of meat when you barbecue outside, which has
led to some health concerns because some PAH molecules are considered carcinogenic.
Aromatic molecules are not limited to hydrocarbons, which are molecules that contain only the elements
carbon and hydrogen.
The elements nitrogen and oxygen are also commonly found in aromatic molecules because
the atomic orbitals of these atoms are similar to carbons.
The original model of electrons and atoms was called the plum pudding model, so called
because the English scientists who proposed it thought the electrons were distributed
at random in space, much like the raisins, which are called plums in this English dessert.
However, with the fact that electrons behave like waves, and with the development of quantum
mechanics, the plum pudding model wasn't feasible.
Instead, electrons have quantized energy in angular momenta, and because of the mathematics
of quantum mechanics, we find that electrons are grouped into shells, subshells, and orbitals.
This electronic structure gives atoms and molecules their electronic properties, which
in turn strongly influence their chemical and physical properties.
Our house analogy for the electronic structure of atoms is now complete.
It doesn't work quite as well for molecules, but that's okay.
Molecules and molecular orbitals are built from atoms, so I suppose we can consider a
molecule like a small city, a collection of houses that have floors and rooms and furniture.
Each molecule is different, just like every city is different, but it's these differences
that make learning about the nature of matter so much fun.
Thank you.
