Imagine yourself exercising. As you work out, you're also breathing. In fact, you're probably
breathing harder than you normally do. When you breathe, you're bringing air into your
lungs air that supports life. But did you know that in the wrong amounts, the components
of air can kill you? How is it that something we need to survive might actually kill us?
Do we really have to worry, or am I just scaring you unnecessarily? Let's talk about air.
One of the ways we talk about our atmosphere is with pressure. Pressure is caused by the
weight of the atmosphere bearing down on us because of the Earth's gravity. We don't
notice it because we're so used to it. But the atmosphere beats down on us to the tune
of 14.7 pounds for every square inch of surface area.
How can I put that in perspective? Think of a rod of iron metal one inch on a side. That's
one square inch of area. Think of this rod as being 51.7 inches or just over 4 feet long.
That rod weighs 14.7 pounds. Imagine balancing that rod on your foot. That's what 14.7
pounds per square inch feels like. That's the pressure of the atmosphere at sea level.
As we go up in altitude, the pressure decreases, and as we go down, it increases. So at the
bottom of Death Valley in California, the atmospheric pressure is about 14.9 pounds
per square inch. While at the Mile High Stadium in Denver, Colorado, it's about 11.8 pounds
per square inch.
Let's get back to air. Normally, air is necessary for life. Pure air is a gas, one of the three
stable phases of matter. Cool it down far enough, and the gases that make up air will
condense into liquids, but at different temperatures. Argon becomes a liquid at minus 302 degrees
Fahrenheit. Nitrogen condenses at minus 320 degrees, and oxygen follows suit at a chilly
minus 362 degrees, less than 100 degrees above absolute zero, the coldest possible temperature.
You can take some satisfaction in knowing that this won't happen naturally in our atmosphere.
Even at its coldest, the lowest naturally occurring temperature was minus 128 degrees
Fahrenheit down in Antarctica.
I just mentioned the three most common components of dry air. Nitrogen at 78 percent, oxygen
at 21 percent, and argon at just about 1 percent. In terms of our four-foot rod of iron, nitrogen
would be 40.8 inches of it, oxygen would be 10.3 inches, and argon would be about half
an inch.
I say dry air because air can also hold water vapor, either from lakes, oceans, or rain.
The amount of water vapor in air depends strongly on the temperature, with warmer air holding
more water vapor than cold air, as much as 5 percent of the air can be water vapor.
The measurement of water vapor content in air is called relative humidity. If, at any
given temperature, the air has the maximum amount of water vapor it can hold, then the
relative humidity is 100 percent. If it's less than the maximum, then it's less than
100 percent relative humidity.
Humidity is part of the local weather forecast because it relates to general comfort levels.
A low humidity usually means that sweat evaporates easily, keeping us cool, while a high humidity
restricts the evaporation of sweat, making us feel less comfortable.
We must be careful with very low humidity, especially at higher temperatures, like up
in the mountains in summertime. Our bodies can evaporate water, keeping us cool and comfortable,
while at the same time, possibly making us dehydrated if we're not careful.
The same thing happens in airlines because the pressurized air inside the plane is usually
very low in humidity, so be sure to drink water during long flights.
Air has some minor components too. After water vapor, the next most common gas in the atmosphere
is carbon dioxide, which is present at about 0.038 percent, or about 380 parts per million.
Then there's 18 parts per million of neon, 5 parts per million of helium, and about 2
parts per million of methane.
Now, that's over the entire atmosphere. There are some local regions where certain gases
build up because the mixing of the atmosphere isn't as good as it should be. I'm talking
about pollution from cars, industries, fires and the like.
These gases include ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur oxides, but pollution also includes
ash and tiny particulate matter that can stay suspended in the air for miles around.
Generally speaking, this is not good, and several major metropolitan areas around the
world have poor air quality because of localized pollution and poor weather patterns. One famous
example of air quality issues occurred in association with the 2008 Summer Olympic Games
in Beijing, China.
Beijing has a relatively large problem with air pollution from industrial and urban sources,
and the Chinese government pledged to address the problem before and during the games. Although
there were some concerns about air quality during the games, measurements indicated that
pollution levels were much lower than normal, and some of the efforts taken during the games
were made permanent.
I remember being in the hills of Berkeley looking out towards the Golden Gate Bridge. The San
Francisco Bay is surrounded by hills trapping air in, so by the end of the day all the smog
and automobile exhaust was actually visible in a layer of the air.
There's one component of pollution that's of some use to us, and that's ozone. Near
the ground where we live, it's a pollutant, but higher up in the atmosphere it actually
serves a useful purpose. The light from the sun includes harsh, high-energy ultraviolet
rays that could damage our skin and cause skin cancer. A layer of ozone, about 10 to
20 miles up in the stratosphere, absorbs this ultraviolet light so that lessen it makes it
to the Earth's surface.
In the 1970s and 80s, scientists found that compounds called chlorofluorocarbons, which
our society used in refrigeration and in aerosol cans, would slowly migrate up higher in the
atmosphere, react with the ozone, and destroy it, eliminating its ultraviolet absorbing
abilities. Satellites orbiting the Earth detected large ozone holes around the north and south
poles where these ozone-destroying chemical reactions occurred more easily.
By international treaty, chlorofluorocarbons are no longer produced. Their uses quickly
fading, and scientists have already noticed that the ozone hole is getting smaller. It's
amazing to think that something that's a pollutant near the ground would be so beneficial a few
miles higher up.
To us, animal life, the most important component of air is oxygen.
Elemental oxygen exists as a two-atom or diatomic molecule in its normal state. If there's a
source of energy, like ultraviolet light or a bolt of lightning, oxygen molecules can
react to make a three-atom or triatomic molecule that we call ozone, which I just mentioned.
Ozone is simply a form of elemental oxygen, but it's less stable than the diatomic form,
so left to itself, ozone would react back to the diatomic form of oxygen. In the ozone
layer, ozone is constantly being formed as the ultraviolet rays from sunlight on the oxygen
molecules in our upper atmosphere.
All animals need oxygen to survive. That's because in our cells, oxygen is combined with
glucose, a form of sugar, to make carbon dioxide, water, and, most importantly, the energy for
us to live.
If you look at the chemical reaction between glucose and oxygen, you'll see that it's the
same chemical reaction as burning glucose. In fact, that's all the body is doing, burning
glucose to get energy. Of course, the actual steps involved are more complicated than just
burning a lump of sugar because our cells are more complicated, but the overall chemical
reaction is exactly the same, and we get energy to live.
Without oxygen, there would be no animal life as we know it. A human being can survive three
to six minutes without oxygen, then irreversible damage occurs. Other animals have different
survival times. It's estimated that a sperm whale can survive for up to 90 minutes under
the ocean without taking a breath. It's thought that they can do this partly because they
have a higher concentration of red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the tissues. The oxygen
content in our atmosphere is generated by plants, either terrestrial or ocean-based.
It's a symbiotic relationship because while we exhale carbon dioxide as a product of our
metabolism, plants take in carbon dioxide, and through the wonderful reactions of photosynthesis
give off oxygen. So what if there are no more plants? Then the animal life on this planet
would eventually die off. There is no other natural process that creates as much oxygen
as plants do, and even if there were, oxygen is so reactive that it would combine chemically
with other compounds in the ground and the oceans. Consider this.
Only one in a million oxygen atoms is actually in the atmosphere. The rest are tied up in rocks
and minerals and in surface water. That's because oxygen is so reactive. If it weren't
being constantly regenerated by plant life, it would react away and animal life would cease
to exist. Oxygen exists in our atmosphere at a pressure of about 3 pounds per square inch
out of the total pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch. However, if that oxygen pressure
drops by only 25% to 2.2 pounds per square inch, a person wouldn't be able to survive.
That corresponds to an altitude of about 15,000 feet above sea level, so many people
ascending that high may need breathing support. In fact, there are only five known cities
in the entire world at altitudes higher than this, demonstrating the challenges of living
at high altitudes. There are two of them in China, and one each in Peru, Argentina, and
India. The total population of these five cities is only about 35,000 people, so only
0.0005% of the world's population live above 15,000 feet in altitude.
The low pressure of oxygen at higher altitudes is also why many of our airliners need to be
pressurized, to supply us with sufficient oxygen as they cruise at altitudes of 40,000 feet.
And it's why some people experience altitude sickness when they go up into the mountains,
and the pressure of oxygen decreases. Too much of a good thing is not good, the same
with oxygen. At pressures of about 22 pounds per square inch or higher, oxygen can actually
be toxic. It can cause seizures, dizziness, confusion, and vision and hearing problems.
While most of us don't have to worry about this, some do, like divers using compressed
air, or doctors treating neonatal babies with pure oxygen, or astronauts in spaceflight.
Divers use special mixes of gas to minimize oxygen toxicity. Ironically, a high oxygen
mix is used for minimal depth diving to avoid complications of nitrogen narcosis, caused
by too much nitrogen gas dissolved in the blood. Nitrogen narcosis initially has a sedative
effect, but as it gets worse, it can lead to confusion, dizziness, hallucinations, and
even blackouts. Not good for somebody a dozen feet underwater.
But high oxygen mixes can only be used to a depth of about 90 feet, less than one third
of a football field. Deeper than that, divers use a mix called heliox, which replaces the
nitrogen in the air with helium. Divers receive special training so they can learn how and
when to use proper air mixtures.
Finally, it's worth knowing that there are some forms of life for which oxygen is actually
poisonous. These are called anaerobic organisms. They range from single-celled life like bacteria,
young guys such as yeast, and the baby worms that cause the disease trichinosis in pigs
and humans.
Anaerobic organisms base their cellular respiration on substances other than oxygen, such as sulfate,
nitrate, or even sulfur. Less energy is given off in these respiration processes, but still
enough to survive. Perhaps the most common use of anaerobic organisms is the use of yeast,
which makes ethyl alcohol is a byproduct of anaerobic respiration, and is fundamental
to the alcoholic beverage industry.
The majority of air, 78% of it, is the element nitrogen. Like oxygen, nitrogen also exists
as a two-atom or diatomic molecule in its elemental form.
The chemical bond between the two nitrogen atoms is unusually strong, so much so that
elemental nitrogen is one of the most energetically stable molecules known.
That's why there's so much of it in our atmosphere, because it's so unreactive.
Unlike oxygen, it does not support life. Animals kept in an all-nitrogen atmosphere die quickly,
as do candle flames. You may not be surprised, then, to learn that the French word for
nitrogen is azote, from the Greek word that means lifeless.
But nitrogen is crucial for life. How does it get incorporated if it's so inert?
There are several common ways. First, lightning. It's energetic enough to force nitrogen to
react with oxygen and make compounds that are eventually introduced into the life cycle.
Second, there are several forms of life, especially some bacteria and a family of plants
called legumes, which have an enzyme that can convert nitrogen gas in the atmosphere to ammonia,
a nitrogen compound that can then be used chemically to make other nitrogen compounds.
This process is called nitrogen fixation. In the case of legumes, peas, beans, peanuts,
soybeans, clover, the roots of the plant host a symbiotic bacteria that actually reacts or fixes
the atmospheric nitrogen. Historically, before the widespread use of fertilizers,
farmers learned to rotate their crops every few years with a kind of legume that helped restore
some of the nitrogen content of the soil. Of the three major classes of biological compounds,
fats, proteins, and carbohydrates, only proteins have nitrogen in them. This means that anywhere
in the body, proteins are important, nitrogen is important. For example, the formation of muscle,
cartilage, hair, skin, as well as enzymes and hormones like insulin. Protein in the diet is a
major source of nitrogen, which is present in the form of amino acids. Amino acids are the
building blocks of proteins, so when we ingest protein, we're actually eating the building blocks
of our own bodies. Most of us get protein from meat in our diets, which contains all the amino acids
that our bodies need to grow and thrive. However, the vegetarian or vegan has to get amino acids
from plant sources like beans or peas or nuts. Unfortunately, the distribution of amino acids
from plant sources is not optimum, so vegetarians need to vary what they eat to make sure they're
getting all the nitrogen-containing amino acids they need from their diet.
Now let's talk about argon, the third most common component of dry air. The discovery of argon is
an interesting story. In the 19th century, the accurate determination of atomic masses was an
important task for the scientists. English scientists John William Strutt, also known as Lord Rayleigh,
and William Ramsey were trying to determine the atomic mass of nitrogen. They noticed a curious
and inescapable result. The experimental atomic mass of nitrogen from air was always slightly larger
than the experimental atomic mass of nitrogen isolated from a compound. They ultimately concluded
that the sample from the air was contaminated by another gas and set out isolating that gas.
From a sample of air having a volume of several gallons, they carefully removed the nitrogen,
oxygen, water vapor, and carbon dioxide, and were left with a small bubble of gas that,
when tested with a spectroscope, proved to be a new element. They called this element argon after
the Greek word for inactive. That was the year 1894. Naming this new element after the Greek word
for inactive was prescient. As it turned out, argon was the first of a new family of elements
that made a new column of the periodic table of elements. This new column, ultimately containing
the gases helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radioactive radon, contains elements that are
extremely unreactive towards other elements and compounds. The reason for this is because of the
arrangement of the electrons in each atom. Remember that electrons are organized around the atomic
nucleus in shells and subshells. When an atom has eight electrons in its outermost or valence shell,
the arrangement is especially stable and resists change. All of the elements in this new column,
except helium, have eight electrons in their valence shell, so they are very chemically unreactive.
So much so that it inspired the name inert gases for this column.
Things changed a bit in the early 1960s when a Canadian chemist named Neil Bartlett discovered that the
largest stable inert gas, xenon, did actually form a stable compound with other very reactive substances.
To date, over 80 stable compounds of xenon have been discovered, as have stable compounds of krypton and
even the radioactive radon. No room temperature compounds of argon, neon, or helium have been
discovered to date. Still, it's clear that under the proper conditions some of these gases aren't
inert, they're just a little standoffish. So the name noble gases is used today, giving an impression of
privileged elements that don't want to interact with the other riffraff elements.
Argonne has some uses in our society. For example, even though I've already said that nitrogen gas is
very chemically stable, there are some cases where it won't work, so argon is used instead.
One example is in welding, where an inert gas is used to blanket the welded area briefly so the hot
metal doesn't rust in air. Another use is in incandescent lights, which are filled with argon so air doesn't
leak in and destroy the hot bright filament. Some automobile and bicycle tires are filled with argon
instead of air, because it leaks more slowly, but I would question whether the difference is worth the
price. And here's a bit of trivia for you history buffs. The cases that hold the original U.S.
Declaration of Independence and Constitution are filled with argon to keep the paper and ink from
degrading over time.
No discussion of the atmosphere can be complete without a discussion of carbon dioxide. Carbon
dioxide is a minor part of our atmosphere, but the cause of a major headache for society. It's one of the
main products of combustion and the use of fossil fuels since the beginning of the industrial
revolution has caused an increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere. Historically,
and by that I mean over the last few hundred thousand years, the carbon dioxide concentration in our
atmosphere has ranged from two hundred to three hundred parts per million. How do we know this? Among
other ways, we can sample tiny bubbles of air trapped in thick ice sheets in the polar regions of our
planet. The farther down you go in the ice, the further back in history these air bubbles were trapped.
Since the late 1950s, a carbon dioxide monitoring station on the volcano Mauna Loa has been constantly
measuring the carbon dioxide content. Since that time, carbon dioxide concentrations have gone from
about three hundred parts per million to just under four hundred parts per million.
Now, how do we know that the carbon dioxide comes from fossil fuels? By the isotopes of carbon in the
carbon dioxide. Remember that each element can have different numbers of neutrons in its nucleus.
Atoms of the same element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Isotopes of the same
element have exactly the same chemical properties, so when carbon isotopes burn, they'll make carbon dioxide.
Natural carbon exists as two stable isotopes called carbon 12 and carbon 13. About 99% of naturally
occurring carbon exists as carbon 12, while the remaining 1% is carbon 13. But the exact ratio of the
two isotopes depends on the source of the carbon, and by studying the isotopic contents of crude oil and coal
and natural gas, scientists have evidence that carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is coming from fossil fuels.
The reason that the increasing concentration of carbon dioxide is a concern is because CO2 is a greenhouse gas.
A greenhouse gas is a gas that absorbs and emits infrared radiation, which we perceive as heat, and which
contributes to warming our planet. This influence on climate is called the greenhouse effect.
Carbon dioxide isn't the only greenhouse gas in our atmosphere. Water vapor, methane, and ozone also absorb
and emit infrared radiation. However, carbon dioxide is the only gas whose concentration has increased by one-third
over the last 150 years. A graph of carbon dioxide concentration with average global temperature shows an
uncanny agreement, which is only one piece of data that suggests that carbon dioxide is impacting our climate.
Now, the greenhouse effect isn't inherently bad. Scientists have modeled that if it weren't for the greenhouse effect caused
by water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other gases, the Earth would be about 50 degrees Fahrenheit colder than it is now,
which would make living conditions on Earth significantly different.
Both of the planets, Venus and Mars, have atmospheres that are mostly carbon dioxide, and both of those planets are warmer
than they should be given their distance from the Sun. But the keys for us are that the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
is increasing, that human activities are the main cause for this increase, and that the average global temperature is increasing
at the same time. Measurements indicate that the average global temperature has increased by about 1.4 degrees Fahrenheit
since the beginning of the 20th century, and is predicted to increase anywhere from half a degree to over 11 degrees
in the 21st century, depending on the carbon dioxide output. What will be the effects of this temperature increase?
Well, for starters, what would normally be ice will melt into liquid water. For example, in the last hundred years,
80% of the ice cap on Mount Kilimanjaro in Africa has disappeared. The only way that ice can melt is if energy is added,
and this energy is coming from warmer temperatures. But ice isn't just disappearing in Africa.
The Arctic and Antarctic polar ice caps have both shown a decades-long trend of becoming smaller and smaller
as they melt due to higher temperatures. In the case of the southern ice cap, because most of the ice lies on top of the actual
continent of Antarctica, this melting ice will contribute to rising sea levels around the world.
Increased global temperatures will affect life in the oceans. We're already seeing the destruction of coral reefs around the world
as the population of sea creatures changes with water temperature. Fisheries around the world will have to change their expectation
as the timing and size of schools of fish change their life cycles. Biologists have already noted changes in the life cycles of birds and insects.
And we're already seeing an impact on the weather, not just a greater occurrence of more destructive storms,
because a warmer temperature means more energy in the atmosphere, but in the record-breaking high temperatures experienced around the world.
In the first ten years of the 21st century, eight of those years were the hottest years on record since 1850, all this because of carbon dioxide.
Our atmosphere keeps us alive. It has oxygen to breathe. It blocks harmful ultraviolet rays. It holds on to some warmth.
Our atmosphere provides us with thunderstorms, snowfalls, and rainbows. But our atmosphere is limited, and we've already demonstrated
with the ozone layer that human activities can change the atmosphere and not necessarily for the better.
But humanity has also shown that we can change our ways if the need is there.
An international treaty called the Montreal Protocol, which was signed by every single country on the planet,
was adopted to limit the use of chlorofluorocarbons, and as a result, the ozone layer is coming back.
Scientists predict that it should be back at full strength by the middle or late 21st century.
It may be harder for us to address the issue of fossil fuels and carbon dioxide.
While our technology was able to find substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons, right now there's not a good substitute for the sheer amounts of fossil fuels we use.
There have been some shift to ethanol, which we can make from plant life.
But to date, only the United States and Brazil have incorporated significant amounts of ethanol into liquid fuels like gasoline,
although other reasons like China, Canada, Australia, and the European Union are developing ethanol industries.
Now, it seems the best way to address the carbon dioxide issue is to change our habits.
And that's something that many people find very difficult to do.
For something that can't be seen and is rarely felt, our atmosphere sure does have an impact on everyday life.
Thank you.
