Human civilization goes back at least 10,000 years, and humans as a species were around
a long time before that.
A lot's changed over the millennia, agriculture, domesticated animals, written language, the
internet.
Over the course of human development, people used naturally occurring materials and slowly
learned how to fabricate new materials that were even better.
Nowadays, it's possible to manipulate single atoms, although most manufacturing operates
at scales much larger than this.
As human civilization developed, several types of matter were so important to the culture
of that time, that a historical age has been named after that material.
Although not every culture experienced each age to the same extent as others, prehistory
is often divided into three ages based on the dominant material used to make tools,
the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age.
After the Iron Age, written historic records marked the eventual development of the modern
age.
The so-called three age system was popularized by Danish historian and archaeologist CJ Thompson,
who refined it in the early 1800s and published widely about it in the 1830s.
The progression from one primary material to another was not universal in all cultures,
nor did they last for the same amount of time.
Some cultures remained as a Stone Age-like civilization until they met other civilizations.
My purpose here is not to oversimplify all of human development into a three age system,
but rather to recognize three of the materials that had major influences on certain cultures.
Nor do I mean to imply that a certain material by itself defined civilization.
Society was and is also defined by its agriculture, its social cooperation, its art, its science.
But the use of better and better materials definitely had an impact on the development
of other aspects of culture.
Ever go searching for, or even find, arrowheads in your backyard or in a local park?
Ever wonder why those arrowheads are chipped from stone?
The easy answer is that stone is everywhere, and was the hardest material that people had
to fashion weapons with.
That's a pattern that's been repeated throughout history by groups of people around the world.
But some people were able to develop other materials that did much better than stone.
I'll discuss that later.
For most of prehistoric times, stone was the hardest substance commonly found.
Stones, or in the vernacular, rocks, are solid mixtures of minerals that is non-organic matter
that compose the outer shell of the earth, called the lithosphere, from the Greek rocky sphere.
On our planet, most rocks are based on silicon and oxygen in compounds called silica, or silicates.
Together, these two elements make up almost 75% of the earth's crust by weight.
The third most common element in the earth's crust is aluminum.
And when aluminum is combined with silicon and oxygen, it makes a type of mineral called
aluminum silicates.
Most clays are aluminosilicate minerals, and when dried, they can become as hard as rocks.
Together, silicates and aluminosilicates compose over 90% of the earth's crust, so
rocks are pretty common.
The stone age is by far the longest age.
There's evidence of stone tool use in fossilized animal remains that are over 3 million years
old.
The oldest known archeological sites that contain stone tools have been dated at 2.6 million
years old.
These dates are consistent with the evolution of the genus Homo, possibly starting with
Homo habilis, Homo erectus, and ultimately ending with Homo sapiens, us.
Before I start talking specifics, let's talk about the different types of rocks.
Rocks are generally divided into three categories depending on how they were formed.
Igneous rocks are formed from the solidification of magma or lava from volcanic sources.
Granite and basalt are two common examples.
Sedimentary rocks are formed from the precipitation of sediment or tiny particles in a water environment.
Over long periods of time, the sediment solidifies into rock.
Sandstone, limestone, gypsum, and even coal are considered sedimentary rocks.
Metamorphic rocks are formed by exposure to high temperatures and pressures deep under
the surface of the earth.
These extreme conditions can change the physical and chemical properties of the rock.
The original rock, called protolith, can be igneous, sedimentary, or some other type
of metamorphic rock.
Slate and marbles are two examples of metamorphic rocks.
Rocks of these different types were used differently in the Stone Age because they have different
general properties.
For example, flint and chert are two types of sedimentary rocks largely made of silica.
They're both very hard, but they also flake easily, and so were made into sharp tools
like spearheads, arrowheads, and knives.
They were made by a process called napping, which is just beating on a piece of rock with
another rock called the hammerstone to chip off flakes one at a time until the final shape.
Even today, napping is still done by hobbyists or even scientists trying to understand the
process.
Bay salt and sandstone were used as grinding or pounding tools, so the original hammer was
actually made out of stone.
Stone wasn't used only for tools.
There is evidence that about two million years ago, prehistoric humans began using stone
for shelter, either with other materials like branches or eventually with animal skins to
make rudimentary tents.
Several world famous buildings are made of stone, some of them dating from the Stone
Age and some of them more modern.
Construction of Stonehenge in southern Britain began around 3100 BCE.
The great pyramids of Giza in Egypt were built between 2700 and 2100 BCE.
Pythons can also be found in Central America, where cultures like the Mayans, the Aztecs,
and others left large stone buildings that still exist.
Stone continues to be an important structural material.
The famous Cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris is made largely from limestone.
The Taj Mahal in India and the Parthenon in Greece are made of marble.
The exterior of the United States Capitol building was made from sandstone.
While modern buildings aren't constructed exclusively out of natural stone, many stones
continue to be used as decoration or accent pieces.
Of course, artificial stones are commonly used as building materials.
We call them bricks.
Modern bricks are mixtures of sand and clay that are fired in a kiln.
The type of bricks we call cinder blocks are bricks made with, literally, cinders.
The ashes left over from the combustion of coal.
Cinder blocks are, in fact, the largest use of recycled ash.
Let's get back to the Stone Age itself.
While we named the age after stone, this period of human development had other characteristics.
Humanity existed largely as hunter-gatherers, essentially obtaining whatever food they found
in their environment.
Stone age people apparently had burial rites because both above ground and below ground
tombs have been found all over Europe and Western Asia.
The earliest known examples of art and even musical instruments date from the Stone Age.
The transition out of the Stone Age is thought to have occurred in Northern Africa and Europe.
It came with the development of smelting, which is the process of heating of certain
rocks to release their metals.
The earliest known metal object is a copper axe found in modern-day Serbia that dates
from about 5,500 BCE.
The actual bronze age itself was well underway by about 3,000 BCE.
It wasn't until a culture learned how to smelt the metal tin separate from copper, then
mixed the molten tin with copper to make bronze that the bronze age was established.
Smelting then is one of the oldest industrial processes known.
Smelting is believed to be over 8,000 years old, but because it predates writing, its
actual invention is obscure.
You see, very few pure metals are found pure in nature.
Instead, they're found as compounds with oxygen or sulfur or carbon and oxygen together.
These compounds are generally known as ores.
In order to get the pure metal, these ores need to be reacted with certain other compounds
at high temperatures.
The chemical reaction taking place is known as reduction.
Substances that can cause reduction include charcoal, which is largely the element carbon.
So, at some point in history, someone realized that if you mix charcoal with a certain kind
of rock and get it very hot, you can make a certain metal.
Different ores ultimately yielded different metals.
Occasionally, the ore had to be heated to decompose it to a simpler substance before
reduction.
This process is called roasting.
Of course, one of the issues was this very hot part.
Different metals needed different temperatures for reduction to occur.
The earliest metals to be smelted were tin, lead, and mercury, which were being isolated
from their ores by around 6,500 BCE.
They were the first because relatively low temperatures were needed to smelt them.
They could be produced from the heat of a campfire.
However, they were all rather soft.
Indeed, mercury is a liquid at normal temperatures.
Because of their softness, they weren't utilized much except for lead, which only had a few
special uses like slingshot ammunition.
Lead was easy to shape, too, so later civilizations in Greece and Rome actually used lead to make
water pipes.
In fact, the Latin name for lead, plumbum, got turned into the English words plumbing
and plumber.
Similarly, tin was seldom used as the pure metal, especially because it was less common
than lead.
Copper however required higher temperatures, so smelting of copper had to wait until the
invention of the oven, or more specifically, the kiln.
That's right, it turns out that smelting of metals happened around the same time that
pottery started to be made.
Sure, you can dry clay, but it's still fragile.
But if you heat it in a special oven at about 2000 degrees Fahrenheit, it hardens into a
much tougher solid object.
Special ovens were needed because regular ovens didn't get hot enough.
Remember, your own oven at home only goes to about 500 degrees Fahrenheit, way too low
a temperature to make good pottery.
In any case, it seems clear that at some point, some thoughtful pottery maker realized that
high temperature smelting could happen in these kilns, too, and a new stage of civilization
developed.
Now, pure copper is also rather soft, but the oldest known pieces of smelted copper,
which are about 7,000 years old, were pretty impure.
Eventually someone noticed that if two or more metals were mixed, the resulting mixture
was harder than either metal alone, and with that, alloys were invented.
Technically speaking, bronze is any alloy of copper, and early bronze was a mixture
of copper and arsenic, as the two elements occurred together in many ores.
Later bronze, by about 3,000 BCE, was a mixture of about 90% copper and 10% tin, and was harder
than the arsenic-containing bronze.
Besides, arsenic was poisonous.
It's not unlikely that makers of arsenic bronze literally died out.
Bronze is harder than stone and pure copper, so it confers a distinct advantage to the bronze
tool and weapon user.
Why is this so?
Well, think of a pure metal as having atoms of all the same size.
These atoms can be forced around each other, either with a little pressure, or by banging
on them with a hammer.
This is what allows us to make thin sheets of metal.
It's a property called malleability.
But by mixing two or more metals together, you now have atoms of two different sizes,
and now they don't move around each other so easily.
Think of pure metal as machine oil, and the second metal is sand.
When you mix a little bit of sand, the machine oil isn't as slippery.
In an analogous fashion, many alloys are harder than the pure metals.
Bronze got used for a variety of items, like tools, weapons, decorative objects, building
materials, and even armor.
But the introduction of bronze to society signaled something else, a development of an
advanced agricultural society.
The domestication of plants and animals began in the late Stone Age, but with the development
of bronze tools, both human and animal labor became significantly more efficient, allowing
for larger, denser populations of people to survive.
By this time, dogs, sheep, goats, cows, and donkeys had been domesticated, as had certain
cereal crops like rye and wheat.
And if you grow it, they will come.
Some bronze age cities like Memphis and Egypt, Ur and Sumeria, now in Iraq, and Babylon,
also in Iraq, had populations of tens of thousands of people.
You've probably heard of these cities already, and it's because of another bronze age invention,
writing.
Writing of numbers predated writing of language, and by 5,000 years ago, certain specific
marks were used to represent certain specific numbers.
Clay was a common medium for making records, some of which survived as artifacts of these
civilizations from long ago.
Writing of language is thought to have developed in Mesopotamia in about 3200 BCE.
Although it's not clear if other civilizations adopted writing or developed it on their own,
it's pretty clear that writing did develop independently in China around 1200 BCE and
in Central America by 600 BCE.
What writing did for the first time is create permanent records so that the progress of
the civilization could be detailed.
We still have some of those records today, and each one is a snapshot of its culture.
The arrival of the bronze age required something else too, the development of interaction among
cultures.
In fact, interaction became a necessity.
The copper and tin ores used in smelting were seldom found in the same location, and different
groups of people had to learn to trade goods or services for bronze to be made at all.
These interactions between groups were not always pleasant.
It's generally recognized that large-scale organized warfare began in the Bronze Age.
Very likely because of competition for resources.
Water, food, land and other natural resources aren't evenly distributed, and if one population
gets too strong, they find it easier to take from others rather than to build for themselves.
It's unfortunate that this tendency lingers even today.
It might be difficult to imagine our lives without iron and steel, but iron was actually
the last major structural metal to be smelted.
Iron was known and used for thousands of years if you were lucky enough to find a meteorite
on the ground, but let's face it, that was rare.
For thousands of years, there was no way of getting a high enough temperature to melt
the iron in different forms, so the best you could do was beat it into shape with a hammer,
assuming that the hammer itself would survive the beating.
Getting iron from its ore requires much higher temperatures than you could get with a pottery
kiln.
You need a temperature of near 3,000 degrees Fahrenheit to smelt iron, and it took special
furnaces to reach that temperature.
Those furnaces weren't invented until 4,000 years ago in a region called Anatolia, which
is now eastern Turkey.
It was only then that iron metal became available.
Iron in its elemental state is not much harder than bronze, however, when iron is alloyed
with a bit of carbon, it becomes steel and is significantly harder than bronze.
Because charcoal, mostly carbon, was a common material used in smelting, a lot of the smelted
iron had a few percent of carbon in it, and it was really steel.
Even though smelting iron was more difficult than smelting copper or tin, iron ore is much
more common than copper or tin ores.
Also, you could make iron from a single ore, so you don't have to rely on trade with someone
else to get one of the raw materials.
So, once the method for making iron metal was established, it quickly became the metal
of choice for tools, weapons, and other uses.
Alloys of iron and carbon are tricky.
Iron with low carbon content is called wrought iron, because it can be, well, wrought, which
is an old name for wort.
The iron could be shaped, cut, or beaten with tools into the right shape because it was
relatively soft, especially when hot.
Typically, this working was performed by a skilled craftsman called a blacksmith, a skill
that still exists today.
Needless to say, wrought iron isn't very strong.
Iron with a too high carbon content, called cast iron, is brittle and difficult to work
after it solidifies.
In fact, the name cast iron reflects how it's used.
Typically, the liquid alloy is poured into a mold and allowed to solidify.
Cast iron was common in China by 500 BCE and was their primary iron alloy.
We still use cast iron today in cookware and pipes and automobile engines, but not in blades
where their ability to keep a sharp edge is important.
Wrought iron has a carbon content of less than a tenth of a percent, while cast iron
has a carbon content of two to four percent.
The oldest furnaces used to smelt iron are called bloomeries because the iron product
that came out was called a bloom.
Essentially, a bloomery was a clay or stone chimney with tubes near the bottom to allow
for the introduction of air, either naturally or with the help of a bellows.
Powdered iron ore and charcoal were mixed in a one-to-one ratio and then added to the
top of the bloomery on top of a charcoal fire.
In the course of burning, some carbon monoxide was produced.
This carbon monoxide reacted with the iron ore to make the spongy iron metal.
A bloomery didn't get to a high enough temperature to actually melt the iron.
This happens at about 2800 degrees Fahrenheit.
So the iron metal that came out, the bloom, was full of gas holes and partially smelted
ore called slag, that is, it was rather impure.
The bloom that came out of the furnace was beaten and formed by the blacksmith, ultimately
turning it into wrought iron.
Two other techniques came into play.
The first is called carburization, which is the heating of iron in hot coals followed
by rapid cooling by submersing in some liquid.
This process adds some carbon to the iron, turning it into steel.
While steel has superior properties to bronze and pure iron, it could also be pretty brittle.
The second technique is tempering, which is the treating with heat that, while it reduces
strength somewhat, also decreases the brittleness and makes it springier and more malleable.
Three thousand years ago, there weren't thermometers or other ways to actually accurately control
the process, so tempering was more of an art form learned by years of trial and error.
Modern science has learned that tempering alters the crystalline structure of the steel
in such a way that the final material is more flexible and durable.
Just like in the Bronze Age, there were other significant sociological and cultural advances
that accompanied the Iron Age.
Written alphabets became widespread, and some of our oldest manuscripts, books and other
writings come from that time, whereas previously clay tablets and perhaps single sheets of
papyrus are all that's left.
Because of the toughness of iron tools, more and larger natural resources were used to
construct more and larger structures, some of which still survive today.
Estimates of human populations suggest that the number of people alive at the time grew
by a factor of six from the beginning of the Iron Age to the beginning of the Common Era.
City states rose and fell.
Sea travel became a major means of transport, not just of people, but of goods.
In some respects, it's safe to say that we're still in the Iron Age.
Iron-based alloys are a major construction material, second only to concrete.
In 2013, worldwide production of steel was over 1.6 billion metric tons, mostly in China,
the European Union, Japan and the United States.
Please don't take these accounts as an accurate history of the entire world.
Different cultures in different parts of the planet developed at different times with different
resources.
For example, Southern Africa had no Bronze Age, they went directly from stone to iron.
Only in Northern Africa was there any significant production of Bronze.
Societies in China and the Americas were largely isolated from the populations of the Near
East and Europe until the 1300s and later, so they followed their own timelines.
There were actually seven metal elements known in antiquity, in spite of the fact that the
very concept of an element was unknown at the time.
They are alphabetically copper, gold, iron, lead, mercury, silver and tin.
Notice that their names don't have that IUM or EM ending that most metal elements have,
like sodium and lithium and calcium do.
No, the names of these metals date back thousands of years before the modern ideas of elements
and scientists were ever developed.
Of these seven metals, only three of them are found as native metals, gold and silver
and very rarely copper.
Of the remaining metals, one of them, mercury, can be liberated from its ore by the heat
of a campfire, but for the others, it took technology to isolate them from their ores.
What we see then is that with the development of technology came a parallel development
of materials that at least partially defined the society.
And it's still happening.
I just mentioned that we're still living in a sort of iron age because of the impact
of iron and steel in modern construction.
I could just as easily say that we live in an aluminum age because at 40 million tons
produced per year, aluminum is the second most widely used metal after iron.
However, aluminum production only began in earnest in the middle of the 20th century.
Why?
Because unlike smelted metals, aluminum is produced using electricity, not a furnace.
It wasn't until the widespread electrification of the United States after World War II that
aluminum production rose to significant levels.
Once again, we see technology, in this case the production of cheap energy, having an
impact on a material that helps define our society.
And it's not just metals.
The huge impact of computers on modern living suggests that we also live in a semiconductor
age because without these types of materials, we wouldn't have anything much more complicated
than an old style cash register.
We live in an age of plastics, those ever present synthetic materials that make things
like video discs, toys, dinnerware, and even car parts.
Most of those plastics use petroleum as a raw material, so maybe we live in the petroleum
age.
We live in an age of wonder drugs, chemicals that at relatively tiny amounts can alter our
health and cure diseases.
And we're entering the age of nanomaterials, pieces that matter a millionth of an inch
big whose properties we're only now exploring.
We live in an age whose developments can't be defined by a single material.
Let's face it, it's messy.
And frankly, it can't go on forever, which is why I predict that recycling of materials
would become more and more important to us.
But historically, in different cultures around the world, at different times in their development,
two or three different materials made major contributions to the standard of living at
the time.
Thank you.
