The Nobel Prizes are among the most prestigious prizes in the world.
The prize money is over a million dollars, but the prestige at receiving one is priceless.
Do you know how the prizes were originally endowed?
For namesake, Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel left the bulk of his estate over 31
million Kronor to establish the prizes after he died in 1896.
In U.S. dollars at the time, that was about half a million dollars.
Alfred Nobel earned a fortune as the inventor of dynamite.
It's ironic that the person who established the Nobel Peace Prize got his money by inventing
a product that destroys.
Our story starts with nitroglycerin, a simple compound that was first isolated in 1846 at
the University of Turin in Italy.
Right off the bat, it was found to be explosive and very easy to set off.
For example, in 1866, a crate of nitroglycerin exploded without warning in San Francisco,
destroying a bank and killing over a dozen people, leading to a ban on transporting the
explosive in all of California.
Users had to resort to synthesizing it on site, which was rather inconvenient.
Alfred Nobel's younger brother, Emile, was killed in the family explosives factory in
1864, which prompted the older brother to consider ways to tame this unstable compound.
Eventually, Nobel found that by absorbing the liquid nitroglycerin onto a type of crumbly
rock called diatomaceous earth, the nitroglycerin was rendered much less sensitive.
This mixture is formed into rods, wrapped with paper, and has a blasting cap added.
Nobel had invented what he called dynamite.
Patented in 1867, this relatively safe explosive was a huge advantage over other explosives
at the time, and its use in excavation and demolition spread rapidly, making Nobel a
rather wealthy man.
Since then, scientists have been searching for newer, better, safer explosives.
But it was also around that time that petroleum began to make its mark on society as a replacement
for animal or plant sources of fuel like beef fat, beeswax, or whale and olive oil.
Oil petroleum, or crude oil, can be separated into various components that have different
uses, but many of those uses involve burning the component to release energy.
Explosives and fuels have a common purpose.
They provide energy that we humans adapt for a particular purpose.
At the same time, however, they also have significant differences.
Both their similarities and their differences deserve a good discussion.
A fuel is a substance that reacts with oxygen, or some oxygen containing compound, to produce
useful energy.
For example, the wax in a candle is a fuel, and the oxygen comes from the air.
When the wax fuel burns, it gives off heat and light, which we sometimes put to some
useful purpose, perhaps warming a snifter or brandy or providing romantic light over
dinner.
We differentiate fuels from other substances that react with oxygen and give off energy,
but for no useful purpose.
For example, iron slowly rusts in the presence of oxygen and gives off energy when doing
so, but the reaction is so relatively slow that the energy given off serves no useful
purpose.
No one thinks of iron as a fuel, despite the fact that it is reacting with oxygen.
An explosive is a substance that gives off a lot of energy when it reacts.
If the reaction is so slow that the energy given off isn't useful, we call it decomposition.
If the reaction moves slowly through the material as energy is given off, it's called deflagration.
If the reaction moves so fast that it exceeds the speed of sound, the reaction is called
a detonation.
Most of the time when people think of explosives, they think in terms of detonations, because
it's that kind of reaction that causes destruction, one of the main applications of explosives.
Another difference between fuels and explosives is that fuels typically need a second component
called an oxidizer to react.
In many cases, oxygen from the air is the oxidizer.
In some specialty applications, nitrous oxide can be used.
It's interesting that the relationship between a fuel and oxidizer is determined by our atmosphere,
which has large amounts of readily available oxygen.
On the other hand, on Saturn's moon Titan, which has hydrocarbons in its atmosphere, what
would be the oxidizer here would be the fuel there, as the atmosphere would provide the
other chemical component needed to support a combustion reaction.
On the other hand, many explosives don't need a second component to react.
That's because many of them already have oxygen or other atoms as part of their chemical
structure that can act as the oxidizer.
We say they are self-oxidizing.
This lets many explosives detonate inside closed packages, buried under the ground, underwater,
or even in the vacuum of space.
Suppose we consider the chemical reaction of a basic fuel, methane, the principal component
of natural gas.
It has the chemical formula of CH4, meaning that each molecule has one carbon atom and
four hydrogen atoms.
Oxygen molecules in our air are made up of two oxygen atoms bonded together.
These two substances react to make carbon dioxide, CO2, and water, H2O, and in reacting
they give off energy.
The balanced chemical reaction is methane plus two oxygens react to make two waters
plus carbon dioxide plus 890 kilojoules of energy.
We need two oxygen molecules and get two water molecules in order to satisfy the law of conservation
of matter, which states that matter can be neither created nor destroyed.
That means we have to have the same number of atoms of each element in both the reactants,
our initial substances, and the products, the final substances.
But what's different in going from the reactants to the products are the energies of the chemical
bonds.
The bond energies in water and carbon dioxide are much lower than those in methane and oxygen,
so there's extra energy.
This energy is given off to the environment, causing a few things to happen, flame, heat,
and light among them.
These three things are characteristic of what we call an exothermic reaction, which
is a reaction that gives off energy.
It's this energy that's being given off that we can put to good uses.
We can heat things up like our house, or even a pot of water to cook spaghetti in, or light
up a room with a nighttime sidewalk to our front door.
But how much energy is 890 kilojoules?
It's about as much energy as in a three musketeers candy bar.
It's enough to warm up about a cup and a half of water and boil it completely away.
All that energy from about half an ounce of methane.
Other fuels have chemical reactions like the one for methane, but the amount of oxygen needed
from the atmosphere may be different.
There is something in common for many fuels, and that's the products of the combustion.
Virtually all fuels give off carbon dioxide and water.
That's one reason you sometimes see water dripping from the tailpipe of the car in front
of you.
That water is actually a product of burning gasoline.
But fuels also give off large amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and we use so
much fuel that the carbon dioxide gas is having an impact on global climate.
Here's an example.
If I drive my car 15,000 miles a year, and I get 25 miles per gallon of gas, I end up
adding almost 7 tons of carbon dioxide to the air every year.
That doesn't sound like much, but there are hundreds of millions of cars on the road in
the world, adding all trillions of pounds of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
And cars aren't the only things that burn fuel.
Other fuels burn and give off large amounts of energy, which is exactly their main purpose
to supply energy.
Additional substances we use for fuel include gasoline, coal, kerosene, diesel fuel, wax,
and even wood from trees.
But a large part of our industrial society gets its fuel from crude oil or petroleum.
Petroleum is found in underground deposits and is formed from the long-term decomposition
of massive quantities of dead organisms, usually plankton or algae.
Over times spanning millions of years, subjected to high pressures and temperatures while buried
in the ground, these leftover animal and plant bodies decompose into what is essentially a
dirty mix of hydrocarbons.
In other cases, impure solid carbon deposits called coal or big underground balloons of
natural gas are formed.
People dig up the reservoirs of these so-called fossil fuels to burn for energy production.
In fact, the collection and processing of fossil fuels, including petroleum, is one
of the major industries in our world and impacts finances, governmental policies, and international
relations around the globe.
Petroleum is, as I mentioned, a messy thing.
Although it's been known for thousands of years, it gained some importance in the mid-1800s
because a liquid called kerosene could be distilled from it.
This kerosene was burned in lamps and it replaced other fuels like olive oil, whale
oil, and oils from various nuts.
But the big rise in the need for petroleum came with the development of the internal combustion
engine.
The development of the engine is a story that goes back for centuries, but it was in the
mid-1800s that a design became practical and it needed a fuel to run on.
The first reliable internal combustion engine was patented by Carl Benz of Mercedes-Benz
fame in Germany in 1879.
Since then, much of the industrial world has come to rely on vehicles using internal combustion
engines, most of which use a liquid mixture called gasoline as their fuel.
In other parts of the world, other than the U.S., gasoline is called petrol.
You see, petroleum is separated at oil refineries into its various components by distillation,
a process in which the crude oil is heated and its components are evaporated at different
temperatures.
These components, called fractions, are condensed separately, thus separating them from each
other.
Invenors of the internal combustion engine used gasoline, not kerosene, to run the engines.
Gasoline is the fraction that evaporates between about 30 and 230 degrees Fahrenheit, while
kerosene evaporates between 400 and 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
We say that gasoline is more volatile than kerosene because it evaporates at lower temperature.
This is important because, unlike what you see in the movies, liquid gasoline doesn't
burn easily.
It's gasoline vapor that burns easily, and the internal combustion engine needed a fuel
that evaporated more easily than kerosene.
It may not be an understatement to say that our society is addicted to gasoline.
In the U.S. alone, almost nine million barrels of gasoline are burned each day.
This is about 44 percent of the gasoline production of the entire world.
Its price per gallon rises and falls due to many influences, and its price has an undue
impact on the global economy.
The U.S. average price for a gallon of gasoline changed significantly since 2000, ranging
from about $1.48 in 2003 to just over $4 in mid-2008.
Gasoline is a rather complicated mixture of hydrocarbon molecules containing anywhere
from four carbon atoms to twelve carbon atoms.
It also has a small amount of antioxidants to keep it from decomposing, some detergents
to reduce buildup formation in engines, and anti-knock compounds to prevent premature
combustion of the fuel.
In many places in the U.S., a significant amount, sometimes as much as 10 percent, of
ethyl alcohol is added as well.
It's added to increase the octane number, reduce the amount of carbon monoxide given
off in the exhaust, and reduce the dependence on imported petroleum.
As I mentioned earlier, when gasoline burns, it makes carbon dioxide and water as the main
combustion products.
One gallon of gasoline, which weighs about 6.1 pounds, produces about 19.4 pounds of carbon
dioxide gas and 10.1 pounds of water vapor, which eventually condenses into a liquid.
Again, sometimes you can see it dripping out of tailpipes.
It also produces about 10 million calories of energy, which is enough energy to bring
140 gallons of water from room temperature to boiling.
Depending on the vehicle, it's enough energy to go anywhere from about 5 to about 30 miles
away, which is of course its primary use for transportation.
Most gasoline is rated with an octane number.
This is related to engine knocking, but what exactly is knocking?
Well, when a gasoline and air mixture is introduced into an engine cylinder, the cylinder then
compresses before the mixture is ignited by a spark plug, sending a wave of combustion
through the compressed gases, and forcing the cylinder back up.
This is normal engine operation.
However, in some cases, the combustible gas mixture ignites unevenly, and the forces of
the combustion are rather badly distributed.
This causes a disruption to normal engine operation, and is called knocking because you
could actually hear the uneven shock waves from the engine.
Excessive knocking can cause unbalanced forces at the wrong time in the engine cycle, and
can even rupture an engine cylinder.
Not good for your engine.
A compound called iso-octane does this very little, so iso-octane is assigned an octane
number of 100.
The compound heptane causes quite a bit of knocking, and is assigned an octane number
of zero.
The octane rating of a gasoline sample is the percent equivalent of iso-octane in a
mixture that causes the same amount of knocking as the gas.
So if a gas sample causes as much knocking as a 90% iso-octane, 10% heptane mix, the
gasoline is given an octane number of 90.
The actual experimental measurement of an octane number depends on the type of experiment,
so many octane numbers are either averages or ranges.
In the U.S., most gas liens have an octane number between 86 and 92.
Because of local regulations, there are some gas liens in the market in countries like
Japan that have octane numbers greater than 100.
It's important to note that the octane number has no impact on the amount of energy or gas
mileage you'd get.
It's simply an indication of how well the engine behaves.
Want to make things a little more interesting?
Here's a warning.
Don't use gasoline for cars and airplanes.
Airplanes use a special gas formula called aviation gasoline, or AF gas.
See, the engines used in aviation are different, with different compression ratios than the
engine in cars, so most airplanes need a fuel with a different octane number.
The most commonly used AF gas has an octane number of at least 100, and it's actually
dyed different colors so it's not confused with other types of gasoline.
There's another form of petroleum-based fuel we use in some of our transportation, diesel
fuel.
Diesel distills from crude oil at about 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
Diesel engines are slightly different types of internal combustion engines.
Instead of using a spark plug to ignite the fuel and air mixture, it uses a higher compression
ratio than other engines, and the heat of compression ignites the fuel.
Because of the higher compression ratio, diesel engines are more efficient than gasoline engines.
They emit less carbon monoxide, and they're considered safer because the diesel fuel is
less volatile.
However, diesel engines are typically heavier and noisier than gasoline engines.
And because diesel is a high-temperature fraction of petroleum, it could sometimes gel or even
solidify in cold weather.
Two other important fuels that we use are coal and natural gas.
Coal is a burnable rock that is mostly carbon with some hydrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and nitrogen
mixed in.
It too is a fossil fuel formed by the decomposition of plant matter exposed to large pressures
and temperatures inside the Earth.
Coal formation starts when plant matter decomposes into peat, which transforms into a brownish,
crumbly rock known as lignite.
If exposed to higher temperatures and pressures, the lignite loses moisture and more volatile
compounds to become subbytuminous, then bituminous, and then anthracite coal, which is about 98%
pure carbon.
Coal is a major fuel source for electrical plants around the world, and one of the largest
sources of man-made carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Almost 8 billion tons of coal are burned every year, mostly for electrical generation
and heating.
One of the problems associated with burning this much coal has to do with its impurities.
Most coal is about 1% sulfur, and when sulfur burns it makes sulfur dioxide, which is converted
into acid rain in the environment.
Most modern coal burners are equipped with technology to remove much of the sulfur, either
from the coal itself or from the smoke.
Another potential concern is mercury.
Mercury is present in coal at less than 1 part in 10 million.
However, this still translates to almost a ton of mercury burned into the atmosphere
every year.
Granted, this isn't a lot in an atmosphere that's estimated at over a trillion tons,
but it's the trade-off we accept in order to have plentiful inexpensive electricity.
Natural gas, or more simply just gas, is another fossil fuel that's predominantly methane,
CH4, which is a gas at room temperature.
It also contains other gaseous hydrocarbons like ethane and propane.
Carbon sulfide, water, carbon dioxide, and sometimes helium.
It's formed in two ways, as the ultimate piece of hydrocarbon containing only one carbon
atom in the thermal decomposition of plant or animal matter, or by various bacteria that
emit methane as part of their metabolism just as yeast emits carbon dioxide.
Under the right geological conditions, gas can build up underground until it's discovered
by digging or drilling.
In many cases, natural gas is found in association with a crude oil find or a vein of coal.
Natural gas is used as a domestic source of heat, a fuel for vehicles, and a replacement
for coal in the generation of electricity.
In domestic uses, natural gas is used for cooking, to run water heaters, and for central
heating.
Many communities are switching to natural gas-powered vehicles, mostly buses, because it generates
less carbon dioxide for the same amount of energy generated, and for the same reason
many coal-fired electrical plants are converting to natural gas.
Gas gives off only half the amount of carbon dioxide as coal does for the same amount of
electrical energy generated.
Because of this, there's an environmental advantage to switch to natural gas as a fuel.
But there's also the economic factor, and in the last few years with hydraulic fracturing
becoming significantly more efficient, natural gas and coal have been duking it out over
supremacy in the energy generation sector.
We may have to wait a few more rounds before we declare a victor, if we ever do.
Now let's get back to explosives.
An explosive has one purpose in common with a fuel, and that's to give off energy.
But there are some big differences.
Many explosives are self-reacting.
You don't always need to supply air or oxygen to make it react.
An explosive needs to give off energy fast, very suddenly.
An explosive typically gives off a lot of gaseous compounds to build up a huge pressure.
This in combination with a lot of energy generates a shockwave that provides the destructive
force.
Not all of these requirements are absolutely necessary.
For example, mixtures of hydrogen and oxygen gas can explode, as can the dust around grain
elevators.
Typically though, these are accidental explosions.
In many cases, we use explosives for a purpose.
Say to demolish an abandoned building, or for mining coal or iron ore, or for blasting
rock to make way for a new road.
For these applications, we want control over what we blow up.
The earliest known explosive was black powder, invented in China in the 10th century.
It's a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and potassium nitrate, which is also called saltpeter.
It's the saltpeter that acts as the oxidizer, so black powder doesn't need air to burn.
It's actually considered a low explosive because it burns rather slowly.
But it does generate a lot of energy and gas, and by wrapping it in a paper tube, we can
make firecrackers or simple rockets.
Black powder, also called gunpowder, remained the explosive of choice until the 19th century,
and a lot of time and effort was spent in getting its formula right.
Nitroglycerin was first synthesized in 1846, and was the first explosive that was better
than gunpowder.
However, it's tricky to use and easy to set off, as Nobel's brother Emile found out
the hard way.
By absorbing nitroglycerin onto an inert substance, Nobel was able to tame nitroglycerin's nastier
tendencies, and dynamite was quickly incorporated into demolition, mining, and warfare.
Nitroglycerin detonates.
It decomposes to make gases that have over a thousand times the volume of the original
material, and gives off so much energy that the temperature in the immediate area exceeds
9,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
This generates a shockwave that can travel up to 30 times the speed of sound, and it's
this shockwave that makes the true destructive force of the explosive.
Nitroglycerin is one example of what's called a high explosive because it generates a supersonic
shockwave.
How supersonic?
A good high explosive generates a shockwave that travels one to five miles per second,
which is five to twenty-five times the speed of sound.
TNT was first synthesized in the 1860s and was used as a yellow dye.
It wasn't until a few years later that it was recognized as an explosive because it
was relatively insensitive and not as powerful as dynamite.
However, TNT rapidly became common because of several advantages.
It doesn't attract water.
It can be melted and molded easily.
And because of its relative insensitivity, it can be handled rather safely.
In fact, it needs a sharp kick from a detonator to make it explode.
In many applications, TNT is mixed with other compounds that have a higher oxygen content
to get more bang.
For example, a mixture of TNT and ammonium nitrate, called amatol, was used extensively
in both world wars.
Two current explosives had the fancy names Cyclo-Trimethylene Trinitramine and Cyclo-Tetramethylene
Tetranitramine, otherwise known by their three-letter names RDX and HMX.
Like TNT, these compounds are rather insensitive and need some sort of detonator to explode.
They're used almost exclusively by the military and can be mixed with other explosives to make
a more powerful punch.
What makes a compound a good explosive?
From an energy perspective, it should chemically decompose to make very energetically stable
products so that a lot of energy is given off.
Three of the most common stable molecules are water, carbon dioxide, and elemental nitrogen,
which exists as a two-atom molecule.
So, a compound that has carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen in the right proportions
has the potential to be a good explosive.
Notice I said has the potential, there's no guarantee.
A good explosive has to decompose fast in order to generate a shock wave that provides the
destructive force.
So it's not just energetics, it's also reactivity that has an effect on whether or not any compound
will explode.
Scientists all around the world are doing research on new molecules that have the proper
formulas trying to find the next replacement for nitroglycerin.
In 1888, Alfred Nobel's brother Ludwig died in France, and a French newspaper mistakenly
identified Alfred as having passed away.
The newspaper identified Alfred as someone who became rich by finding ways to kill more
people faster than ever before, in reference to his invention of dynamite.
There are some who speculate that reading this inspired Alfred to establish the Nobel
Prizes in the hopes of recognizing people who made significant positive contributions
to mankind's advancement.
One of the prizes is, of course, the Nobel Peace Prize, an ironic twist for a person labeled
the merchant of death in his own premature obituary.
Thank you.
