Hello and welcome to the Innocence Channel. Is there a way to talk about how we perceive
the world, act in the world and make sense of the world that also explains how other
organisms, communities and systems operate, right from and colonies to teams of work colleagues?
Today we have Daniel Freedman helping us understand the conceptual framework called
active inference, which may be able to do just that. Daniel has a fascinating academic background
in biology and genetics. His PhD was studying ant behavior. He co-founded the active inference lab.
I really hope you enjoy this conversation and can see how sensing inner bodily sensations or
interception fits with this active inference framework. Please remember to subscribe to
the Innocence Channel for more information about the role of your bodily sensations and tips for
using bodily awareness to improve your well-being. Thank you. Okay, so good morning Daniel. I believe
it's pretty early on in your homeland. Yes. Yes, it is early in California.
6 a.m. or 7 a.m. Okay, so thanks ever so much for taking the time to or making the time so
early on to join us on the Innocence Channel. We're here today to talk about a topic called
active inference. So please could you tell me a little bit about your background and how you
ended up establishing the active inference lab, which is something that I've really enjoyed
viewing. It's an online participatory lab that's communicating, learning and practicing
applied active inference. Well, thanks for the invitation and yes, looking forward to unpacking
a lot of this and I'll just begin with my path and how we all together came to working in this
active inference lab. So I've been a student of biology and genetics, always very curious about
how different living systems worked and enacted in their environments and I went to graduate school,
did a PhD in biology and specifically that was in behavioral ecology in ants and so for five years
in graduate school, I did field work in southern Arizona in the United States and also a lot of
lab work and computational work and all of those experiences are kind of embodied in their own way
and help just show me some glimmers of how many different methods and approaches and perspectives
there were on just one question like how do ants make decisions about how to regulate their foraging
behavior at the colony level. So that's kind of what I've been interested in from a research
perspective and during that time, I was also learning more about different frameworks for
perception, cognition and action and there are many such frameworks but the one that I started
to learn more about in around 2017 and 2018 was the free energy principle and active inference.
So comma there. I'll just leave it there before we go to the next chapter. Yes.
Well, so I'm just curious about ants and how you study them in the field. So literally you were out
but these weren't ants that had been collected in a kind of glass container. These were in a literal
field were they? Yes, they were in an actual open grassy field and ant field work was awesome.
The methods ranged from highly improvised and basic like using toothpicks and spray bottles of water
and stop watches and little flags and a lot of just things that are available objects and questions
that people could ask in their local neighborhood or in their backyard, counting ants crossing one
direction or another on the trail. But then also there was the liquid nitrogen and collecting ants
and labeling them and giving them pharmacological treatments and then collecting them and measuring
different aspects of their gene expression and all that comes with that in terms of like the
molecular biology and the computation. So ants are awesome to study and I hope that we can
continue to tie that in in this conversation because although your wall and some of your previous
discussions focus on the humant, sometimes I just think about things in terms of the ants and the
colony and I think that just shows how when we do have integrative ways to talk about perception,
cognition and action, everybody will have their own systems that they've studied and phenomena
that they've looked into. But there will also be like a higher language that helps us connect the
dots across those different systems. Okay. Yeah. And I think that word language, as you just said,
is sometimes it's key. I think you had, was it Mark Solms on your channel a while back and he
said this phrase, I think it was a avoid, he was wanting to avoid getting into semantic tangles.
And I think that is so, such that, you know, I love that that phrase has stayed with me and it's
so such a useful thing to remember when trying to have these sorts of discussions that, as you said,
we can be coming from different perspectives and have different experiences and different languages
to describe what we think is a useful way to explain our existence. But one person's choice of
words might have a very different semantic reasoning or understanding to someone else's.
So, yes, let's proceed. One thing I wanted to mention now that the theme tune for the active
inference lab is excellent. Was there any particular reason why you chose that theme tune? Was it,
did it represent the free energy principle or active inference or it's got some stochastic
elements and some non-stochastic elements? The theme song was a special request of a friend of
one of the co-founders of the lab, Yvonne. And Dima Shvokov is the name of the musician and
at least I did not provide even any suggestions. But when I hear it, I hear how there's a
a regimentation and an orderliness, but also an energetic feeling and a motivational and maybe
even an action-oriented feeling to it. So, it always is exciting when I hear it. Let me return
to the story of the lab. So, in 2019, I connected with the other people who we would all together
go on to co-found the lab and that was Alex and Yvonne. And we were very interested in
applying active inference to organizational design, especially to online teams and organizations.
They had a background in systems engineering and systems thinking. I had a background in
thinking about complex systems like the ants and also learning about active inference. And
all together, we knew that we had a lot of learning and applying ahead of us. And so,
we thought, how will we rise or meet this unknown unknown and only parts of it we were in a position
to see at that moment? How will we meet this large challenge of applying active inference,
a framework which is still undergoing conceptual development, just like all conceptual frameworks
are, but also one that we believe has a lot of possibilities for application. And so, we thought
we're not in a position to be hiring people to be in an academic lab, getting graduate students,
and the pace on that would be slow, even if that were an affordance that we had, an opportunity
for action. And so, we wanted to take the spirit of open science, decentralized science,
and just participatory sense making and bring some of these threads together by offering this
co-creative space, the active inference lab, where participants from different backgrounds,
different time zones, different levels of familiarity with active inference, and other topics
can come together and be learning, communicating, and applying active inference.
That's really nice to hear the background to that and the kind of the spirit of it being so
open and open to people joining in. And I would encourage anyone who's interested
after they've heard what active inference is to subscribe to your channel. And you always take
time in the first of a series of digesting papers to kind of really slow things down and to
cover all the different concepts that you're going to talk about in a particular series.
So, let's start by just, in a nutshell, can you explain what is active inference, please?
Okay. Well, the first thing that comes to mind with a question about
nutshells is Hamlet, who said, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite
space. So, active inference is very austere in some ways because the kernel of this nut,
the action perception loop, is very pre-application. Let's say it's very general and it needs a lot
of meat to be added and more to that skeleton before there's something there to simulate or use
even as a thinking tool. So, the kernel of the nut is very simple, almost to the point of being
infuriatingly so like language. So, that would be my zeroth pass, would be the nutshell is its own
domain and inside of it, there's so much space to be developing and there's so much that will
sprout out of it. But, yes, go ahead. Okay. So, they're infuriatingly simple bits about
action and perception. What is that? So, if there's someone you've never spoken to before,
you meet them in an elevator, what would you say active inference is?
Okay. So, here's how I would perhaps approach that. It's all in the title. Active inference
is about integrating action and inference. And then if we go one level deeper, we're using
inference, which is to say like cognition or in a computer happens to be computation.
We're using inference as a way of integrating our models and perspectives on action
with cognitive processes that include planning, perception, emotion, memory, anticipation. So,
we have this tremendous diversity of sensory processes. Those could be our visual sense,
our olfactory sense, our interception, proprioception. So, we have many inputs to the system.
And then there's also a diversity of actions that different systems select. And those can be like
the sort of onboard action opportunities, the onboard affordances for bodily action. And also,
they can include extended affordances like using a computer or using a pencil. So, we have a lot
of inputs. And then we have a lot of outputs. So, a lot of sense coming in, a lot of actions coming
out. And then there's a lot of things that happen in between in what we call broadly cognition.
Again, like some of those features or phenomena I mentioned like planning, anticipation, memory,
etc. Now, we could have bespoke narrow theories for each sensory modality, for each cognitive
phenomena, and for each action, affordance. And or we might be interested in pursuing some
integrative ways to unify our formal models and our informal models of perception, cognition,
and action. So, I believe that is what active inference offers. And then we can go into in a
second how it differs from some other frameworks. But I believe what it offers is a way to think about
that input space, the cognitive space, and the output space, as well as in the impact,
which is kind of the fourth quadrant there, thinking about all of those in a unified way,
which at the very least we have to do for useful computational modeling, but also just for useful
sense making. Okay, okay. So, it really unifies all of the different components of our being,
you'd say, of how we experience ourselves. Is that going too far?
Each will use the map to navigate the territory. So, if it's honest in how you say it, then
amazing, I hope so. Sorry, I was just going to say, how does it differ then from other more
classical ways of viewing how living organisms go about their business of staying alive?
Awesome question. I hope for, as we would say, an active expect and prefer that in the future,
there will be a URL that I can provide where these will be listed and enumerated and more
referenced. But just off the cuff, how does active inference differ from other potentially
integrative theories for action, perception, and cognition, whether they be cybernetic or more
system specific like a human psychological theory? So, one key difference between active inference
and some frameworks for biological and computational behavior like reinforcement
learning is that in active inference, action selection is accomplished by always the joint
consideration of epistemic and pragmatic value. Epistemic value means the value of information
or of learning and knowledge like epistemology. And pragmatic value is like utility or reward.
And so, in reinforcement learning, there's an emphasis on the common currency of pragmatics.
Reward value. And then it leaves a bit of this awkward or ad hoc way that curiosity
and intrinsic motivation has to reenter and be translated or transmuted into this common currency
of pragmatics like a curiosity bonus. We'll pay you a little bit to go on an extra epistemic
foraging trip. In active inference, though, we can have a common grounding between epistemic
and pragmatic value, which enables our simulations and our embodied systems to rapidly make decisions
that in one moment are more exploratory and in the next moment can be more exploitative
over multiple timescales. So, first point is it's a way that different than reinforcement
learning, we can bring epistemic and pragmatic value into a common grounding.
Second is short. And that's as mentioned earlier, that in contrast with essentially any other
framework, although I'm open to hearing what else people bring to the table, it integrates
very diverse and heterogeneous perceptual cognitive and action features in at least in
inter accommodating framework. And so very few other theories or frameworks attempt to have such
a scope. For example, there might be a model of just memory or of just action selection,
but then those are like different modules that then have an ad hoc connection. And so active
inference gives a principled set of connections. And then the last point that I'll make in terms of
differentiation with active inference versus many other theories is with active inference,
we can be quite explicit about where are we talking about the map? And where are we talking
about the territory? And so the territory, how things quote really are, and the map,
how we're modeling it. And so I think about a linear regression. And if we did a linear
regression between height and weight, and we found that there was a positive or negative
correlation or however it may be, nobody would think, well, you're saying that height and weight
are a linear regression. Because the linear regression is just a map, it's just a model
of a territory. And so similarly, with active inference, though many times people are interested
in how things quote really are, how the territory is, and may even use active inference to discuss
as if they are discovering how the territory is, we also have this opportunity to be very clear
about map making. And I think that is a tremendous value, because it helps us hold a space
between the observations that we're taking from a system and the modeling that we're doing,
while also leaving some of the mystery and openness.
Okay, some of the mystery and openness. The use of words terrain and map making there,
I think, will be useful later on when we dive into some of the concepts that are used amongst
your colleagues and peers in the lab, especially when it comes to this idea of,
sometimes it appears like the terrain and the map are identical. Day to day as I go about
my daily life, I feel that what I, you know, things happen so quickly that it feels like
I'm actually the terrain and the map are equal each other. But what I'm here saying here is that
active inference gives us an opportunity to understand how the map is formed and how it
relates to the changing terrain. Is that right? Yes. So we're all, without falling into any
simple fallacies, we're all inside of our sensorium. Pick a different spatial metaphor if you choose,
but we are not directly observing lightning strikes in clouds. We're receiving sensory input
in the form of sound and light in that case of like lightning and thunder. And then we're doing
inference on a hidden cause, an unobserved cause. Again, though we observe the sensory
consequences of the territory, and we can take a totally action oriented, realist, pragmatic,
let's get out of this open field because there's a thunder and lightning storm happening. So we can
make useful action while also holding that space and not thinking, well, we won't be able to take
useful action until we're in that cloud directly observing the lightning strike. It's like, no,
we are observing the light and the sounds and we're making an inference about unobserved causes
and we can share that with each other and we can decide how to act based upon that.
And then maybe when we're hanging out in the house, we could talk about what is real
and what lightning really might be. But there's also this ability to be applying active inference
again at the level of mapping, while also holding space for some philosophical questions
about the nature of the territory. Okay, so I think this is getting to a really
key point here. So the sensorium way I understand it is that that's just that's a way of describing
the collection of different things we might sense. So it's a bit like, you know, we have the genome
and the microbiome or collections of genes and microbes, but the sensorium is our
global collection of sensors. So not just the five sensors, as you said,
the intraception, procreception, all of these things, maybe pH, blood pressure, temperature,
changes in air pressure outside of us is anything that we might sense either consciously or
subconsciously. And if I could bring in one term from a field that active inference draws a lot
on, which is ecological psychology. Ecological psychology provided that notion of affordance,
which is like a capacity for action. So it's something that could be selected on the outbound.
And then a sort of complement to the term affordance is Umwelt. And yes, it's a German term or
something like that. And I'm sure it could be looked up and searched more, but it is exactly
referring to that sensorium, which is that integrated perceptual experience. And in active
inference, that is actually an actively generated process. And we can experience that directly
with our visual input. So in the anatomy of the eye, there's actually color receptive cells
that are more concentrated in the center of the eye. So there's higher resolution and there's color
vision in the center of the eye. And that actually kind of drops off in color perception
and in clarity as it goes out. And of course, there's a quite large blind spot in the eye,
which is like where the optic nerve is coming out. Yet our visual experience or at least a
possible visual experience has the felt sense of color in all parts of the visual field,
equal clarity, and quite curiously, no blind spot, right? So even just in the visual modality,
before we get to multisensory integration, or some of these more ineffable senses,
we're already quite aware that that Umwelt, that sensorium is not just a signal processing,
it's not just the microphone and then the filter and then the central processing unit
and then the action selection unit. There's actually something quite dynamic where even
when we close our eyes, we can still continue to have a generative model. But when our eyes
are open, that too is a generative model, one that is meeting a compromise with the incoming
sensory information, to be sure, but also is actively generated by the generative model of the
organism. Okay, so just to sort of quote, I think it's Anil Seth from his book Being You,
he says that all of our perceptions are controlled hallucinations that happen
with through and because of, you know, our body. So this, so it's not just
visualized, things we visualize with our eyes closed that are kind of models. Actually, everything
that we perceive is constructed as a kind of to help a model to help us understand things
which are beyond our direct ability to our ability to perceive directly.
Yes, I think we can even explore this notion of perception as active or generative in two
senses. So the first is in this sense of the generative model, for example, of vision, where
there's this generated visual scene, what Anil Seth calls the controlled hallucination, that is
being met with a compromise by incoming sensory data, and that can be modeled using Bayesian
techniques, but we won't go down that road. So that's one sense that perception is generative and
active, just to summarize is it's not this passive receiving, it's something endogenous,
internal, and then being met with a compromise with internal incoming information. And the other sense
that perception is quite importantly active, it's an amazing example that's used in the
recently introduced Active Inference textbook. And I think it also speaks to this map territory
distinction and the importance of action for perception. And so the experiment, the embodied
experiment goes like this, place one's finger on their pants. And so that is-
I'm going to do this now. So on my thigh, just when you say pants in English, sorry, in England
means underpants, but I can do it on anywhere on my trousers. Now I have reinterpreted many of my
previous awkward interactions. No, I'm just kidding. Yes, on one's favorite piece of clothing or
fabric on the couch, if they may. Is the fabric rough? And the answer is actually to even determine
that the finger must be moved because the roughness is a feature that we do active inference on
through actual physical motion. And by reducing our uncertainty through action, we're integrating
action and perception. And so we couldn't just sit there, so to speak, with our finger on moving
and think about whether it's rough or not. So here, the fabric is like the territory,
and the map is how rough is it there? Maybe there's parts where it's rough and there's
parts where it's smooth. But how could we know if all we have is a finger in a dark room,
we need to move it? And that actually has a lot to do with other cases of active perception,
like ocular motor movement, eye motion, when we're reading or scanning, or all other kinds
of things that people can think of where the sensory inputs are not predestined or determined,
but they're actively sought after in a way that is more like seeking and informed foraging
rather than just ad hoc sampling. That's a really simple but powerful example,
so I can't tell if something's rough or smooth. I could guess it if I was looking at it, but by
touch, I have to move, I have to take this active part of the to infer whether it's rough or smooth.
And so that's kind of an easy to grasp physical example, because we all know how to move our
fingers and feel texture. But what we're saying is that that principle applies to all types of
inference. There's an active component. And I guess that makes sense with sound because we can only,
you know, it's the moving between pitches, isn't it? It's the change that allows us to interpret
sound. If it was all just one tone and constant, we would never be able to distinguish between
anything audible. And just one other example. So we've mentioned the physical palpation
with touch and touch receptors. And so it's a yes and with all the biology of the touch receptors.
So this is something that is here to, again, be a yes and to all the molecular biology of touch.
It's just adding in this note that in the organismal context, action is part of the
perceptive process. Then we mentioned the visual scanning. And then a third example might be in
communication, where somebody might have uncertainty about whether their conversant is
on the same pages them or seeing what they're seeing or whether they're grasping or comprehending.
So it's like we already have these visual and tactile and even prehensile or grasping metaphors
for communication and cognition. And we might take an active step of like asking,
how does that sound to you? Or what does that make you think about? Or does that
make sense what we're planning here? Those are an example of communication as action and inference
in the interpersonal. And that's an example about how active inference can be applied
at the cellular and at the organismal level, but also at the interpersonal level, which again
speaks to one of the important aspects of this integrative framework, which is that it helps
us connect the dots with different systems and scales. And that helps me appreciate the
concept of an affordance as well, which you mentioned. So you can't really,
you know, so an affordance from what I understand is that the quality of something. So, you know,
a cup has got graspability, I can hold it, but to, you know, to a fork laying on the table that
the cup isn't graspable, because the fork doesn't ever use cups. So it's the fact that we have to
actively do something that makes the cup have the affordance of being graspable.
And an important piece there is that relationality or the way that you described how the affordance,
it's not like we could just tag the cup as being grabbable by whom, not even by all humans. And
so actually the concept of an affordance and this radically relational nature of affordances and
situational helps us bring accessibility into the picture, bring personalization,
and just other situational context, because there's no such thing as an affordance
that is agnostic to the actor. And so again, it's an example of a qualitative insight,
like interactions are relational or preferences, expectations, affordances, all are conditional
on the situation. Those are quite qualitative felt senses that many people may resonate with.
They might not have on their own connected that to Bayesian statistics and formal models of the
action perception loop. However, we're all increasingly finding that indeed those connections
are there. And hopefully we can hold the space for there to be a continuum of discussion,
again, between those qualitative insights, like context matters, and some formal models for action
and perception in context. Okay. Can we think about I'm looking at your mission statements again,
for the active inference lab. So it's a participatory online lab that's communicating learning
and practicing applied active inference. Can we think about the practicing applied part so
in what ways can active inference be applied once you become aware of the concept,
how can you apply it or practice it? Awesome. Well, I look forward to
a thousand applications blooming. So I have more uncertainty than certainty on that question,
because I think we're just beginning a few areas where active inference has been applied.
If I could list them and then we can see which ones might be interesting. The first is in the area
of bodily physiology, whether interception as well as in mental health and in cognitive dynamics.
So there's a lot of work that's been done in a clinical and in a psychological domain.
A second area is in the group level. So thinking about online teams and communities,
as we and others have and modeling group communication as a case of active inference.
And then the third might be in robotics and embodied non biological systems or systems that we
want to imbue with some natural perceptive, cognitive and active features, but are not
the same type of biological thing as we are. So those would be three quite interesting areas,
would be the organismal and bodily, the community, team, group, communication space,
and the embodied robotics. I find that the second one, the hardest to kind of see how that would
be applied. I can see how, as you said, mental health and in the health domain, it's really
easy to apply or possible to apply and also robotics or artificial intelligence, because
it's all very much about being able to take action and infer and all of that. But for the
group dynamics, can you give a sort of example about how the concept of active inference
applies in a group setting? I'm thinking about your aunts in the field now.
Yes. Yes. Is the aunt the nest mate or is the aunt the colony? Well, aren't colonies just
sets of nest mates? But aren't nest mates just sets of organs? And aren't organs just sets of cells
and so on? And how do we think about collective action? And again, somebody may have no issue
with thinking about an organism as being the locus of perception, cognition, and action. People
make decisions, right? Yet groups also make decisions, sometimes explicitly, like through
what is quite literally called policy decision making in governance or in an organization.
We also call that policy selection in active inference. So sometimes groups make overt
policy selection. And there's some type of internal process of determining that like a vote
or however it's done. So just as we could think about the subunits, whether they're modeled or
unmodeled in the organism, leading to an organismal decision about policy, we could also think about
an analogous process, be it implicitly or explicitly reached for how groups are making
decisions. And then that is that interesting question where, well, I mean, again, groups don't
have perceptions, cognitions, and actions. They're just composed of people who do. Okay, fine. But
then people don't, right? It's just the cells. And that's the reductionist slippery slope. And
then one can also take the train in the other direction, the holest slippery slope. Well,
individuals, be they cells or organisms or groups, they're always in an ecological context. And so
they actually can only be said to be a bit player in their decision making, because they're part of
these extended, enacted networks of action. And so it's like, we know there's a train that slides
us down the reductionist path. And we know there's a train that slides us down the holism path. And
so much work beyond active inference has observed that relationship or tension or dialectic. And
again, active inference is like, maybe in that metaphor, like the train conductor,
helping us do something useful and move things back and forth and have fun and hang out on the train
while we're in a qualified way, and hopefully in a principled and rigorous and accessible way,
modeling these different scales of the system.
Yeah, the policy and politics and group decision making, that makes sense now.
It's reminding me of a conversation I had with Professor of Politics called Laura Cram from
Edinburgh University. So her day job is to, is academic and to look at
politics and decision decision making within politics. But outside of that, she teaches,
she's a yoga teacher, and has created a type of yoga called interception yoga, or that's what
she brands it as. And she cited a very interesting study where it was looking at
decision making in politics. And, you know, as the person, as a person enters a room into a meeting,
depending on what the, what flags are placed in front of them that they see from different countries
will influence the decisions they make in the meeting. So, you know, it's
the, this idea of the symbolism of what's presented in front of us influencing the actions we take,
the decisions or the actions we take, and that's just from a flag, you know, and so fascinating
stuff, mind-boggling stuff. That makes me think about polling, or polling, when there's an
assessment of sentiment, for example, within an organization or within a country, that is kind
of like interception at that group level. There's the, the palpation, that's like the customs are
on the border, on the interface. And then there's the interception, which is like the sensing within
and so as I've listened to your work and seen this area of interception develop,
it reminds me of sometimes that external focus that perception, cognition and action have had.
And now I think we're seeing new ways of balancing, not prioritizing or ranking,
they're just different complementary processes of extero and interoception and wouldn't it would
be awesome to have unifying ways of talking about them and modeling them so this didn't have to be
like this topping of food versus this topping or like sports teams. There are not team,
exteroception and team interoception. There's the organismal mystery and the territory.
And then there's how we model it, our mapping and sense-making process, which is participatory
and collaborative and built on the shoulders of giants and so on. And so to be able to, again,
respect but also have usefulness in that space brings us back to active inferences focus on both
the epistemic and the pragmatic value and how in moment to moment those shift, you're doing
something useful and then all of a sudden you need to go do an action that's useful because
it helps you reveal something, an epistemic action. And so just, again, having fluidity
to talk about those two sides of the interoception, exteroception coin and the two sides of the coin
with epistemic and pragmatic, two sides of the coin with perception and action, it's kind of this
minimum of two idea that pervades a lot of the discussion that gives us flexibility but also
the ability to drill in and do useful things. It's 19. Daniel, do you have any personal
experiences or examples to share of how viewing the world through the lens of active inference
has influenced your own life, changed your behavior or allowed you to see things differently
or situations differently than you did before if you can remember life before active inference?
When I was a young forager, well, there's probably many expressible and ineffable ways to address
that and I think of it as a show not tell, but the example that comes to mind is, again, related
to my aunt research as I was just beginning to study this area. So on one hand, I was reading
and learning, not doing anything useful from the point of view of perhaps some, but I was learning
because I was continually being surrounded by novelty and new information and what was very
exciting and just meeting my curiosity with this endless stream of papers and formalisms.
And then on the other hand, I was there in the field with the stopwatch and the ants. And so I
thought, how can there be a synthesis of the ways that the ant research community has modeled
the multi-scale system that are the ants and this kind of abstract notions that I'm learning
in active inference and I acted. I reached out to authors and I started sketching different models
and that moved onto a path that resulted, for example, in 2021 in an active inference model.
And so that was something where it wasn't on my radar when I started that process of
action and curiosity in tandem. And so I think that active inference through bigger,
longer time scale phenomena like just described, like adjusting one's research agenda or regime
of attention, as we might say, towards applying active inference to a phenomena that I was already
interested in. But then seeing how that plays at a much shorter time scale too, it's just fun to
weave together the concepts and find the patterns across different systems and phenomena.
Yeah, I got a sense of the looping there. So you went from curiosity to action reaching out to
people and that's that loop has kind of snowballed, I suppose, and brought you where you are today.
Wonderful. So I first became aware of the term active inference after reading it in a paper by
Seth and Friston on the topic which this channel is all about, which is interception. And the paper
was called Active Interceptive Inference. So they jammed interceptive in between active and
inference and the emotional brain. And so it speaks to the heart of the inner sense channel.
And the way I understand it is that what we can see is a model where signals from our body,
so these feelings that we sense from inside our body can be used to update our predictions about
the state of the body. So I'm now hungry because my stomach's rumbling, for example, or we could
just leave it there or we could actually lead to an action that helps us return to, helps keep
stay alive, basically, return to homeostasis. So this is, you know, my blood vessels dilate or
contract and that helps me move towards food, for example. So we carry on. If I could give
it on the temperature example and how active inference deals with homeostasis that return to
a normal temperature range or pH or blood sugar range, but also how active inference deals with
allostasis, which is sometimes where stress is actively pursued by an organism or they make
a decision that's anticipatory, like choosing to bring a jacket with the expectation that it will
be colder outside. So in those kinds of settings, which we interpret as cognitive, like if a robot
or an ant did it, we would think that it was thinking because it planned to bring the jacket
along. And so that's like allostasis or planning because it's the expectation through time of
body temperature and actions can be taken in anticipation about future expectations. Somebody
can wince before there's a physical impact and there's probably so many other examples. So just
wanted to add that point that a lot of frameworks deal with homeostasis and the return to like a
control region. And that's very familiar to the areas of like cybernetics and control theory.
But where those frameworks without this deep generative model concept sometimes fall a little
short is in dealing with situations where there's uncertainty about the future, but actions are
taken now to ameliorate that uncertainty about the future or to bring body temperature into
alignment again in the future, but not putting on the jacket in the house, but preparing a future
affordance. So just wanted to bring that up because that temperature example, it's both a basic
example used in cybernetics and control theory and homeostasis and physiology. But just by moving
into that example again qualitatively, before we layer on any math or any variables, we can think
about the reality of how temperature is modulated in the world. And that opens up a very rich
discussion about other cognitive features that would be really important to consider.
Yeah, thank you. Yeah, the term allostasis is less well known than homeostasis.
And as you're saying that, Lisa Feldman Barrett has come up with the term body budgeting, which as
I understand it is equivalent to allostasis. And so it's got that kind of idea of budgeting or
forecasting, as you say, planning into the future. And the body bit is about that it's looking after
our energy or resource budget or balance. And as you will use that example of temperature and
putting on a jumper, I was thinking, okay, that's that's for me personally. And then I might build
a house to control my temperature environment for my family. And then we have weather broadcasters
and weather stations, which for you going back to the point about group decision making, you know,
if the weatherman or woman says tomorrow, there's going to be a snowstorm, then that changes the
decision that has an act people will take action on a kind of city or country or nation wide scale.
So would you say that's allostatic control at a group level or active inference at a
national level? Absolutely, the weather person provides a high and a low temperature, let's
just say, but another way that they could share those two temperatures would be like the midpoint,
and then the variance around that midpoint. And so that's still sharing two numbers. So instead of
saying it's going to be between 20 and 30, we could say it's going to be like 25, plausibly plus or
minus five, and it still could be outside with a smaller probability, but 95% or 99% of the time.
So absolutely, what they're conveying is their estimate and uncertainty, which is kind of like
where epistemic humility comes into play. We say things like, I'm not sure about or I'm quite sure
about. And again, that's reflected in that weather report. Is it 28 to 32? Or is it 10 to 40? So what
is the variance? And we always hold space for that mean estimate and the variance estimate.
And yes, the weather report is being utilized as an actionable signal for people who then take actions
from their set of affordances based upon the information they're receiving. So then people
go and buy a jacket if they hear that there's going to be an upcoming string of cold days, for
example. And so yes, it's a great example about how communication at the group level
is happening through information technology and through meteorology. But then also there's that
biological version of like different cells and different organs, kind of like sending weather
reports. And there was a professor at my graduate school, Craig Heller, who made this awesome and
interesting technology. It was like a glove. And there was other variants that had a slight negative
pressure. And then it had cool, but not cold water circulating. And it turned out that that
was able to reduce the body's temperature. And that previously many approaches that people had
taken to recovering people from hypothermic or hyperthermic, entailed putting colder hot
appropriately on like their thermal sensors. And that actually sometimes suppressed the body's
actual thermal response. Because it's like, the body's overheated, and the danger is the core
overheating. But then the thermal sensors, like on the shoulders, would become cooled down. So the
person would immediately feel relief. But it shut down their endogenous vasodilation, actual heat
dissipation, which created a dangerous situation. And so this is like a way of not using active
inference, but of course, could be modeled as such. And working with the ways that bodily and group
systems actually do communicate and make decisions, rather than thinking that we can just intervene in
this one specific way. I love that example. And it sort of reminds me of some of the therapeutic
approaches for dealing with something like anxiety or phobias, where you're wanting to, you know,
stop the overall system from going about its, you know, its normal action perception loop,
and find an entry point, and give it a different way to update its its model or update its action,
so that it doesn't turn into a vicious cycle. And, you know, that that method, I suppose, which
they had a negative pleasure glove or something you said, I guess that's similar to some of these
techniques like the Wim Hof method, or something where the person is training themselves so that
their body doesn't, I guess you couldn't say the set points, the allostatic set points are being
shifted by the practice, or the the model of how dangerous the world is, is being changed
by the practice so that the perception of threat is being altered.
Yes. Entities are taking actions that are aligned with a kind of entity they expect and
prefer themselves to be. And that's something that for sure can be unpacked and explored.
But perhaps methods of training, like the breathing methods that you mentioned,
in the sense they update, I'm the kind of thing that is chill in a cold shower. That's me. I'm
that person who does take a cold shower, who has the discipline to do so, and who sees that being
enacted, not the kind of entity who observes the book being unread on the table about cold showers,
but doesn't feel the cold. I'm the person who's now perceiving taking deep breaths and all that
comes along with that from the Vegas, etc. while I'm also getting that cold water. And that is
where the updating and the development happens, not in the hypothesized experience. So I think
there's some amazing and deep and relatively lesser explored territory with how we frame
our own interception and development. I mean, I'm tempted to sort of go deep in this on the
and go into the free energy principle and
expecting ourselves to be in a state and but I'll save that maybe for another time.
I am aware we're coming up to an hour and this was due to be an hour hour long meeting.
Do you, I wanted to go into some of the terms that you use with your colleagues,
but I think we'll maybe we'll leave that.
If I could give a closing note there, just on a historical and a relatively closing issue,
then we can have her much shortly longer, you'd like. Several years ago, and in earlier
developmental stages of this framework, there was I would say less clarity between what the
free energy principle was and active inference. And so I hope that increasingly it becomes
distinguished and that people can find accessible on ramps onto both. But for those who are listening
this far in, yes, it would be awesome to unpack it in the future. But active inference is about
that action perception loop and free energy sort of meets there and goes in a totally different
direction. I don't know if it's totally different, but it is a different approach. And so like it is
a different way that we can go. Okay, so yeah, if anyone watching or listening to this is curious
about the free energy principle, then there's lots to be enjoyed on that topic. One question
before we wind up, do you have any thoughts about when inter receptive active inference
could become maladaptive to an organism? As I am only an ant doctor, I can only speak to that.
But it makes me think about anteroception. And I think, well, how could it become maladaptive
in the colony if its internal perception, for example, of how much food it has becomes maladaptive?
What if it's continuing to forage and just store up seeds way beyond what's reasonable? What if
there aren't enough seeds, but it isn't foraging because it's not elicited to do so, because
it's colony level interception isn't happening. Or what if it's blocking up its entryway every time
it gets cloudy? And that's actually like a false positive rate that's unacceptable. But it would
be appropriate to act that way sometimes when it does flood in the desert, but it's not that way
every day. And so I think it's a very interesting and important area to understand how different
contexts and different people in different cognitive systems find themselves in situations where
the ball rolls downhill and it all makes sense. Yet it goes in a way that we don't prefer. And so,
again, it both does make sense why the body and mind and spirit are compensating in a given way.
But also, we may want to be part of that process and move it to a different space.
Yep. Those two examples are really nice examples about gathering resources like food. Do I need to
keep hoarding, hoarding, hoarding, hoarding or not? Or let's find to let the cupboards go empty,
will be fine, everything's okay. And the weather one, oh, it's a little bit cloudy,
batten down the hatches for the next month. But nothing actually happened.
Or the other other extreme. They'd believe the weatherman. And then
I'm sure there's analogies at the organismal and at the social level.
Well, thank you so much for your time. And I've really enjoyed this conversation.
Where can people, well, what's on the horizon for the active inference lab over the next few
weeks and where can people find out more about your work? Awesome. Yes. Thanks again. And I
look forward to continuing the interaction in different ways. So to learn more about active lab,
head over to active inference.org. And you'll find a lot of resources there. You can also find our
videos and other content and so on, as well as find out about your affordances for participating
in the lab. So that's definitely the best way to find out more. Some of our next steps just to name
a few include discussions with none other than you, where we'll be with some other authors of work on
osteopathy and the therapeutic alliance and a lot of other fascinating topics. And we continue to
develop some educational materials, as well as work through the textbook, there's a lot of learning
and applying that people are involved in an active lab. Great. Exciting times.
And awesome. Yeah, really fun times. Again, I'm looking forward to continuing it. And
one hour is not enough, but one year is not enough. So onwards we forage.
Onwards we forage. Thank you so much, Daniel. Thank you. See you later. Bye.
