electrical engineering, ophthalmology, and the Graduate
School of Education.
He directs Stanford Center for Cognitive and Neurobiological
Imaging at MRI Service Center, and was deputy director
of the Wu Sai Neurosciences Institute from 2013 to 2021.
Dr. Wandel earned his undergraduate degree
in mathematics and psychology from the University of Michigan.
He then moved here to the University of California,
Irvine, where he received his PhD in social science.
Dr. Wandel then completed a post-doctoral fellowship
at the University of Pennsylvania.
In 1979, he joined the faculty of Stanford University,
where he has been conducting his research up to the present day.
Dr. Wandel's research centers on vision science,
spanning topics from visual disorders, reading development
in children, to digital imaging devices,
and algorithms for both magnetic resonance imaging,
and digital imaging.
Dr. Wandel's work in visual neuroscience
uses functional, structural, and quantitative MRI,
along with behavior testing and modeling,
to understand the action of the visual portions of the brain.
His lab has worked to identify and then
understand the organization of the visual field
maps in the human brain, color and motion
processing within these maps, the potential for reorganization
following injury, and the development of cortical circuitry
for reading.
The Wandel lab develops software tools
for digital imaging applications.
The software includes methods for analyzing magnetic resonance
imaging data, as well as tools to design and evaluate cameras
used in a range of applications.
His work has resulted in multiple publications
in prestigious journals, and has led
to the commercial applications, including two companies,
that he co-founded.
He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences
in 2003, and most recently received the prestigious Proctor
Medal from Arvo in 2021.
We are very excited to host Dr. Wandel here in person today,
and please join me in welcoming him
and presenting his talk today, Cortical Circuitry
for Vision and Reading.
Well, I hope you can all, OK, we've got a mic here.
We thank you very much for the invitation.
It's really nice to come back to Irvine.
I was, it's amazing, you know, for,
I'm looking at so many young people.
It's amazing what you can't imagine what it was like
when I was here in 1974.
And it was incredibly, it's gorgeous now.
It was actually quite gorgeous just in a completely different way
than with just fields everywhere and emptiness.
And you filled it up with some really brilliant people
and some wonderful institutions, and it's a really pleasure
to see how it's developed and what's come here.
So I chose a couple of things, as you mentioned kindly
in your introduction, I'm old, and there's
a bunch of things that I could have chosen
to speak about over the years, work over the years.
And I've chosen, because I'm so fond of my colleagues
in ophthalmology, I've tried to choose some things that
are related to issues that may come up
in the field of ophthalmology.
And in particular, I'm going to focus
on cortical plasticity during development
and cortical plasticity in adulthood, which
has took a fair amount of time for me thinking about it.
And this is because in ophthalmology,
you're so fantastic at doing work at the front end
of the system and wondering what's
going to happen at the back end after long periods
of problems at the front end is something, I think,
that we, as a scientist and not a practicing clinician
or doctor, it's something that maybe I can help with,
or at least help you get prepared for as you develop
these fantastic devices.
I think my friend, I don't see him on here,
but Daniel Polanker, who I know is up.
Hey, Daniel, good to see you.
Maybe we should be having coffee instead of this, though.
Working on these devices, working on devices
to implant in the front end, or the different kinds
of gene therapies that are evolving and so forth,
mean that you want to know what's happening at the back end.
So a lot of the stories that will be about that.
So I'm also going to take you through,
let's see if we can get this to go forward.
So as I was just saying, plasticity and stability,
human cortex is really what the issue is.
By the way, sometimes you'll find people,
and they may come through here, that I'll just say,
oh, it's so plastic, it's so plastic,
and I'm not one of those folks.
There's both plasticity and stability,
and it depends where and when and so forth,
and I'm not going to be one who just says it's amazing plastic.
You'll see it in other contexts.
So let's try to figure out when it's plastic and stable,
and then I'll take you to bits about how
we tried to do something at the intersection of education
and seeing and feel that I hope that ophthalmologists might
get a little more involved in pertaining to how it is we
recognize objects and see words and have visual acuity.
OK, so let me go back to the beginning.
I'm going to do some of the basics first,
because in my experience, you may all
be terribly expert at this, but my guess for most ophthalmology
visits is that the cortex isn't really
what you wake up in the morning and think about,
so let me just set the stage.
So the history of how we figured out things
about the organization of visual cortex
is really quite amazing.
Perhaps the most famous name isn't shown here,
it's a guy named David Ferrier.
And Ferrier, when Hubel and Wiesel gave the Ferrier lectures,
and he's a very famous name.
And Ferrier, in this particular deal,
is the guy who stood up there and said,
you know where visual cortex is?
It's in the parietal lobe.
If you lesion the parietal lobe, you'll be blind.
And that was just wrong.
That was just wrong, but he's very famous.
And he did other things that were better,
but he got that one wrong.
And the guy shown here, Monk, was
like, no, that's not right.
But he did it in such a rude way.
He also did lesion experiments.
And he said, the actual visual cortex is an occipital lobe.
He did it in such a rude way that William James stood up
and said, what is wrong with all these vision people?
They're so argumentative.
What are they doing there?
And then he went, Monk basically got it right,
identified the occipital lobe.
It was then Henschen, who's a Swedish neurologist,
who studied a lot of people with strokes
and noticed that when the stroke occurred
on the dorsal side, the upper side of the brain,
the loss would be in the lower visual field
and the lower side of the chalcron.
It would be conversely, it would be in the upper field.
So Henschen was the first one to see
that there was a little bit of retinotopic organization.
Certain parts would you lose one part of the visual field,
other parts of the brain, you'd lose a different part.
It was then Inouye, working with,
showing up here, these helmets and rifles
from the Russo-Sino-Russian-Japanese war
in 1904, something like this.
And these were damaging instruments,
but they didn't kill you.
And a bullet might go past through your head
and you wouldn't die from it,
but it would lesion a part of cortex.
And he had a lot of people that he studied with us
and he could see even more beyond Henschen
to the visual field map,
which Holmes had the same situation
but in the First World War.
And the Holmes map became quite famous.
And actually, if you don't mind,
I don't often see this many ophthalmology folks
at the same time.
How many of you are taught the Holmes visual field map
as part of your training?
Just so you know, Daniel,
I'm not seeing a lot of hands go up here.
So, and I don't think that,
I think the same thing would be true
at Stanford by the way, so it's the same story.
Nonetheless, it's visual cortex
and the map is shown here.
This is a little bit,
you'll see a lot of brains coming up,
but this is the occipital pole,
the very posterior part here.
The foveal region is represented over very large expanse.
So it's very small,
it's just maybe, you know,
600, 800, 900 microns across on the retina,
but it spreads out quite far
over a centimeter in the area of the one.
And then you can see the representation here.
The lower visual field shows up on the upper bank
of this calcarin sulcus, which is here.
And the upper part of the visual field
was represented in the lower part
of the calcarin just as Henshin had told us.
So this has then became,
it was kind of a quiet period
until the start of the electrophysiology revolution,
the 30s and 40s, at which point,
all the neuroscientists,
sort of the origins of neuroscience in the visual cortex began
and from about the 40s to the 90s,
there was a massive number of measurements
when we discovered, gee,
there's not just one such representation,
but there's many such maps like this.
And I'll show you pictures of them coming up,
but that was in all in animal models.
And when it came to human,
there had been, you know,
we can't do electrophysiology in a human.
And so we had this,
I could pull out this very nice quote from Jonathan Horton
and Bill Hoyt, who are a wonderful neuro-optimologist
at UCSF said, basically, we don't know anything
about the second visual map in human in 1991.
That's kind of where we stood.
And the reason was we had technology
that looked like this, a PET.
And PET is pretty good for some stuff,
but in terms of spatial resolution,
the ability to measure a lot, you know,
this is what would get you a nature paper in 1985.
You'd take a bunch of people and put them in a PET scanner
and have them stare at something in the fovea
and then keep fixation,
but put the stimulus a little bit peripheral
and you'd see that this little spot here
would move from the very back of the brain,
a little bit forward, you're averaging many people,
you put a little outline of the brain there,
you'd write for three or four pages and there you go,
you got yourself a nature paper.
And that was the best we could do in those days.
But the revolution in functional magnetic resonance imaging,
the ability to measure repeatedly
in the same person at higher resolution
meant that by about 20 years later,
we were able to make measurements
of the human visual cortex
and what's shown here again is the same posterior,
the occipital lobe over here.
And the spatial resolution had changed
from boxel sizes this big,
a chunk of brain this big to a chunk of brain this big,
shown to scale, so a massive increase.
And you could put people in again and again
to increase the signal to noise ratio
so that we could literally identify where area V1 is
and then the second visual map V2 surrounds it over here.
I'll show you how we get it in the second.
And the third map surrounds that and so forth
and we could keep going.
And we did for quite a number of years.
You could find out not just the maps,
but notice that for these three maps here,
one, two and three on the medial surface
of the left occipital brain.
Am I okay when I say that?
Medial surface left occipital lobe.
You can see that we can measure not just where the maps are,
but the eccentricity representation,
just the way Holmes and Inouye and Henshin were telling us.
And here you can see this is representation
from a couple of degrees on out.
And you can see the large fobial confluence back here.
And notice that the eccentricity maps for all three,
the eccentricity representation for all three
of these maps is the same, right?
They kind of run together in parallel with one another.
The way in which you measure that,
we kind of figured this out in the early 90s,
was you would have somebody go into the scanner
and stare at a fixation.
And the first way we used to do things
was we would just have like expanding rings like this.
And you can literally, you know,
I'm running this faster in the scanner
that takes about 30 seconds for a cycle,
but that would be tedious.
So we run it a little bit faster here.
And you can literally just see
the eccentricity map running across all three
as you go from the posterior occipital pole
into the anterior counter.
Notice by the way, there's a little thing going on here.
I'll come back to that in a moment.
And it's easy enough to just see the common eccentricity map.
And we often represent it.
You'll see some maps like this as we go on
by literally just saying, when was this part activated?
Well, it was activated early,
then that was this fovea was activated a little bit later,
and that's the just, you know,
para-phobia and so forth.
And then going out to the periphery.
Notice that little part I was pointing you to down here,
that's another little foveal representation.
And it's actually distinct
from the main foveal representation of V1.
And this has been seen,
I'll build on that as we go on a little bit.
To find the different field maps,
that comes about by just putting in a stimulus
that instead of expanding,
just goes around in a circle like this,
rotating wedges into early days.
We do it differently now,
but this is how we did it back in the day.
And you can see that just as Henshin told us,
here's the red, here's the lower vertical meridian.
Green is the horizontal,
blue is the upper vertical meridian.
And that's a whole hemifield there, the V1 map.
Notice that on this side, it's all blue and cyan.
Blue and cyan make it a little bit into the green.
So that's the upper quarter field.
And so it only goes that far.
And that's why we say V2 goes a quarter, half of it here.
And on the other side,
where it's now red and green, the other quarter field,
that's why we say it wraps it around.
And we already knew this from the monkeys
that it was likely to be like this,
but the ability to measure it in a living human
might be doing a task and we might have some disease
and so forth, that's pretty cool.
And you can do it now in experiments
that take about 10 minutes.
When we first did it, these experiments would take an hour.
Maybe you'd have to do it two or three times
before you got it right.
But at these days, the technology is just way beyond that.
So when Alisa Brewer, who's here, was in my lab,
she was also an MD-PhD student at Stanford back in the day.
And we did a number of things together.
And one of the things was we really paid attention.
We can see this, we shrunk down the field.
So instead of trying to get the whole coverage
of 20 degrees, 30 degrees, we shrunk it down
so that we would just focus on the higher resolution
and the central phobia.
And that really clarified some things.
And particularly clarified that this wasn't a mistake,
this separate eccentricity representation down here
in the ventral surface.
And so here you can see the central three degrees
are represented just in the posterior
and all the mapping together.
But there really is a separate distinct little
eccentricity representation right down there
on the ventral surface of the phobia.
And in fact, as we pursued this over the years,
and this was probably six or 10 years worth
of trying this and checking and checking,
we and a whole bunch of other groups
observed that, yeah, you've got one eccentricity
representation here.
Here's the second one I was just showing you
in the ventral occipital region.
That one, by the way, can also be separated
into a couple of maps.
It's not just one map,
but just as we could separate the V1, V2, V3,
we could separate the ventral occipital.
And then there was another one on the lateral occipital.
It's okay.
And then there's another one we stuck with the notation.
Actually, sometimes I call this temporal occipital,
but MT is so famous amongst neurosurgeons.
Recording in progress.
So that means we missed the first part, could be.
And then another couple up here
along the intrapurital sulcus.
And for those of you who are students
and might do this, all the names
that were floating around in the literature,
if you go back and read the literature in those days,
we all have these weird monkey physiology names,
but we managed to persuade people to wipe that out.
And if it's in the ventral occipital,
it's called ventral occipital.
If it's in the lateral occipital,
it's not called lateral occipital,
but A1 and 2.
And for those of you who are students,
all I can say is you're welcome.
That was a battle.
And I'm glad you don't have to go through it.
Okay, so the next thing,
once you kind of figure out where the maps are,
the next thing you might do is try to figure out
some computational models of what's in the maps
and how are they responding?
And why do you have so many maps?
And I'm glad to talk about it.
I won't give an answer to that today,
but I spent a lot of time worrying about that
and talking about that.
But one of the things you can do is the same kind of thing
that the physiologists have done for many years
all the way back to Heartline and Kofler.
Well, we'll eat in fact while we're back to Sheraton.
You can look at a particular voxel
and you can just start sweeping,
you know, put a bar, run a bar through this visual field
and ask, well, what happened at that voxel?
And try to map the receptive field
of that particular voxel.
And so Sergio Mulan and I started a little industry
of quantitative modeling of the response,
put different stimuli through there
and try to predict what the response would be.
To any particular stimulus.
And, you know, we started as anybody might
with just linear models of what the fields would look like.
And I could see a certain distance
and you can see very big differences.
If you look in V1, the spatial receptive field,
which is what's shown there is quite small.
If you look in MT regions,
the regions on the temporal occipital lobe over here,
the receptive fields are much bigger.
And in fact, if you look within a map,
so the lower one here is V1,
as you go from the fovea to the periphery,
the size gets bigger.
As you look across the maps,
that's the different colors over here.
The sizes just get systematically bigger
across the different maps.
So there's a great deal of order
into what these signals look like.
And then the next thing that particularly Kendrick did,
Serge, that number of us,
was look at the more and more complex models
of to explain larger and larger classes of stimuli.
And that's an ongoing project.
And I'm happy to talk about that computational project,
but it's not exactly a ophthalmology thing.
So talk to me about that,
if that kind of computation is of interest to you.
So by the time, I don't know when we wrote this,
maybe 2008, 2010, something like this,
we and a number of others,
I should mention, and Sabine Kastner,
Roger Tutel, Marty Serino,
there'd been a whole bunch of us competing
with one another and struggling,
oh, who's gonna get the next map?
Who's gonna do this?
Who's gonna do that next and so forth?
And by about 2008, 2010, that game was over,
so we all moved on to the next games.
And there had been some agreement,
at least two or three groups,
that seemed something like 16 different visual field maps
spread across the brain.
And there's now just kind of a big question
of how they're organized and what they're for and so forth.
And I'm not gonna go in that direction today,
but I think it's a great topic for basic science research,
and particularly relating it to all the new developments
and computational vision.
The direction I am gonna go is at that same time,
the wonderful Nobel laureates
for the field, Hubel and Wiesel,
were looking at developmental plasticity.
And that was important thought.
And Mike Merzinek was up at UCSF, saying,
oh, everything is plastic, everything is plastic.
My God, the brain hardly stays stable at all.
And John Kosz was kind of backing up.
And I enjoyed all of these folks
and sort of started to look into it a little bit.
And so we started to do some experiments,
but then because of communities like yours,
sitting at my desk, minding my own business one day,
and somebody calls me up and says,
Brian, Joyce Lee Owl actually is an ophthalmologist
at Stanford calls me up.
So Brian, we have this patient here,
it seems a little weird.
Would you mind measuring this patient
because he doesn't have a chiasm?
Okay, no chiasm.
So that's interesting,
because we could measure the visual field maps
and here's somebody who's miswired at the very front end.
So again, this I'm guessing you do all get lectured on,
just you'll tell me that the outputs of the retina,
the nasal side always crosses to the other hemisphere
and the temporal side stays on the same
and that's on a typical subject.
And that means that, for example,
the right hemisphere sees the left visual field,
left hemisphere sees the right visual field.
And if you don't, and that's what it looks like in an MR scan,
easy to see and this is what this guy looked like, okay?
No chiasm.
And there's a molecule that in fact signals
that the nasal axons from the optic nerve
are supposed to cross at the chiasm.
And if you don't have that molecule, they don't cross.
And now all of a sudden you have like one eye
goes straight up to the same side,
the other eye goes straight up
and there's no crossing, no hemifields,
both hemispheres, well, they weren't sure,
they called me out and said,
could you confirm this?
Because I don't really trust this MR stuff really.
And so could you confirm what's happening in the map?
And sure enough, here's an example
of an experiment from the paper.
This eye is open and this eye we covered up
and we put things in the left hemisphere
and it's the right eye and so sure enough,
you get a response over there.
But you know that in a typical,
if you flip the stimulus to the other side,
the response would flip to the other side.
But in this guy, you flip the stimulus to the other side,
stays on the same side and you have both maps
overlaying one another in the same hemisphere.
So let me say about this guy,
you might think, wow, this guy must have trouble seeing,
right?
No troubles.
Reeds plays baseball, doesn't have stereo vision,
has a little bit of, he came to us
because he had nystagmus.
And then the nystagmus always had a little
and the nystagmus got worse.
But mostly he passed all the standard clinical tests
as we described in the papers and so forth.
So this guy is completely miswired in the front end.
And yet, so his V1, V2, V3 are completely unlike
any of you in this room.
And yet he could read, walk around just fine,
never really complained about his,
we actually had two subjects like this,
Michael Hoffman, great collaborator in Germany.
Had one and we had one and we were,
the moment we were going to go first and we just said,
let's put it all in one paper together.
And Michael was a great collaborator for that.
So we could then put on, try to measure receptive fields
in people, in these people.
We did it for the ones that are in a surgeon.
I had just been developing the PRF,
the population receptive field methods back in those days.
And the way you run those is you put some stimulus in here
and you move these bars through.
And you could see that the fits of the models
that we would have to apply to explain the data
from this particular guy would have two Gaussians, not one.
It was like the retinal representation sensibly enough
was folded over itself like this and came on up.
So that in the world, when you referred it back
to the stimulus, he had these symmetric Gaussian
receptive fields out there.
And the curves are the fits and the points are the data.
And that's, it was a pretty good explanation in the sky.
So one of the things that's interesting about that
is that it's a miswiring upfront,
but everything else sort of stayed the same.
In other words, when you looked in V2, V3 and so forth,
it continued the bad V1 representation.
That didn't change to try to compensate for it and so forth.
And yet somehow or other,
the ability of the visual system to interpret it
just stayed the same.
So I've always wondered,
there must be a massive amount of ability to learn
and to deal with whatever input you have
in the other parts of cortex.
And the guy did not, by the way,
make any right, left confusions,
any of the things that you might have just quickly thought of.
So that's interesting and it tells us probably less
about the visual system, which just seems stable,
than it did about the rest of the cortex's ability
to interpret objects and see patterns and judge positions
and so forth, given a miswired front end.
So I've always thought I should spend more time working on that.
Okay, let me say one other thing about this guy.
During the years that,
during the years that I had been developing this,
I'd also had the good fortune to work with Franco Pastilli
here amongst at Takamura and others,
and we were spending a lot of time on tractography.
So tractography is a method using diffusion-weighted imaging
to go and make estimates of the tracts.
And I've just given the last three lectures in my class,
I've been all about tractography,
which is mostly filled with the things that it's limited on.
But one of the things that it's not limited on is,
when you know that there's a big tract there,
and the fact that you're all looking at me
and I can see your eyes and you're following and so forth,
means that I'm pretty confident you have an optic nerve,
an optic tract, an optic radiation.
I'm pretty good with that.
And we can use diffusion-weighted imaging
to go and find them in your brain.
So we could do that for this guy who had been miswired,
and we could look at the sizes of them.
And he was just at the edge,
he wasn't off the distribution on anything.
So this is, for example, a measure of diffusivity
in each of these different regions.
The ellipses are showing you the distribution.
We had 30 controls sitting around in our databases.
And so I put an ellipse of where the distribution is
for these values, measures of diffusivity.
And he's really not off the charts anywhere here.
And if you look at the size of the corpus callosum,
because typically you go from the between the two hemispheres
through the corpus callosum in the very back,
called the spleenium, you can say, well, how wide,
how much of an area is there going through the spleenium?
He's small, corpus callosum, small spleenium,
but not off the distribution either.
So even though there'd been this miswiring at the chiasm,
which was obvious, there wasn't much of a big effect
in any of the wiring in other places.
So we were glad to know that.
And I have to say, although,
and this has now been seen Michael Hofmann carried on
with this research over the years.
And there's nothing really to change
in the big part of the story of the many details.
And I recommend Michael's work and others on this.
It turns out he and Irene Gottlob have found more people
like this and it's just, okay, so at that time,
so that's a case where part of the system is miswired.
I wouldn't say that that's developmental,
but I would say, you know, it's a miswiring in development.
And the brain is quite classically says, okay,
I can deal with this and moves on.
And I had been listening to Mike Merzeneck and John Koss
and all these others talking about plasticity.
So, and I have this very close friend,
Logathetus, who had been given a wonderful opportunity
at a Max Planck Institute and he went and built himself
a rig that's shown here on the left
to do these experiments in animal models.
And in fact, he could put in macaque and as, you know,
the macaque brain is about 10 or 15% the size of the human.
So it's not the same, but it's the closest,
I suppose to, oh, I don't know, say a mouse,
which is one 3,000th the size of the human.
So that's okay.
And so with Elisa Brewer and Stelios Mironakis and Nikos,
you know, we went over there
and we could use the same methods
to go and find the macaque.
This is the operculum, they call it back here,
this is the eccentricity map.
And this is one of the reasons why the macaques
are actually an attractive model,
because V1 is just on the surface right back there.
So it's easy to get at with microelectrode and so forth.
And so we could go and do that.
And Stelios, Stelios is a neurologist and was a postdoc
or something, he had some position with Nikos
at the time he's now at Harvard.
And he could lesion the left eye and the right eye
in the corresponding locations.
And that would therefore remove the inputs
to this chunk of V1.
And so that gave us a controlled situation
where we thought, okay, great,
now we're gonna see it plastically reorganized,
we're gonna do some biochemistry
and look at the molecular basis for this and so forth.
And we measured LPZ-Sanford lesion projection zone.
So he had lesioned the two eyes and we measured right away
and then we measured two weeks later
and then we measured four months later
and then a year later, not shown here.
And the thing just didn't close up at all,
just didn't close up at all.
And this really ran in the face of lots of other,
Charlie Gilbert and so many other people were saying,
oh my God, there's all kinds of plasticity.
But they were finding their plasticity
by going in with anatomical measures of boutons
or looking a little bit of sprouting.
So what they were seeing were things
that were maybe 50 microns in size.
And we were looking at something here
that was many millimeters across.
And these are just plots, time after time.
And plus we were looking at fMRI
and they're looking at anatomicals.
So, okay, maybe it's the electrophysiology
but it's Nicos' shop and Nicos went in
with the electrophysiology and he came out
and he would come out,
and I remember one time in particular he came out,
Nicos is a very great, enthusiastic, vigorous guy
and he's only about this big
but he can still shake quite well.
And he said, it's the deadest piece of cortex
I've ever measured.
So we just weren't seeing it.
And there's a little bit of residual conflict
in the literature.
They, this happened to get published,
accepted for whatever reason in nature.
And it's a little bit of back and forth about that.
And I don't think we convinced them.
And I know we've seen this again and again now.
We saw, I didn't wanna keep flying to Germany
and working on this thing with monkeys.
It's a project, it's complicated for various reasons.
But we, I did have a good fortune
to work with you, you each your own Masuda
and Hiroshi Horiguchi, who I had a series
of wonderful ophthalmologists from Japan who came by
and would work with me on projects like this.
And they really led projects on other kinds
of retinal lesions, natural ones
that you guys probably study and treat routinely.
JMD, Libers, we have Libers patients,
retinitis pigment, TOSA patients,
and they have now published a series of articles
and they've been great.
I'm maybe I helped them find the coffee
and get started on this work and shared some tools,
but they have really pursued this.
And the same thing has been true
in all of these kinds of human subjects
that when in the face of macular degeneration,
it's not the case that cortex changes and fills in
and there's a lot of plasticity.
And again, we're sticking with our story on this,
but it's a pushing and shoving going on
a little bit in the literature on that.
Okay, so I will now tell you a case study
in this general thing, perhaps.
Some of you will have heard of the famous
Chesselden case, it's not, it's just kind of a fun.
This is showing up here, oh good, it's not.
The Chesselden case, whereas the first case really
where somebody had very bad optics,
very bad physiological optics,
and Chesselden did a surgery in 1728
and hoping that the kid that he did the surgery on
would be able to see and the kid didn't really see very well.
Richard Gregory had done a remarkable case of,
when they first did the corneal transplants
in London in the 50s, Richard was a brilliant guy
and went rushing down to the hospital to see,
well, what happens?
This person had been blind for,
I was thinking SB had been blind for many years
and now all of a sudden the cornea has been replaced
and it's a clear retinal image and what does he see?
And nothing very good happened in that case
and SACS tells him a similar story,
the elbow tells him a similar story.
And we had a case like that for the first time,
all of those were behavioral cases, right?
These were corneal replacements
that you could then study their behavior
and ask them what they see and that's a great thing
about studying humans, you learn a lot.
But this guy here, Mike May, and Mike is very public,
he's written books about it and so forth
and nothing secret about his case.
Mike had a, who had lost vision when I was just completely
blown out in a chemical and thermal explosion
in his parents' garage when he was about three years old.
But when I was still intact, but the cornea
and the limbic stem cells were completely blown out
and every time they tried to put in a new cornea,
it would just cloud up and they tried that once
and it didn't work and they didn't wanna do it anymore.
And so he lived for 43 years with one eye very, very clouded.
So he had no contrast.
He would, if the room liked to turn on and off,
he could see that but he couldn't see any pattern
to structures, it was so clouded.
He was quite a remarkable guy, I'll tell you more about him
and he then went in, maybe you know this person,
it was a Dr. Goldman in San Francisco,
whom I don't know, but who learned how to do
these corneal replacements with the stem cell therapy.
And here's a picture of Mike just coming out,
as it's just taken off the bandage,
he's reaching out to touch his then wife,
first he'd ever kind of seen her face and so forth.
And we became an Ioni Fine,
who really got into this, met Mike and started testing him
and found him quite a bit and she called me up one day
and said, so like you know how to do that MR thing
and we don't really have any MR data on people like this.
Brian, how about if we all get together
and we do some magnetic resonance imaging of Mike
to track it and she had been doing and we helped
with some just standard tuning curves
and maybe you guys know the spatial frequency on this axis,
so you know how many cycles per degree on a pattern.
And this is Mike May's data at various times,
various months after the surgery.
And you can see he can see stuff
at very low spatial frequencies
and 0.25 is very low for a spatial frequency.
You can all see out to 30, 40 cycles per degree,
the controls in this region are all flat in here
and Mike starts to fall off like this.
And so even after the surgery,
after the replacement, after he has a good retinal image,
after he has a good ERG, like to retina ground,
he still has very poor spatial resolution.
And I happened in 84 weeks, months after the original surgery
happened to be driving past Davis where he lived
and I stopped in and took another measurement,
just didn't change, just didn't move much.
And Mike, by the way, even though he had this surgery
and he doesn't regret it and he could sort of see stuff
so that he couldn't see before some amount of patterns
and so forth, he still had a seeing eye dog
and he had a cane and he lived his life
and he's quite a remarkable guy.
He's an entrepreneur and he just had all these rigs
and stuff and he kind of lived his life
not that differently after the surgery
compared to before the surgery.
So that suggests that all those years
living without any contrast vision
meant something had happened to his visual cortex
that just wasn't gonna get fixed
after the corneal replacement.
Okay, so it's a kind of stability.
43 years of this, sure, I'd give you a good retinal image now
but even though for these achiasmics,
the cortex has no problem coming developmentally,
I can figure out anything, give me this, give me that.
I'm okay, I'm good to go.
But for Mike, after 43 years,
cortex now all of a sudden an image comes in there
and cortex says, I'm sorry, I'm cooked.
I'm ready to go, I'm not changing.
So there was a couple of things,
I'll show you the responses for Mike.
This is this temporal occipital region here.
When you put in a moving stimulus
that really flickers and moves and so forth,
you'll always get a really big response
in temporal occipital cortex here.
Sometimes maybe you'll have heard of MT,
it's kind of a famous visual area
of this very filled with motion responses cells.
And he actually, that he had.
This is a control here, you can see,
I think it's actually a Lisa.
And you can see that moving stimulus produces
all kinds of activity.
In Mike, it wasn't very much, but MT was there.
We could see that.
Mike, by the way, as I mentioned, he was special.
Mike, as a blind guy competed in the Paralympics
in the skiing event.
And for quite a number of years,
he held the world's record for downhill skiing
for a blind guy and the speed was 100 kilometers per hour.
And if you wonder how a blind guy skis at that pace,
it's you get the world gold medalist to ski in front of you
and he tells you, go right, go left, stuff like that.
He leads you down over the moguls and stuff like that.
So Mike was, that's why, you know, he's out there
with a book and he was hoping that Robert Redford
would play him in a movie and stuff like that.
So he had a lot of flickering lights
and lots of kinds of things, you know,
transitioning across his visual field.
And so perhaps that kept this alive.
When Netta Levine, who's now in Jerusalem
and his chair of the Neurology Department there,
she was fortunate to have her in the lab
for a couple of years.
And when we compared controls,
you've seen this before from phobia to periphery in Mike,
that all that foveal stuff, all that red stuff,
just, you know, we just never could see a signal like that.
And we could, in fact, this is the sizes, the PRFs,
I was showing you these things that they go up,
like in typicals, they go up, up, up like this.
In Mike, they're bigger and then they come down.
In fact, the size he has here in the periphery
isn't that different from the size of these guys,
the typicals in the periphery,
but in this fovea, the size is way too big,
consistent with his inability to see fine patterns.
Okay, and things like face areas and stuff is just,
you know, we don't get that out of Mike.
We did also look at the tractography in his case,
and he is off the distribution.
So Mike is the star over here.
And this is longitudinal diffusivity
and radial diffusivity of the optic tract.
And Mike is, here's the, you know,
the ellipsoid is the usual cortical distribution.
We also compared in the blind and monocular patients
and so forth.
So something did happen from the age of three on
to the white matter in his brain.
That was quite different.
And the corpus callosum was a really big effect.
Here's Mike, he has a very big corpus callosum,
but a very small crossing compared to all of these others.
It's just diagnosing.
I don't, I wish I had a computational model
of what implication that would have.
And if you know this, what would that mean?
And what should we expect?
And what could we do?
I also, I'm sorry, just a little aside.
I wanted to say that I have just become amazed
at the last 10 or 15 years about the white matter
and the axons in the myelin.
I'm just kind of shocked by how much we've learned.
Much we've learned.
So maybe you all know this, but the axons
in the middle of the white matter
turn out to be releasing BDNF brain-derived neurotrophic
factor and vesicles, for God's sake,
containing glutamate and GABA that actually excite
the glial cells.
So I'm just sort of thinking, boy, I should spend more time.
Well, when you're younger, maybe you'll spend more time
looking at what the impacts are in here.
Any event, all this plasticity and the ability
to think about plasticity led us to the conclusion
the way we summarized it.
Stelios and I wrote a review article
some number of years ago and we said,
asking whether the brain is plastic or stable
is just a waste of time.
It's both, depends when and where.
It's how I started.
So glad that you're nodding.
So it's a little comfort that sometimes I say that
people kind of actually get annoyed with me.
And I just think we need to figure that out.
And obviously, during development,
there's a lot of plasticity.
And so I then became interested at that point in time.
We had sort of done enough on the maps
and we felt, well, maybe we could do something helpful
for kids and look at the development of the visual
circuitry that was necessary for reading.
And I have to say, when I got into that field
and I would encourage you all to have a look
and see if there's something you can do in there also.
There's just a ton of kids who, not mine,
but a lot of friends, kids and people
where the kids just have trouble reading
and there's an obvious why.
And it's not really a corneal effect.
It's not a lens effect.
It's nothing obvious about the retina,
but there's something going on.
So that kids, some people who can be very successful
in many other ways, just can't learn to read.
Just a skill that they don't have.
Famous people, maybe you see them routinely.
Charles Schwab would go around giving talks about this
and start centers for this.
His kid can't read.
But yet these Schwabs are a successful guy
and David Boyes, I don't know, all kinds of people.
So we thought, well, let's try to do something
to see if we can't figure this out.
Something to at least contribute to this.
And like any complex failure like that,
failure to learn something as complex as that,
it's not likely that there's one single bottleneck.
So we sort of laid out, Rosemary and Lee and I laid out
in a review article, all the places
that we should start checking.
And to just sort of get you to where we were,
I should either remind you or explain to you
that on the ventral surface of the human brain,
there are several regions that seem
like they're highly specialized for parsing,
for understanding the foveal signals.
So actually what comes down here
is not the entire visual field a lot,
but mostly the fovea and regions right around it.
A lot of the axons from the foveal retina,
if you track where they actually end up delivering their signal,
it's into the ventral occipital regions like this.
And people have things like this, a chromatope,
if you have lesions over here, meadows and 74s,
and you know what, your color vision
can really become problematic.
And if you have lesions in these red zones over here,
maybe it's more likely to be,
you have difficulty seeing faces or so this.
And so there's kind of a big industry of people.
And I'm not one of them, but I watch them who have gone
and said, there's a face region here or something like that.
But I'm not also a person who looks into a single region
and says, ah, now that I know that this is responsive
to faces, I understand faces.
I'm a kind of person that, well, how did it get there?
And where's it going to?
And what's the computations and stuff like that?
So we thought, well, let's see if we could do that.
I know, and this is from my colleague, Will Specter,
where I'm showing some of the complexity,
a review from about six or 10 years ago,
showing some of the complexity,
even at that time, and it's just gotten more.
So we know where these maps are, v1, v2, v3.
We're looking at the ventral surface here.
And there had been a region that Stan Dahon
and Laurent Cohen had identified
as being particularly responsive when you see words.
See words, not quite the same as reading, seeing words.
And so they called back, they had a lot of confidence.
They called it the visual word form area.
Might do other things, I'll say,
but it does respond when you look at a word.
And with Andreas Rauschecker, who's now at UCSF,
we, in the neurology department there,
we could put on a word.
So you're fixated here, and you put on a word.
Okay, it's in the right hemifield.
So you all know that therefore it goes
into the left hemisphere,
and it's just out there on the little periphery.
So there, as you can see the response in v1.
And you can also see the response in v2 and v3,
right next to one another over there.
This is the horizontal meridian.
So it should be along the border there.
Sure enough, there it is.
There's another map down here, the fourth one.
Then there's another, these ventral occipital ones
that I showed you in the beginning.
And then there it is, vwfa.
So for me, that mean, that was good.
That meant we could start to try to trace these signals
at least that far, maybe if we got better,
we could keep going and find other regions.
These are the same data.
I'm just showing them two different views
of the left hemisphere, the one I tracked for you.
This is, I've just rotated around
so that you could see that on the dorsal surface
there's some activity, it just doesn't go quite as far.
And so we just started making measurements.
And I told you about these population receptive fields
that Serge and Kauru had been making with me
for a number of years.
And in those regions here, where I was showing you,
down here in the vwfa, you don't have a map,
but you do have individual voxels that,
for each one of those, they have a receptive field.
And even though they're not a map,
and so you can take them and plot them all next to one another
and they're a little scrambling.
You can't see a clear map, but you can put them up
and say, well, how much of the visual field is covered?
How much does it see?
And if you do that in the early ones,
which we did just to confirm that this all made sense,
you'd say one v one covers a hemifield, cool.
Okay, and then v two and v three,
when you go down here, covers a border field.
So okay, what does it cover?
When you get down here, it's not a map,
but how much does it cover?
And Garry and I still owe a paper on this
and Rosemary Lee used this part for dissertation.
And you can see that, wow, this is only five degrees
over here.
And for this particular one of 20 subjects,
you really only have a small coverage.
And so that the regions that are responsible
for interpreting words don't really see out to here.
And then as Zeig will tell you,
if you put letters and words out in the far poor for a year,
you can't actually read them very well.
Try it yourself, you know, just look at the exit sign thing,
then look off the sign and ask yourself whether you can see.
And there's a number of reasons why you can't read it
when you go out there.
And one of them we think is because the signals
that you learn to read with go down here
and they only go down, go into the ventral region,
they only come from the foveo
and that's what you train on and so forth.
And so when you have that signal on the periphery,
it doesn't get down there and the parts of the brain
it goes to are not trained for seeing words.
That's what we think.
And we started looking at different people.
So your 20th subject was the one down here
and they're not all the same.
Some are similar and some are varying and so forth.
And we have one more story to tell.
I won't tell you about this today,
but we looked at these and thought,
well, maybe this could be a diagnostic cue
about who's going to read well or not.
But we kind of stopped because, you know,
you can compensate with eye movements.
So we started to try to measure
for the ones having small regions and bigger regions,
they have differential eye movements and so forth.
And there's a piece by Jesse Gomez thinking
that maybe they do.
So we were kind of in that mode where,
okay, we have these measurements,
we have some eye movement measurements,
but we pretty much around 2018, 2020,
we sort of stopped and COVID and plus and hold.
Okay, so what half I've been doing now in my retirement
after that.
So we've got this story up to reading at a certain amount.
And I'm telling you the story
about building the signals up from the beginning.
And I have to say that I felt that starting at V1
with the signals as I did for you
in that previous map wasn't good enough.
And plus I just like hanging out with Paul Anker
and the ophthalmologists and people
who do physiological optics things and cameras and so forth.
And so Dave Brainard, Nicholas Guitara,
Stricia Leann and I, a number of others,
we said, you know, and I don't want us to do another
$50,000 experiment.
So we've opened up our computers
and we started trying to build computational models
to summarize all of these data,
starting at the beginning at the stimulus
and going all the way through the optics,
through the retina and so forth and build those things.
And with the idea that, you know,
we've got these measurements down here
of what's happening in ventral cortex.
We've got ways of predicting them.
We know things, by the way, about the white matter
that I didn't tell you about,
but there's another dozen papers about thinking about
we've discovered a new track
and anyways, a bunch of things in the white matter.
So we'd like to assemble it all
into some kind of an actual, here's the stimulus,
here's what happens through the lens,
here's what happens in the retina,
here's what should happen in V1.
Let's just go, let's try to build this up, right?
And why should the computer scientists
have all the big computers?
Why couldn't the ophthalmologists have some big computers?
I don't know, we ought to be able to do that.
So we ought to be able to write our code
in a nice, transparent way, share it,
have digital twins of the visual system
so that when a patient comes in,
you have like what the standard should be
at different places.
And here's a little computational model of that
and so forth.
And if they have trouble reading,
maybe you look at the digital twin
and look at their measurements
and try to understand why.
So it's a good way to retire.
You can do this in coffee shops and so forth.
And we have open source code image systems,
the image systems engineering tools
were things from that other part of my life
having to do with cameras and CMOS images and so forth.
But these have now been repurposed.
So we have parallel extensions
and to trying to do the front end,
take the Pablo Artau measurements of the wayfront aberrations
and we incorporate those in all things
that are known about being homogeneities,
the retina and so forth.
And we're building these up
and we hope they'll be useful to you.
And I hope I'll have enough time
to be able to use them in thinking
about how it is letters and words and so forth,
get carried on through the visual system
through these cases while kids are learning to read.
So let me say that the work that I described to you
has been work over quite a number of decades,
not all of it was ours to begin with,
but the work that I described was carried out
and many of these people here today brainered as a young guy.
I don't know if you know who this person is as a young guy.
This is Alisa was very helpful.
E.J. Chichelniski is Daniel's colleague
at Stanford in neurosurgery.
Bob Docherty was very, very helpful.
Heidi Basler did a lot of the early work with me
on plasticity and so forth.
Tony Morrill and Alex Wade
are at York University and doing great.
John Winnowhere continues to be a close partner of mine.
He's a wonderful colleague at NYU,
Ariel Roken, Kendrick, so forth.
I particularly want to mention
these guys,
these guys here who a lot of the work on plasticity
and particularly the case studies that I showed to you
came from the fact that I was just fortunate, right?
A lot of you just have to be lucky.
Like you have a great place here
and people are going to want to come and visit with you
and take advantage of the fact
that you're in such a beautiful part of the world
and such nice buildings and so many smart people.
And I was fortunate that way.
And these guys from Tokyo just called me up
and said, you know, look, we're ophthalmologists in Tokyo
but we kind of want to get PhDs
and why they want to do that.
I have no idea, but I was just great, great.
Cause we give out PhDs and you know a lot of stuff.
So that's great.
And they came and it was a wonderful,
probably decade of these ophthalmologists teaching me
about Libers and macular degeneration
and doing patient studies and so forth.
Which let me talk about quite a number of things
that we shared here.
So thank you all very much for your attention.
And nice to meet you.
Before we go to, I don't know if he has a question on Zoom.
Let me ask you, you mentioned about 16 different maps
origins that you identified.
Did you do a color stimulation as well?
Yes.
Can you comment on that?
I just don't know that it was published.
Yeah, sure.
Sure.
There was a period, I'd say he's in the late 90s early,
maybe in the 90s and early 2000s
when Samir Zeki was really pushing the idea
based following on meadows
that there was a color center of the brain.
And he had an important publication with Friston
where they would put up a target was black and white
and then another target of the same pattern
but that was colorful.
And they would find one in one place
that was heavily activated for that.
And that was in the days when we had weak,
you know, our tools weren't that great
and you'd see one thing pop out.
But if you do that experiment now
with much more sensitivity,
you'll see that those very same data
produce differential activation of all kinds of places,
not just the one place.
You know, it's a thing about having an insensitive instrument
means that maybe you only pick out the one really big one
and then the others are just below
and then your instrument gets more sensitive.
My God, it was like everywhere.
So the idea that there's a single color center,
particularly for somebody like me
who I spent like a quarter of my life worrying
about the comb photoreceptors and photopigments
and stuff like that.
You know, there's a series of things
that lead to your color and lead to your color perception.
Although Samir, who I loved dearly,
was really focused on the idea that there is a color center
and that your experience of color is all tied to that.
It's definitely, you know, if you screw up your cones,
your experience of color is screwed up.
If you screw up the certain populations of gangrene
themselves, your experience of color is screwed up.
If you screw up this part of the visual cortex,
your experience of color is screwed up.
So it's part of the chain.
I wasn't more of a specific, if you have, let's say,
deficiency in blue cones, short white-brown cones,
where there's a different organization on this mapping
versus, let's say, those who have red and green deficiency.
That's interesting.
We did different things than that.
I don't have a, the maps won't change.
I haven't measured that, but the maps are not gonna change
with respect to that.
But we have looked to see where the S-Cone signals go.
So the S-Cone signals, as many of you know,
come out of through the bi-stratified gangrene cells
into the cone-yosilio layers of the LGN.
And then they go into the superficial part of V1
instead of into the, they have a different path.
And then they may or may not go to other parts
that we didn't know about.
So we particularly looked to see if we could get
S-Cone-driven signals in motion selective cortex
and so forth.
We did that for a couple of years
and it did seem that their distribution was different
compared to the LNM codes.
So at that part, not all parts of cortex
have the same color responsibilities.
Go ahead, Doug.
Yeah, hi, Brian.
This was an absolutely wonderful talk.
I just, so much and so incredibly clear.
And I expected it to be a wonderful talk,
but I've heard your talks previously
and they've all been wonderful.
About a month ago,
Bawan Sinha from MIT gave a seminar,
had a symposium, the NIH organized on plasticity.
And he's been working as I'm sure you know very well.
He's been working on these kids in India
with congenital cataracts who've had their cataracts removed
and has had questions similar to the ones
that you've been asking about your patient, Mike.
Yes.
Well, that raised two questions in my mind.
First of all, in Mike,
did you see any auditory compensation?
Did you look for that?
And then what are your thoughts
about the effect of the age
on the extent of plasticity?
Yes.
Thank you, Gordon.
Thank you so much for the kind words.
So Pavan has led this project,
probably been in 10, 15 years, called Project Prakash.
And he has done, you know,
it's really a combination of science
and humanitarian work in India
where he will persuade people like you
who do corneal surgeries and so forth
to go help these kids.
A lot of them have these corneal lesions
because their moms don't have, what's the disease?
It's like, they don't have the MMR thing.
And so they get measles, mumps, rubella, I guess.
So they get, so that when they're born,
they're born with this disease
that then scars their corneas.
And if you had enough money,
but in lots of parts of India, they don't,
you can replace these corneas and get these kids sight.
But a lot of them grow up 10, 15, 20 years.
And like Mike May, where their corneas are not in good shape.
And so they go in and they do these surgeries
and Pavan has published a couple of papers.
But Gordon, I haven't seen any papers recently,
but he did publish papers maybe 10 years ago
on collections of these kids.
And sometimes when they do these surgeries
at the age of 15 or 20,
actually the behavior gets quite a bit better.
And that wasn't true for Mike.
And sometimes it doesn't get any better.
And we don't have enough,
I would say power on knowing the individual cases.
And it's in India and it's remote.
They don't do neuro-imaging on it.
And the behavioral measures are important.
They're navigational measures,
mostly can these kids navigate.
And so I, down pathways,
maybe he showed you a few others.
They had some,
they used to make occasional resolution measurements.
Is that, did he show that in his last presentation to you?
So what I remember is that there was improvement
in many of these kids.
It took a long time that they initially did not see very well.
But with time, they definitely got better.
And he also had evidence for auditory compensation.
That's why I really asked the question.
I haven't read any of his papers.
I just heard this talk, which I really impressed me.
Yeah.
That's just a lot of the data I don't know.
So I'll keep, I will say that,
you can say auditory compensation.
There have been reports also that
if you don't have good visual signal,
I'm not sure it's compensation,
but that you can pick up either memory or auditory
or non-visual signals in regions
that are normally largely visual.
I want to say just one more thing.
I went to one of Pavansak and I really admire his efforts
here, but I went actually with this guy Hiroshi Horiguchi
and we went kind of enthusiastic about this effort.
And he came out of there as a clinician
and he said, the cost of doing these surgeries
and catching these kids at best point in time
compared to the cost of giving the proper pills to the moms
so that the kids aren't born with MMR,
so it's like a buck for a pill
and the cost of the surgeries, thousands of bucks.
And the number of, so if you were just looking
at social policy, there's nothing wrong
with what Pavan does.
But if I was a legislator in India
and I wanted to spend a million dollars on something,
I would be spending it on the pills, not on the surgeries.
So I just wanted to add that.
I think Pavan is also trying to get some science out of it
and the science has been slow in coming
over the last 20 years.
So Brian, we have a challenge here.
We have 12 or 13 questions and we have 10 minutes.
I'll be shorter.
I'm sorry.
We need to move on and so either that
or we'll reduce the number of questions.
I'll be shorter.
Okay, so I will be next.
Thank you very much for this fantastic presentation
and going back to your subject
that didn't have the chiasm.
But you mentioned that he had a good vision
but he also had some degree of small nystagmus.
He did.
Was there any correlation between the two eyes
in the nystagmus?
Yes, they moved together.
Very interesting.
So do you think this was to help him?
He didn't have the 3D vision
but maybe that was to help him with the 3D reception.
What is your...
He saw him 3D but he had no stereo.
Yeah.
No stereo.
Thank you.
Thank you.
That was really fascinating work
and I really appreciated the historical perspective.
Gordon kind of asked my question.
I remember reading a long time ago
about people who lost their sight
and kind of repurposing the visual cortex
for other senses.
So can you comment a little bit on that more?
Is it only in congenital blindness
or is it also seeing people
who will lose their sight at some other age?
Right.
The big reports are...
The initial one was from Sudato in the late 90s
and they're pretty much congenital
or the big ones at a later age.
Maybe they squeak out a little signal
but not a big effect.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So a detailed question perhaps.
You...
When you describe the early visual areas V1, V2, V3
and you showed the topographical maps,
Eric Schwartz was describing them
using the log polar map as a geometry.
Now when I spoke to Schwartz he was quite strong
that it exists in V1, V2, V3
but he was not clear how far it goes beyond those three.
Did you look into the log polar nature
of the higher visual areas?
You know, I didn't really.
There have been people...
So I didn't...
It was a bit of a...
Quantifying the maps
in terms of an abstract theoretical representation
was a passion of Eric's
but I would say that other people look and say,
it's a good approximation
and here's four other good approximations.
The data are sufficiently noisy.
The maps, I'm gonna say it's a fine approximation.
What a many.
Hi, beautiful talk.
Sometimes, you know, pharmacology allows us
to have beautiful tools to study, for example, your maps.
And I want to know if you actually ever use
any of these molecules that have very fine visual effects
and see what happens to the maps
of these healthy volunteers.
Absolutely not.
And make sure you tell all my funding agencies
that I would never do such a thing.
But on the other hand,
that was really why we set up the whole rig
in, I think it's a great thing to do.
And that was why we set up the thing
in the Max Planck Institute.
Yeah, but...
Okay, we have two questions from Zoom.
Brian.
Hi, from one Brian to another.
I've always been sort of fascinated
by the brain's intrinsic plasticity
and the ability to process new information.
And when the Knights's did their experiment
where they engineered new opsin into primates
to give them, you know, dichromacy to trichromacy,
the cool thing for me was not the fact
that they could do that,
but that the brain was like pre-wired
to see the additional discriminant
and make sense of that.
Do you think that that's like new recruitment
of additional cortex or are these,
I mean, is kind of a riff on the earlier question.
But I'm just wondering about your thoughts on that.
Thank you.
For everybody else, the Knights's have a study
where they took dichromatic,
I guess in their case,
I think it was dichromatic monkeys, right,
and they engineered one of the pigments
to shift it a little bit.
And the monkey could then make discriminations
that were not possible prior to this engineering thing.
And there's a bit of a battle in the literature
and I don't think it's resolved,
which is why I went to explain this,
as to whether the reason that the monkeys
could then do the new discrimination
was literally because they had a new,
that they had now tri-chromatic color vision,
or it was because the introduction of the ops
and then we've computed this produces
a kind of speckled pattern in the image.
If you had no, you could do those discriminations
if you had no new color,
just because you'd have a kind of a textury new image.
And Walt Mack has pointed this out first
and we did a lot of calculations on it.
And I'm not sure that's resolved.
The knights are convinced, and perhaps you are,
that actually this really is,
we were ready for a new dimension of color
and they're pursuing this with Austin Warder
and others at Berkeley to give all of you,
not three dimensions of color, but four, not four, but five.
And so this is an ongoing conversation.
I put me in the skeptical camp,
but I'm very respectful of the knights
as they've done tremendous work
and maybe they have something in all that.
I don't think, yeah,
you really could have five dimensions of color.
I mean, regardless of whether it's an additional color
or not, it's an additional like sensory modality
that they've been engineered in.
No, it really could be just,
you look at something, it looks spatially uniform
and you look at something
and it's got a lot of little speckly light and dark things
in it and say, yeah, I can tell the difference.
It really doesn't have to be.
So literally I can do those experiments computationally
without any new, without any new invoking any new experience.
But I think it's a, come and visit us and talk about it.
I think it's a terrific topic.
All right, let's move to chair.
Hi, great talk, thank you, Brian.
My question really is about,
do you look at the effect of deliberate learning?
Like, things that Daphne Belovir has done,
Dennis Levi, Robert Hess?
I, no, I tried to hire Daphne,
but no, I've never gone into things.
Yeah, things like the word attention didn't come up
or intentional and so forth.
I'm not that far advanced, but I love those guys
and I just haven't, I don't have much to say,
but we do have a guy, Jason Yateman at our place
in the graduate school of education,
who probably does do things like that.
And Justin Gardner, who you might enjoy visiting.
Thank you.
Hello, thank you for the great talk.
I'm just wondering if you have had a chance
to look at the brain from people without vinyl,
without venison.
They have a reduction in EPSI
and more contralateral projections.
There could be some problems
because in terms of the fovea acuity,
but I was just wondering.
I missed a key word there,
but for autistic kids, is that what you said?
Albinos.
Oh, albinos.
You know, let me refer you to Tony Moreland,
M-O-R-L-A-N-D, maybe you already know his work,
but he has spent a decade.
Tony was in my lab, he came wanting to work on albinos.
He didn't, but he left and he has done tons of work.
He, Michael Hoffman, kind of that crap.
And yes, they have reported a lot of things,
but maybe, you know, if you haven't seen it,
that's a great place to start.
Thank you.
Thank you for the reference.
Hi, Dr. Wendell.
Over here, in the room.
I have a question about how the reading circuitry
may be affected in patients with aphasia,
such as Brocas or Wernicke's.
Are they still able to read?
I just think that's a great, right?
So then it's the next stage on,
and I have not gotten to that,
and I think it's important.
But, you know what, I'm hoping, for example,
if you do it, that you do it
by taking the systematic approach all the way through
and not just looking for a spot somewhere.
But I have not, but thanks for the question.
Hi, again, in the room.
I really enjoyed your talk,
and I understood one thing from your presentation.
Correct me if I'm wrong,
that so-called critical period
is longer than up to three years of human life
since it wasn't able to be repaired
after cornea transplant.
That's one question that I like, the confirmation.
And the second is, do you know what happens in aging,
actually, whether there is a loss of precision
or some what problems, I don't know,
amplify from retinato cortex or the opposite.
Thank you.
Yeah, thanks.
The question not only of, you know,
what is, I think if we break the critical period up,
I think that's a consequence
of maybe something we both agree on,
that some things are fixed a little earlier than others.
So I didn't mention about Mike,
and it's been true of all the patients
that they see color instantly.
So Mike was good till three,
and at 43, he still saw color just fine.
Other stuff, at three, he should have been able,
he probably could see out to 25 cycles per degree,
but the development of acuity
seems to continue a lot longer than color,
so that by the time, so that when it got screwed up
for all those years, he lost the acuity,
but he kept the color.
So probably we want to probe into different subsystems
like that, and I have not done work on aging,
but in fact, when I look around now,
I'm noticing that all the people in the center,
I've now stopped directing that center,
and just a few months ago,
and all the people are working on infants and kids,
and I think, well, what about me?
People, I'm 72, you could put all people in there,
and the places I've seen,
I haven't seen a lot of elderly studies.
All right, we'll conclude with the three questions.
Okay, thank you for this presentation.
I was wondering if you ever work with ambliopia
in terms of like this,
it also seems like a very good model
for this plasticity versus the stability.
Have you ever worked with ambliopes?
And just a quick other question,
in the case of stroke or lesion in V1,
do you see upstream effects on the retina?
Oh, okay.
I have not, it's a great topic.
And sometimes I get people references,
I'm sure people have worked on ambliopia,
at least rabbismic ambliopia, I'm not sure about,
and ISOs and so forth,
but I have not, and I'm sorry,
I can't even give you a reference on it,
but I know it's out there,
and as predilections,
what we did look at was not functional stuff,
but we did look at whether there was
white matter impacts projecting back,
and I can't, and I'll look it up and I'll send it,
and if I don't have a memory of it.
Hi, great, yeah, I really enjoyed that talk,
just like everybody else.
So in the visual word finding area,
is the activity contingent upon recognition
of the character?
So if you put Chinese characters
or blurred characters in English,
would the activity be the same?
Yeah, thank you, and that's very interesting.
In China, there are several groups
literally asking whether,
because the reading and writing system is so different,
whether in fact they even have a visual word
for marrying the general view is yes,
but then as to whether it's the same
or not became important to them
because of surgeons who go into brain surgery
and don't want to, and then want to check
whether the reading system for the Chinese characters
is the same, it's not,
and there's a debate between a group dad and Shenzhen
and a group up in Beijing,
and I don't know how it's gonna turn out,
but they do have the original one near visual cortex,
everybody agrees on that,
and whether the secondary ones are in the same place
or not and how the surgeon should act
or not was not resolved last I checked.
So Brian, now I'm giving you Zach.
Thank you for that really interesting talk.
I was really curious,
has anyone ever looked at synesthetics
and whether there are interesting changes
in like VOT fields of synesthetics,
particularly if they have these kind of
very hardwired connotations
between like words or letters and colors, for example.
Yeah, thank you.
So first off, thank you for that.
Synesthesia, there's some wonderful behavioral studies
on synesthesia.
We have Eagleman hanging around Stanford
for some reason he did a ton of synesthesia stuff,
and there have been people who looked to see
whether white matter connections in synesthetes
were different from controls,
and I'm sorry, I don't have on the top of my mind
who that was, but I'm guessing you could find,
you look for tractography in synesthesia,
but I would also guess it's not that sharp a measurement
so that you could actually see a few.
Right, and that has kind of been dependent on the individual.
But behaviorally, there's still a lot to be learned
from synesthesia, and the fact that it's a very real phenomena,
not just some kind of goofy thing,
it's quite compelling actually.
And Randall Blake, I noticed,
is winning an award at VSS this year,
and he's done one for work on the synesthesia.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Brian.
Thanks for coming.
Have a good one.
