is interested in any of the details, the software, the data sets, or getting in touch with me, this is
the website where everything is. And so what we're going to talk about is the opportunities around
bioelectricity and in general around cellular collective intelligence in biorebotics, regenerative
medicine, and so on. So the design challenge that we have is can be summed up as the total
rational control of growth and form. And what I mean by that is that if we had the ability to tell
groups of cells what to build in terms of three-dimensional anatomical structure,
many medical problems. In fact, most medical problems would go away. So birth defects,
regeneration after traumatic injury would be possible. Cancer could be reprogrammed, aging,
degenerative disease. And not only biomedical problems, but also synthetic biomorphology. So
not just reprogramming individual cells, but actually programming a large-scale shape and
structure. And also actually non-neuromorphic AI would become possible. And so all of these
things boil down to one problem. How do we communicate our morphological goals to a group
of cells? And here I have to do disclosures because I'm involved in three different spin-offs from
my lab, which I'm happy to talk about afterwards. So morphosuribals, astonishing labs, and fauna
systems. Now, the solution to these problems we call the anatomical compiler. So the idea is that
at some point in the future, you will be able to sit down in front of a computer and
draw the animal or plant that you would like to have. So you would draw the three-dimensional
structure, the anatomy, not the molecular biology of it, but actually the anatomy of what you want.
And this system would compile that anatomical description into a set of stimuli that would
have to be given to cells to get them to build whatever you want. And in this case, here's this
like three-headed flatworm. I'll show you some flatworms in a minute. So now the two really
important pieces to this. One is that this is not a 3D printer. The point is not to micromanage
the position of every cell and try to assemble something complex piece by piece. It is also
not anything to do with genomic editing or CRISPR or anything like that. This is fundamentally the
right way to think about this is as a communications device. This system and the AI that will make it
possible is for translating our anatomical and functional goals to the goals of a collective
intelligence of cells that are going to build this thing. Now, we don't have anything remotely like
that. We can only do this sort of thing in very few specific cases, but I wanted to lay out the
opportunity. I had this as the roadmap. So why don't we have this? Genetics and molecular biology
have been doing great over for decades. Why don't we have an anatomical compiler? Well,
let's just remind ourselves that we all start life as a group of cells and these embryonic
blastomers reliably build something like this. So this is a cross-section through a human torso.
You can see the incredible complexity of all the tissues organs. Everything is in the right
place and relative to each other. And so the question is, where does this shape come from?
Where is this order stored? Where is it recorded? And you might think, well, the genome, the thing
everything's in the genome, but actually we can read genomes now and we know what's in the genome.
What the genome encodes is the tiny protein hardware, the molecular hardware that every cell
gets to have. There's nothing directly in the genome that says anything about size, shape,
the number of organs, the types of organs. And so the fundamental scientific challenge here is to
understand how this group of cells exploits that hardware to build something reliably. How do they
know when to stop? Why do cells sometimes defect from this plan? And then that results in cancer.
And then as workers in regenerative medicine, we'd like to know if something is missing,
how do you convince the cells to regrow it? And if as engineers, we would like to say, well,
what else can these cells build? Okay, is there, what a standard genome? Can you get
the exact same hardware to build something completely different? And so these are the
questions that that faces. Now, I want to show an extremely simple example to remind us why genetic
information is not enough. So this is the larva of an axolotl. So baby axolotls have little four
legs. This is a tadpole and baby frogs at this point do not have legs. So in my lab, we can make
something called a frog a lot. So what's a frog a lot? Well, it's a chimeric embryo that's part
cells from an axolotl part cells from a frog. And now I can ask a very simple question. Well,
we have both genomes. So the axolotl genome has been sequenced, the frog genome has been sequenced.
Could anybody tell me whether frog lottles are going to have legs or not? And the answer is no,
there is no existing model that will go from genomic information to being able to predict anatomy
in cases like this. In fact, even even within a single organism, we can't go from the genome to
a description of what the anatomy is going to be without cheating, basically comparing that
genome to something where you already know what it is. And so, so there's this fundamental disconnect
between the molecular hardware and the large scale anatomical decision making of the collective
of cells that's going to decide to build this large scale structure, possibly involving cells from
the frog. But this is the frontier. The frontier is understanding how large scale
collective decisions are being made that determine our anatomy and our function. Now,
the bad news is that by themselves, these very important technologies such as genomic editing
and molecular biology are not going to give us everything that we want. Because this process
of going from a single cell egg to one of these complex bodies is that this this morphogenetic
process is incredibly complex and recurrent. In other words, all of these cells are doing
various things. And together, there's they end up building something like this. But reversing
this is extremely hard to give you a very simple example from, for example, the fractals. This
is a simple mathematical formula. It's very short, very simple. If you iterate it and plot the plot
the kind of a version of the Julia set, you will get this very complex pattern. But now and so
that's great. Going forward is easy. Going starting with the rules and getting something complex is
very simple. But going backwards, if I if you were a worker in regenerative medicine, you said, well,
this thing isn't quite symmetrical. And by the way, I don't want three of these. I want four.
How would you have to change the formula? It's there is no there's no way to do that. This is an
intractable inverse problem. And so figuring out what you would have to change on the molecular
genetic level to make large scale changes and repairs is extremely difficult. It'll be possible
for some cases, but it needs to be complemented with a top down approach. Now, here's here's where
we are today. We're very good as a community in manipulating molecules and cells. And there are
amazing kinds of advances all the time in terms of synthetic biology and protein engineering and
things like this. We're actually still a very long way away from control of large scale form and
function injuries, cancer, birth defects, these things are largely yet not addressable. And I think
that's because we are still fundamentally in molecular medicine. Somewhere here, this is where
you know, computer science was in the 40s and 50s where in order to reprogram the machine,
you have to physically interact with the hardware, right? You have to have a physically
rewire. And this is this is where all the excitement is today. So, so gene regulatory circuits,
novel novel molecular interactions and so on. But but in addition to that, we have the opportunity
to do something amazing, which is to take advantage of the high level information processing,
intelligence in the layers of biology. Now, what I'm saying intelligence, I don't mean,
and this is this is the good news is that we have now opportunities to do this,
I don't mean a human level second order, I know that I know and that that kind of thing. I mean
something else that might be at different locations along this continuum. This is this this sort of
continuum is due to Norbert Weiner and colleagues. And William James defined intelligence as the
ability to reach the same goal by different means. And so I don't have time to show you too many
examples, but I'll show you a few biology is really good at this. And what we now have the
opportunity to do is to use AI as a kind of translator between us and this robust intelligence
of cells and tissues that are navigating something we call morpho space, morpho space is simply the
space of all bits of it's a virtual space of all possible morphogenetic outcomes or anatomical
outcomes. And so we have the ability to, to control how the living system navigates that
morpho space. And it's possible because biology, unlike most of our technology, I sometimes give
a different talk of why robots don't get cancer. And the reason the reason that biology is so
special, and there's no reason why we couldn't emulate this, is that it uses a multi scale
competency architecture. The idea is that at every level, right, so from molecular networks to,
to, to cells, the tissues to whole bodies, whether in behavioral space or anatomical space,
or even collectives, each of these layers solves its own problems. They are not just structural,
they are problem solving systems that operate or navigate in the space of gene expression,
the space of physiology, the space of anatomy, and of course, three dimensional behavioral space,
in our case, also linguistic spaces, and so on. And they all have different levels of sophistication
and different competencies to do this. But the key is that rewiring them physically is not the only
game in town. We also have the opportunity, because their intelligence is higher than, than, than a
simple hardwired clockworks, we have the opportunity to communicate with them, to reset their set points,
and to have various other kinds of interesting interactions with them. So the thing to recall
is that fundamentally, we are all collective intelligences. There's no such thing as an
indivisible kind of some sort of indivisible diamond of intelligence, we are all made of parts.
And the parts that we are made of are individual cells. Now here's a cell, this happens to be
a free living organism known as a lacrimaria. One cell, there's no brain, there's no nervous
system. This thing is incredibly competent and very local, tiny little goals, metabolic,
physiological, and other kinds of states, you can see it here feeding in the environment.
Anybody who's into soft robotics should be drooling at this, we don't have anything
remotely like this level of control. And again, just one cell. And it is made of molecular
networks that also have all kinds of competencies. For example, the gene regulatory circuits and
pathways inside cells are capable of at least six different kinds of learning, including
associative conditioning. And this is all without changing their structure at all. So this is not
about rewiring GRNs with gene regulatory networks through experience. This is in situ exactly how
they are, they're capable of learning. So this multi-scale architecture of competency, meaning
that we are made of cells that used to be independent organisms and didn't drop all
their intelligence when they joined together, means that we have lots of different competencies in
morphogenetic space. So for example, when you take an early embryo, let's say a human embryo,
and you cut it into halves or quarters, you don't get two half bodies, you get two perfectly
normal monosygotic twins, because each half can recognize that the other half is missing and
rebuild what it needs. In fact, you can think of embryonic development as a kind of regeneration
of the entire body from just one cell. And so there's this ability of different systems. Here's
the normal embryo, here's the embryo cut in half, and so on. The ability of different systems to
navigate this space to reach the ensemble of gold states that we associate with normal target
morphology or normal anatomy for that species. And in fact, in many cases, going around avoiding
various local maxima that would trap a less intelligent system. So this is one example
of regulative development. Here's another example. Creature like this, this is an axolotl,
and these guys regenerate their legs, their eyes, their jaws, their portions of their heart and brain,
their ovaries, spinal cord, and so on. And what they do is if you amputate, and in fact, they bite
each other's legs off all the time, so this is a natural experiment that keeps happening,
you can amputate anywhere along this line, and the cells will very rapidly build exactly what's
needed, and then they stop. Now, this is the most amazing part of this whole process, is that not
only does it regenerate no matter where you cut it from, it makes exactly what's needed no more,
no less, but that it ever stops. How does it know when to stop? It stops when a correct
salamander arm has been completed. So this now tells you that this kind of thing is some sort of a
navigation policy in this anatomical space. It's an error minimization scheme where errors like
this become corrected over time, and when the error is small enough, then they stop. So we really
need to understand this ability, this ability to navigate so all the tools of autonomous
self-driving various vehicles and all of this kind of control theory stuff from
engineering and AI becomes very relevant here. Now, this is not just for salamanders and worms,
I'm going to show you in a minute. Let's do this too. So humans regenerate their livers, human
children regenerate their fingertips up until a certain age. So if you just leave it alone, an
amputated fingertip actually becomes cosmetically a very nice finger, and deer are a large adult
mammal that regrows basically meters of new bone, vasculature, innervation, and so on,
and it does it every year, and it does it at a rate of about a centimeter and a half of new bone
per day. So it is not the case that mammals are somehow unable to regenerate, but our
capacities at present, and I do think this is changeable, are not as good as those of certain
other organisms. Now, we've been studying for some years how it is that this happens, how does a
collection of cells know what to build and when to stop, and we took our inspiration from the
nervous system, which is basically a collection of cells that guide your body through behavioral
space using memories and goals and so on. Exactly the same thing, it turns out happens in anatomical
space. So the way it happens in the brain is that the hardware looks like this. It's a bunch of
cells we call neurons, they're electrically active, and so they have these little ion channels
in their membrane, that set of voltage. That voltage sometimes is communicated to their
neighbors through these gap junctions or these electrical synapses, and so there's this network,
and there's this physiology. So here it is, this group imaged all the electrical activity of a
living zebrafish brain, as zebrafish are thinking about whatever it is that zebrafish normally
think about, and so you can see all this activity, and it's the commitment of neuroscience that all
of the cognitive activity, the goals, the preferences, the memories, the behavioral
repertoires of this animal are in this physiological activity, if only we could decode it. So there's
this notion of neural decoding where you can scan a brain, decode it somehow, and figure out what
the animal is thinking about or looking at, and there's been some success in this both in humans
and in model systems. The amazing thing is that brains and neurons didn't learn this trick on
their own or didn't invent it from scratch. This is something that living systems have been doing
since the time of bacterial biofilms. Back, already that long ago, evolution discovered that
electrical networks are amazing at storing and processing information. So every cell in your
body has these ion channels, and figuring out what is a neuron and what isn't is actually not
trivial at all. Most cells are connected to their neighbors with these electrical synapses,
and what you can do is you can look at early embryos or regenerating limbs or anything else
using the same techniques, basically electrical imaging, and try to do the same decoding program.
You could ask, could we learn to decode, to understand what the cells are saying to each
other, and then to rewrite those patterns and get them to build something else, and this is what
we've been working on. So I'm going to show you very quickly just two examples of these
bioelectrical patterns. This is using a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye, so here the gray scale
colors represent a voltage of the cells. This is a time lapse movie of an early frog embryo
putting its face together. Now one thing you'll know, this is a frame, one frame out of that one,
call this the electric face. Why? Because already before the genes come on that are going to pattern
this whole structure, already you can see this is where the eye is going to be, this is where the
mouth is going to be, the animal's left eye comes in later. This is the, the placos out to the side
that give rise to all kinds of tissues. Already you can read the electrical pattern memory that's
going to guide what happens next. I'm going to show you in a minute why we know that this is
actually an instructive set of interactions, but this is a normal pattern, this is required for
normal development. This is a pathological pattern, so here we've injected a human oncogene into an
embryo, eventually it's going to make a tumor, eventually the tumor will metastasize, but already
using this voltage dye you can see what's going on here. You can see that these cells are electrically
decoupling from their neighbors. They're acquiring a weird depolarized membrane potential and they're
just going to roll back to their amoeba lifestyle and migrate and treat the rest of the body as
external environment. So that's why we read these patterns and we've developed tools to rewrite
these patterns and we don't use, there are no electrodes, no applied fields, no waves, no frequencies.
What we do is we exploit the native interface by which the cells are normally hacking each
other's behavior, which is these ion channels that are on their surface and these gap junctions
that allow them to talk to each other. So we have ways mostly appropriated from neuroscience using
optogenetics and drugs and so on to open and close these channels and to control the topology
of the network. And so when you do this, what you can do is we can induce whole organ, so we can
induce inner ears. This is all in the frog model right now, I'm showing you. Inner ears, we can
induce hearts, ectopic beating hearts. We can induce forebrain. So here's where the forebrain
normally stops in this tapioca. We've made this extra large forebrain. We can make extra limbs.
So here's our five and six-legged frogs. And we can make some structures that don't even belong
on this animal, like fins. And there's a whole story that I don't have time to tell you today
about changing the actual shape of an animal to a different species without changing the genome.
And we have several stories about that. So one of the amazing things about this is that these
changes can be permanent because we're dealing with a tissue-level intelligence that has memory.
So when we take this flatworm, so here's a flatworm, it's got a head and a tail,
and we amputate the tail, we amputate the head, we leave just the middle fragment. So this middle
fragment will normally regenerate 100% of the time to make a normal worm, one head, one tail.
And we ask the question, how do they know? How do they know how many heads they're supposed to
have? And we found this electrical gradient that says one head, one tail. We change that gradient
to say, actually, two heads. And so what you get is this two-headed worm. And this is not photoshopped,
these are real. You can see the video, these two-headed worms in their spare time, what they're
doing. And the amazing thing is that once you've got this two-headed worm, that's it. From then on,
if you amputate the primary head, you amputate this ectopic secondary head, this middle fragment
will continue to regrow two heads. The genetics are untouched. We never did any genomic editing
here. There's no trans genes, no new circuits, no synthetic biology, nothing. All we did was a very
brief physiological stimulus that rewrites a pattern memory. This is literally the way that
people read the memories of a brain by looking at the electrical activity. We can now read the
memories of the collective intelligence of the body. And so what we can see is that once you've
rewritten what the system encodes as the correct morphology, well, it will continue to build this
new morphology, as far as we can tell forever. And we now also have a way of changing them back
to be one-headed. Now, I'm going to show you one other example, and then we'll get to some of the
biomedical stuff in the biorebotics. So this has to do with organ-level induction. So we can inject
a certain ion channel RNAs that will induce, for example, we can copy that eye spot that I showed
you in the electric face. We can put it anywhere in the body. So if we put it on the gut, these gut
cells happily make an eye. And this eye has all the right lens and retina and optic nerve and all
of that stuff. But notice a couple of interesting things. One is that we didn't have to put in
all the information about how to make an eye. In fact, we don't have any idea of how to make an eye.
What we do know is that there's a high-level subroutine call that says to the local cells,
make an eye. And then all the stuff downstream, all the morphogenesis, all the gene expression,
all the gradients, everything else is taken care of. The other thing, so that's really a
really attractive property, this modularity. But the other thing is that there are other hidden
competencies here. For example, this is a lens sitting out in the flank of a tadpole somewhere.
And the blue cells are the ones that we injected with this potassium channel. And so they go to
make an eye. But there's not enough of them. There's only a few of them. So what do they do?
They recruit a bunch of their normal cells, which are not blue. That's how we have not
manipulated them. And these brown and clear cells participate because these cells hijack them.
They recruit them towards this goal. This is the mark of a good collective intelligence,
like ants and termites. When there's a task that's too big for the individuals that have started on
it, they will recruit their neighbors to all work together. So again, we didn't have to orchestrate
any of this. This is already, this competency is already in the tissue. So discovering these
subroutines and discovering the various competencies and the abilities of these networks to restore
the correct structure and function with minimal intervention, with minimal tweaks is the name
of the game here. And so moving to the regenerative part. So in a frog, unlike salamander, if it loses
a leg 45 days later, there's nothing. Although interestingly, once you do the amputation,
the opposite leg lights up bioelectrically. Within 30 seconds, it lights up exactly the
location where the damage took place. So the whole body knows about this. And you can think
about this as surrogate site diagnostics and things like this. Already you can read out where
the damage was. Now, what we did was we came up with a cocktail of ion channel drugs that induces
regeneration. So here the pro regenerative genes come on within 45 days, you've already got some
toes, you've got a toenail, eventually you have a very nice leg and it's touch sensitive,
and it's motile. And what we found is that one day, so 24 hours of a wearable bioreactor made by
David Kaplan's lab, with the right payload gives you 18 months, a year and a half of leg growth,
during which time we don't touch it at all. So this is not about 3D printing. This is not about
micromanaging what the stem cells do. It is about convincing the cells at the very beginning that
they're going to go down the regenerative route and not the scarring route. And that's it. After
that, you don't touch it again. So we are now, this is our efforts through Morphosuticals. Again,
David Kaplan and I are co-founders. And what we're using is that we're now in mammals,
and we're attempting to do this in mice, right now with a bioreactor that controls the wound
environment, and then it's got a payload of drugs that try to convince the cells that they need to
regenerate. So there are also applications to cancer. I showed you this picture a minute ago.
Once you start thinking about this as these electrical networks as a way of
creating a larger scale system that can pursue large goals like building nice organs instead
of little tiny amoeba level goals of proliferate and migrate, then what we can do is we can artificially
reconnect these cells when the oncogene tells them to disconnect. We can force them to be in
the right electrical state. And so you see here, the oncogene is labeled and read. This is the same
animal. There's tons of it, right? And so if you were to sequence this, you would see that there's
a nasty K-eras mutation or something like that. And you would say, ah, there has to be a tumor there.
And in fact, there is no tumor because what we've also done is co-inject an ion channel that forces
these cells into electrical communication with their neighbors does not let them detach. So there's
a cancer therapeutic thing here. Okay. So the last bit I want to show you in the last couple of
minutes, I want to show you some synthetic life. So we call these xenobots because they come from
the skin cells of the frog called Xenopus lavis. And we think this is a bioromatics platform.
And this is a collaboration between Josh Fongard at the University of Vermont and myself.
So Doug Blackiston is the biologist who does this work in my group. Sam Friedman was
Josh's student who does the programming. And what you see here is this thing swimming along.
This is a piece of, this is this, this, this proto organism self assembled from cells taken
scraped off of an early embryo. These are just skin. Again, there's no neurons here. There's no
brain. This is what the skin will do when left to its own devices, when when freed basically
from the instructive influence of the other cells. And you can see what happens here. They can move
in circles. They can patrol back and forth like this. These are all spontaneous behaviors.
They have collective behaviors. They can interact with each other. They can sort of go on these
longer journeys as great individuality here among them. And what you're looking at is,
is the answer to the question, what would skin cells do if given a chance to reboot
their multicellularity taken away from these other cells? Now, here's one navigating a maze.
You can see what it's doing. It's swimming here. It takes the corner without bumping into the
opposite wall. And then here for some internal reason, it decides to turn around and go back
where it came from. Okay, again, completely spontaneous. This is, and this, these, these,
these xenobots have all kinds of calcium activity, which you would normally see in the brain.
But again, no neurons, just skin. And one of the most remarkable things about this is that we can
now in that we can now use AI to control their, their behavior. So, so here, what you're seeing
here is these, this, this white stuff out here, these, these little particles, these are other
skin cells, just loose skin cells that we provided them with. And what we did this, so what, what
Josh and Sam did was, was to do a bunch of simulations that showed us that if we make this,
this little Pac-Man shape, they become really, really good at this task. So what they do is
they collect the cells, they sort of push them together into a little ball and, and they, and
they polish that little ball. And because they're dealing with an agential material, meaning the
cells are not passive particles, they have agendas, they, they like to do certain things.
Once they're pushed into this ball, that then matures into the next generation of xenobots.
And guess what they do? They run around and do the same thing, although not quite as well as the
first generation. And so there's a few things we, we learned from this. One is that we can use now
AI to begin, and this is just the very beginning, we can use AI to begin to control the native
behaviors, the very rich native repertoire, very surprising repertoire that nobody had any idea
that skin cells can sort of implement Von Neumann's dream, a robot that goes around and
builds copies of itself from loose material it finds in, in the environment. But there are these,
there are these amazing competencies and the research program now in the roadmap is to learn
to recognize them and then to learn to control them and reprogram them for applications in
regenerative medicine, robotics, and ultimately to take what we learned from the intelligence of
these cells and use them to create a new, new artificial intelligence. And so because biology is
so incredibly interoperable, they find biology finds a way to live coherently under so many
circumstances. In the future, almost any combination of evolved natural material, designed material,
and software at whatever scale is some viable feature. And so I think in the future, we are going
to be surrounded by all kinds of hybrids and cyborgs and chymeras and all kinds of things,
which are going to require a new kind of ethics for relating to beings that are nowhere on the
normal tree of life with us. In other words, we cannot use familiar criteria of where did you
come from, meaning evolved or designed, and what are you made of, meaning do you have a brain,
does it look human, that kind of thing, those criteria are going to be out the window.
Everything that Darwin meant when he said, endless forms most beautiful are a tiny corner
in this enormous option states possible bodies and possible minds. And so I will just end with
this by saying that there's some very deep new ideas coming in the space of biomedical
interventions rooted in this kind of idea by Fabrizio Benedetti who studies placebo effects,
which is that really what you have here is the role of top-down cognitive information
on molecular events. You do that every time you get up out of bed every morning. Your intention,
your mental intention of getting up feeds down into the molecular properties of your muscle
cell membranes that make you get up. And so the idea, especially using bioelectricity as this
transduction layer, that software layer between the intelligence and the actual execution machinery
and AI to actually manage this, gives us a whole range of strategies here that are
in complement to all the successful kind of mainstream strategies. So that's it. Just to
summarize what I've said, the right limiting step in truly transformative technologies are
the communication of goals to cellular swarms, not just the, not just the molecular details,
but actually the algorithms of life. And we have a roadmap for exploiting the native computation
and the competencies of living networks. Bioelectrical signaling is a really crucial
protocognitive medium of that collective intelligence. And we now have tools that
appropriate all kinds of deep concepts from neuroscience to help us understand this in
other contexts. And at stake are a huge number of really transformative applications.
And so I'll just, I'll end here by thanking the postdocs and the students who did all the work,
our funders, and most of all the animal model systems because they do all the heavy lifting.
And then once again, there's some disclosures that I need to make. So thank you very much.
