I was going to talk first a little bit about what I like about mathematics and why it moves
me and hopefully then again you'll get to glimpse how I do it through my eyes a bit as you start
to see and build a larger sense of how it goes. Most of this first lecture will be me talking
about the general outlines of what mathematics is and how it can be done and how a mathematician
thinks about it. For myself I was originally enamored by language and the certainty of proof.
The language of mathematics is very precise and the goal of that precision is we're trying to
convince people that what we're saying is true not just now not just tomorrow not just the person
who's standing next to us but everyone for all time that what we are saying is universally applicable
and never falls. This is a serious bit of business and speaks to this certainty of proof.
We'll explore a number of these ideas later in the lectures and we'll keep
circling back and touching on them. Let me contrast this for a moment the idea of mathematics
without of science. Sciences are revised. The sciences are also magnificent attempts to understand
the universe and how it works. People create theories that try to explain various phenomena
but as time goes on we realize as humans that phlegiston is not an element. We realize that
ether does not fill all the space between planets because light can travel through a vacuum.
New theories come along and the old theories sometimes are scrapped wholesale.
Better equipment for the sciences means better results means new theories and this is grand in
the way it should be. Contrast that with mathematics. Every single thing proved by Euclid
two thousand years ago is still true. Now there are non Euclidean geometries and we'll talk about
those later in the lectures but they do not invalidate Euclid. If we are on a plane or on a line
or in Euclidean three space everything Euclid proved that was true two thousand years ago
is true today and will still be true in two thousand or two hundred thousand years.
This is completely different from science and a remarkable thing. When I was younger I found
that so palpable and so powerful because in college I like to argue with professors and
professors and sometimes other students would tell me what I was wrong. I hated being wrong. Well
in mathematics you might be wrong but if you're right you are eternally right and I like being
eternally right. Over time I've become fascinated by what is computable. Approximations to things that
can't be known. Calculus for example is a tool that helps construct mathematical models of the
world. How do we do it? We abstract. We try to take a situation and we think can this be put into
numbers? Can this phenomenon be described by a function and I'll talk about what I think of a
function as but the important idea is that we take a real world set of things and we put it into
the abstract world of mathematics. Once it's in the abstract world of mathematics it's subject to
all the ironclad laws of logic that we hold and agree and we have all kinds of clever tools and
tricks that again our centuries worth of predecessors have come up with to play around and tinker.
So it's almost as if we build a model. A model in our heads. It can be out on paper and blackboards.
We use numbers and these ideas of functions and we toy with it. We play with it. We can put in
different inputs. Things don't actually blow up in the real world or go awry but we can say ah if
we did this this would blow up or if we tried that these things might happen.
