Once we're done playing around with the model, we think, how can we do this in the real world?
And we put the model back into the real world as best we can.
Now, a model is never going to be the real world, and it's probably the first step of insanity
to start to imagine that the model in one's head is actually reality.
And I'm going to add, when one reads the lives of famous mathematicians,
it's a bit sobering to see that for most of them, but not all,
the biographers typically will say something to the effect of,
and after his or her nervous breakdown, the work he or she did,
and they go on as if, of course, it's a given statement of fact
that any mathematician will have a nervous breakdown.
I haven't had my nervous breakdown yet, so perhaps that just means I'm not a great mathematician,
but I'll take that trade off.
At any rate, as long as we believe that the model is a model,
we know it's not exactly the world, and we start to worry how far off is our model from the world.
It's not precise. There's going to be an error.
Can we bound the error? How precisely can we bound the error?
And I want to say that this is one of the great insights over the centuries
of mathematicians and probably scientists, too.
And I don't know that it's commonly taught in school.
At least I don't remember it from my elementary, middle, and high school experiences.
And the idea is almost nothing we do is perfect.
Almost nothing we get will always work out exactly right.
There will be some error.
But if we can say exactly that the error is no more than one thousandth,
or one ten thousandth, or one millionth,
then even though perfection has not been achieved,
then certainly something good enough to work with has been achieved.
And this is a magnificent achievement.
And I'll be talking more about different forms of approximation and where it comes up.
The last thing I want to say about this particular topic
before trying to explain some of the ideas of mathematics is that word problems,
which I know are not beloved of most people,
and certainly I didn't love them when I was young either,
word problems are almost precisely these miniature encapsulations of what I'm talking about.
In a word problem, there'll be a description of something in the real world.
It's probably fairly artificial.
And if the person who constructed it is good, it might even be a little bit funny.
But the idea then is that the person taking a look at the word problem
will be able to shut off all the extraneous words and ideas in it,
get down to the gist.
There's some kind of logical or numerical substructure there
that needs to be pulled away from all those other words.
Then those numbers can be understood in and of themselves in naked isolation,
beautifully worked with, hopefully correctly,
again subject to the ironclad laws of logic,
tinkered, tampered, and a result will come out.
Then that number is applied back to the circumstances of the word problem,
and we find out that the train will arrive at the station at 10.07 a.m. or some such.
And now I'd like to talk about my vision,
a mathematician's vision of the vastness, beauty, and deep truth of the subject.
And I'll talk about vastness first.
Mathematics grows and grows.
Again, it's very different than the sciences in this.
I think scientists maybe think of their processes expanding somewhat,
but always refining, always honing,
pairing away what's inessential, trying to get down.
Since mathematics, once it's true, it's always true,
if it's been proved correctly, it just gets larger and larger and larger.
A lawyer friend of mine once mentioned to me that,
in fact, mathematics is very similar to law in this respect.
Laws have been around for thousands of years.
Legal systems have been around for thousands of years.
The law is continually tested by circumstance.
It's added to, it's changed,
and when courts are convened to examine various questions,
people talk about it, think about it,
and decide that a law is good or maybe needs modification.
That might be a bit more like science than the process of math,
but I love the idea that law, like mathematics,
has been around for thousands of years
and just continues to grow and adapt,
and when new circumstances develop,
new laws are created and new mathematics are created.
