Mathematics applies to most everything. At a very base level, mathematics can apply either a number to something or say that it's a particular shape.
This isn't a very interesting application, but the more one looks at something, the more it's possible to start thinking, well, it's not just a number.
Maybe I can apply a whole sequence of numbers to this, or maybe I can collect numbers every few minutes on it that tell me something about the shape of it and take more looks at that.
And the idea of statistics was born. We'll take a look at that in a later lecture too, but we'll start worrying about how can we shape all this information?
What do we do? Are there concise ways of putting it together? And once it's put together, how can it be thought of as a thing in itself and a star in a larger constellation?
That's the vastness. The beauty of mathematics is, well, it might be hard for you listening to think of mathematics as beautiful.
It's quite possible that most of your experiences with math were much more of the, let's solve this problem, shall we?
And maybe you were really good at that, and it was interesting and fun. But beauty is a different kind of thing.
And I suppose one of the reasons I ended up a mathematician is that ultimately I found it very beautiful.
And so let me talk a little bit about beauty. Beauty is a refined, learnable aesthetic.
Now, it's quite possible that there's certain things we learn very early on, or perhaps naturally appear very beautiful to us.
A double rainbow, should we be lucky enough to see one? A beautiful sunset over the ocean? Mountains and clouds and a storm coming?
A moon overhead on an autumn night? Different things different people may or may not naturally find beautiful.
But then there's more refined things that won't seem beautiful at all necessarily to people at first.
Let's say forms of modern art or classical music or more specifically 20th century classical music that traded in on ideas of atonality
and breaking of rhythms and disharmony and some ideas of randomness and chaos.
Actually ideas that we'll also talk about although outside the context of classical music.
And it can be very difficult to find these kinds of things beautiful at first.
Here's some others that may or may not appeal to everybody. Japanese no drama, ballet or modern dance.
These are all things that the first time one sees them, it's unlikely that one will be struck how beautiful they are.
At least not for me.
Now, I'm fortunate to have a Grammy nominated jazz musician friend who introduced me to 20th century classical music and jazz and the ideas of atonality.
And he said to me, and I think he's right, that if humans listened to jackhammers long enough that eventually jackhammers might start to come to seem beautiful too.
There's a certain kind of rhythm and pounding and propulsive drive to them.
There's a tone palette that stays within a narrow enough spectrum that after a while our ears start to anticipate what might come next.
So in that sense, even a jackhammer might sound beautiful.
One other idea of the beauty of math is just like there are different interpretations of songs and they might sound very differently depending on who's singing them.
There turns out there can be many different ways of proving different theorems.
For example, probably the best example in fact is the Pythagorean theorem.
It's attributed to Pythagoras.
It's a remarkably important theorem that no doubt you learned at one point probably in elementary school and applied to a number of very basic problems.
But it turns out to be a tool that's used in proving very important and deep theorems and sometimes it pops up in very sophisticated places.
But my point is it's such a fundamental idea and it's been around for so long that in fact there are dozens if not hundreds of different ways of proving it.
There are proofs without words.
There are many proofs that without words.
The most famous is, well to describe it, it's a square with a diamond in it and it had the word behold below it and it's interpretable as being seen as a proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
President James Garfield, before he was elected, worked as an educator and he too created his own unique proof of the Pythagorean theorem that had never been seen before, at least not published before.
And he published it in 1876.
Now he was elected president in 1881 and I love to believe, although I doubt it's true, that the American populace in awe and dazzled by the fact that a presidential candidate had a new proof of the Pythagorean theorem
swept him into office on a rising tide of we are in favor of great mathematics in the White House.
I admit it's a bit of a stretch, but I find it a nice anecdote about President Garfield that this was something that was clearly meaningful to him.
He had interesting geometric insight and he came up with a new way of doing it.
