But the point of all this and connected to beauty is that if there are a whole spectrum
of different things, then it's possible to look at them and say, you know, I kind of
like that one, it's a little bit shorter, or, oh, take a look at that, this was done
very cleverly, or even, how did the person think of that?
I never would have thought of that, not in a million years.
And then of course the mathematician in me says, well, perhaps in a million years, because
that's a long time to think about things.
I don't think it's a provable proposition, but I'm willing to bet that a psychologist
would back me up on this.
The more options that we're presented with, the more examples of one kind of thing there
are, the more likely we are to say, this one's nicer than that one, I like this one a little
bit better.
And eventually one can start to say, I actually think that's very beautiful.
So I'll give another example that I find a little bit meaningful in this context.
Jackson Pollock paintings.
I never liked Jackson Pollock paintings.
I thought they were kind of silly, I thought they were juvenile, I thought they were yet
another example of the art world gone crazy, celebrating someone just for the sake of celebrating
them because they were different.
I thought, my goodness, like everyone else, a 10 year old could do that.
And I persisted in these beliefs for many, many years.
And then one day I was at the MoMA in New York City, and I stopped in front of one of
his paintings, and I suddenly saw within it the fierce intent, the willpower that he
brought to the bare canvas and what he was trying to accomplish.
I saw the different gradations of thickness and thinness and drippings he did on the painting.
I saw his artistry and the color choice and texture.
I saw the balance that he was trying to achieve.
And I was dazzled.
It was remarkable to me that something that I thought I could never find beautiful, I
suddenly found beautiful.
And to tie this back to mathematics, I had that experience with proofs.
I thought, based on my experiences in geometry, that a proof was nothing more than a set of
very short, bland assertions that started me where I was supposed to get and three or
four steps later ended me where I was supposed to arrive.
And I did that well enough to get through geometry, and probably you did too, but there
was certainly nothing beautiful about it.
And then, in higher math, it became clear that a proof could have all different kinds
of surprise, elegance, a concision that came out of nowhere, what it seemed like perhaps
a dozen cases would have to be shown, a hundred cases would have to be printed out by computer
or people furiously working.
Everyone has one brilliant idea, unexpected, out of nowhere, that ties together three different
things, and it's as beautiful as a sunrise, it's as beautiful as a sunset.
It's a constellation of ideas, there's an architecture that's built with undergirders
and struts and all sorts of supports and bars, and then a beautiful facade on top of it and
then encapsulated with interior decorating, and the whole structure is magnificent.
Now I will contrast this again with Euclid, for Euclid the game was, and we'll talk about
this later on too, start with as little as possible and build up as much as you can until
the whole universe exists in a geometric pattern.
Another idea of the beauty of math is the fitting togetherness of calculus.
It's like a giant machine with hundreds of thousands of complicated little gears all
connected in intricate, detailed ways, and when it's working and it's working smoothly
and one is moving from one line to the next in a derivation or a calculation, it's an
extraordinary feeling, and I'll add complicated and not easy in many cases, but all these
little pieces fit together, all this hard one knowledge accumulated over years of study
just fits and goes smoothly and the things are supposed to happen, and at the end something
pops out, and that's an extraordinary feeling.
The deep truth of mathematics, one may deny the applicability of logic, but then again
one may deny anything.
Radical doubt may be a defensible philosophic position, if I'm talking to someone and they
say, oh how do I even know you exist, how do I know I'm not a brain in a vat on Mars,
how do we know that any of this is real, how do we know we're not living in the matrix,
I don't think that logic holds in the universe.
There's nothing to be said to a person such as that, it produces nothing, and more importantly,
especially for my purposes, it's no fun.
So
