It's not even clear how to search for an answer to these kinds of questions.
I think philosophers take shots at it and mathematicians,
maybe late in the evening at the end of a long day sitting in front of the fireplace
or a metaphorical fireplace, can start to worry about this,
but it's nothing that's answerable at the moment.
There's no way to even begin to think what set of tools would be necessary
to try to answer this question.
However, the universe does seem to work with this built-in consistency,
where time and again the same thing results, and we take advantage of that.
If not, we would live in a chaos.
We would live in something worse than a Jackson Pollock painting of the universe.
It would not be nearly so beautiful as Jackson Pollock's work.
We would live in a universe where things would just change or not change
according to nothing, no law, no flow of time even, just nothing.
We couldn't do anything in a universe like that.
I don't believe life could exist either.
Certainly we can't comprehend it.
There's also, back to the deep truth, the last thing I want to say about it.
There's an eerie and amazing omnipresence of certain numbers.
I don't know that I want to draw mystical connections,
but it does the older I grow freak me out a little bit more every time I think about it.
The number pi, what is pi?
Pi is a ratio.
Pi is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter,
which is why we have that lovely formula that's so easily memorized that
pi times the diameter equals the circumference.
It seemed like such a magnificent thing when I was taught it.
My goodness, I can always calculate the circumference of a circle,
but the reality is that the Greeks observed the following,
that the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle
was always going to be about 3.14159 and so on.
And that number, seemingly so innocuous, starts to pop up everywhere.
It pops up in crazy formulas.
It pops up in strange places.
Now, why should the ratio between the circumference of a circle and its diameter become so powerful?
I don't have an answer for that, but I know that it's extraordinary to me.
Another number that comes up a lot, it's had books written about it,
is the golden ratio, also called the divine proportion,
often given the Greek letter phi or phi depending on your mood.
And the golden ratio is, as the name suggests, also a ratio.
It's a little bit trickier to describe in terms of dividing up rectangles
and how a smaller rectangle inscribed inside a larger one
has to have a perfect ratio between the short end of one
and the long end of the other and so forth.
But again, one would imagine that, well, okay, someone defined this interesting ratio
and there's nothing special about the way it's described,
rectangles to rectangles, sides to sides.
And yet, it pops up again and again.
Now, there's several ways it pops up.
People look at things like the Parthenon or the human body
and they want to say, well, if we measure this and that, we get a golden ratio.
And there may be truth to that.
But more importantly, it pops up in numbers and formulas and series and sequences
and all kinds of other places in the math world
where it's not so clear why that number should pop up, that particular ratio.
And when I start trying to think about this and how it fits in
with the deeper bones of the universe
and why is it that some things are consistent and why are some things true,
I do get lost at times saying, why are these few ratios seemingly eternally recurrent
and what's going on?
