Numbers and Shapes. Numbers and Shapes are the letters and three letter words of a language.
Now for you Scrabble fans out there you know there's something like 729 different three letter
words in English and they're great in doing Scrabble. Numbers and Shapes are they're sort of like
that too. They're the glue that's everywhere. Once you have letters and you have a few small words
you can build up a lot of things. So I want to bring up a pair of philosophic ideas that
hark back to Plato in this context. The idea of a number versus a particular number of objects.
Since I'm interested in philosophy a bit we'll we'll touch more on these throughout the course
of the lectures as well. But we can talk about a certain number of objects. We're talking about
fruit again or trees or blades of grass on a lawn. The number of automobiles that we've sold this
month from the dealership. We can apply numbers to all different sorts of things. But what is the
idea of a number versus a particular one? A similar thing with shapes. We can talk about the outlines
of particular objects. We can talk about what properties they may or may not have. We can say
oh the frisbee is circular or the orange is somewhat spherical. But then what is the idea
of a shape? This seems to take us to deeper waters. As interesting as it is to explore the ideas of
shapes what Plato called the forms of the shapes and the form of the number mathematics does usually
focus on the particulars. I want to talk about numbers now. People have wondered especially
since the time of Plato what are numbers? Where are they? They're not exactly adjectives although
they can be applied to nouns and they're not exactly nouns although they sort of function
like nouns at times too. You can't touch them although you can certainly touch a number of things.
There are whole math courses that develop and understand different numbers starting from scratch
or as much scratch as mathematicians start from. Start from nothing. Call nothing something. Call
that nothing, that something, the empty set. Once we have the empty set now we have a thing even though
that thing is really nothing. Now we can say we have one thing but one thing we have nothing.
Once we have one thing it's pretty easy to have two things because now I can just say
suppose I had another one of those one things that I had and now I'm off to the races. We're
going to build up the real numbers this way. We start with two then we go to three, we go to four
and nothing's going to stop us now. Negative numbers are a little bit harder to get at so
maybe I won't talk about them yet.
