Once we have the positive integers, we can build fractions, rational numbers.
We take ratios of one integer to another, example, a half, three-quarters, twelve-fifths,
and my favorite natural application of fractions is for pie and cake.
I love pies and I love cake, and when we split pies and cakes, fractions naturally arise.
There are all kinds of other numbers, though, too.
There are negative numbers.
Negative numbers are very odd.
They trouble people.
They've troubled famous, fantastic, great mathematicians through the ages.
It's worth mentioning that, till about a hundred years ago,
negative numbers weren't taught.
They weren't thought of as real because, in a way, they're not.
We just say, well, show me my negative four dollars,
and the only possible response is, I can't show you the negative four dollars.
I just know that you have negative four dollars because you owe me four dollars.
So the four dollars, the next four dollars you get will become mine,
or maybe you could think of it as holes in the ground.
At any rate, this troubled people, this troubled mathematicians.
Students have trouble with it, too, but mathematicians had a lot of trouble with it
and thought of it as a convenient fiction, useful to help solve problems and get things done.
But once we have negative numbers and rational numbers, fractions,
then we can also start worrying about, as did Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans, irrational numbers.
This was a huge leap.
The Greeks thought that numbers were only in the form of integers or ratios of integers,
hence the word rational numbers.
Irrational numbers, no one could even conceive of something that could be that way.
After all, isn't everything rational?
The irrational numbers came in looking at the diagonal of squares.
Using the Pythagorean theorem, one comes up with what the length of the diagonal has to be.
Now, there are nice ways of proving that that number is not a ratio of integers.
And this was really startling.
This was the genesis of a huge leap in mathematics as the Greeks realized that some numbers were not ratios.
In other words, that they were irrational.
And it was very disturbing to them.
And I find it fascinating that the word irrational now has come to mean crazy
because I think it drove them crazy.
It shattered their worldview.
It made them think that numbers which had just been ratios of integers
could be other things.
If they could be other things, then how could they possibly be described?
And at first then, they probably thought, well, maybe every, perhaps every irrational number
can be written as the diagonal of a square or a rectangle that was appropriately chosen.
That would at least be comforting because now we have to admit a new class of numbers,
but at least we can always draw geometric constructs that give that new number.
Well, that turned out not to be the case.
And time has shown that it's tricky to put a finger exactly on what an irrational number is.
Pi is a very famous irrational number, as is the golden mean.
The best way of thinking of them, at least the best way to my mind, is in decimal form.
Once they're in decimal form, we know certain things about them must be true.
They go on forever.
They don't terminate.
So pi is 3.14159, and it goes on and on and on.
They don't repeat.
One third is a ratio.
It's a fraction.
It's a rational number.
And if we put it in decimal form, as I'm sure you know, it's 0.333333, and the threes go on forever.
Irrational numbers, no patterns, no termination, no stop point.
And it raises a question for me and for mathematicians, which is, well, we don't have an easy means of computing these numbers, do we?
I mean, there's no pattern.
For one third, I can just say the decimal of it is 0.3333 dot dot dot line over the three.
I can make as many rational numbers as I want by taking a certain number of digits, 0.13579999921.
Boom.
There's a rational number.
Or I could say, take that number and repeat it forever.
That will be another rational number.
How do we get at irrational numbers?
There's only so far we can go.
Our computers, the time we have in the world.
So pi has been computed out to 250 billion decimal places.
I'm going to say that again, 250 billion decimal places.
And that was a great achievement by the people who came up with the way of computing it and had the resources and supercomputers and looked at that print out.
But it raises a whole bunch of questions for me.
One is, so what?
It's 250 billion digits, but that's out of infinitely many digits.
Since it goes on forever and since the pattern never repeats, looking at 250 billion digits doesn't tell me anything new.
The second question is, how do we know that those digits are really the right digits?
Back to what I was saying, this has not been a repeated experiment.
This has not been a calculation that's been performed again.
People who want to look at those digits and believe that those are the correct digits for pi have to decide that the algorithm put in the computer was correct and no strange glitches occurred during the computation.
So one can ask, did your rational numbers exist?
How do we know?
We can't say them all.
We can't write them down.
We can just point to them as a distance between rational numbers on a line.
There are all kinds of other numbers that are of interest, imaginary numbers and complex numbers.
We'll talk more about those in other lectures as we go on.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about logic, truth and paradox, a deeper exploration of what the underlying tools that mathematics relies on to decide if something is correct or right.
This ends lecture one.
