Mathematics is power, lecture two, logic, truth, and paradoxes.
This lecture looks at the power of logic, how it helps us decide if something is true or false, and what those mean.
And after gaining a sense of it, we'll take a look at paradoxes, which I take as helping us understand the limits of logic.
First, let's ask, how does logic play a role in thinking?
Logic is essentially the rules for making conclusions.
So the idea is we'll start with some things, axioms, premises, that we'll think of as somehow true or of interest,
and then we want to find out what we can get from them that's still true, but maybe we hadn't thought before.
Or at any rate, something that when we arrive at it, we can say, this was derived logically, therefore I must accept it as being true.
Later on, when we talk about infinity, we'll see some problems with that that arose in that people started off thinking about something that was true,
and consequences arose from that that they were very unhappy with, and that caused some problems.
At any rate, we usually think that acilogism is the best way of making conclusions from premises.
Acilogism is a pattern, if you will, of kinds of sentences and clauses and consequences, and it's a little bit of a fancy word,
so we can think of it as the same as a reasoned argument.
Probably the most important syllogism, the most important reasoned argument, is one that you're familiar with, and here's an example.
Everyone who appreciates math is powerful.
By listening to these lectures, you appreciate math, therefore you are powerful.
Do you see how that follows?
If everyone who appreciates math is powerful, and you appreciate math, then you too must be powerful.
If we think of it in terms of sets and subsets, you can think of it as that appreciate math is contained in powerful.
There's this giant overarching sense of what is powerful, all the kinds of things that are powerful.
Within that, there's this little subsection called people who appreciate math,
and since you're now in that little subset of people who appreciate math, you are in the bigger set of power.
By understanding and appreciating math, you are powerful.
Here's a flawed version of that syllogism, that reasoned argument.
If you can spot the flaw before I tell you, you are powerful.
Everyone who appreciates math is powerful, therefore you appreciate math.
I'll say that again.
You are powerful, and everyone who appreciates math is powerful, therefore you appreciate math.
Do you see what went wrong here?
In terms of sets, again, appreciate math is contained in powerful.
However, there's lots of ways to be powerful without appreciating math,
and so the fact that you're powerful doesn't mean that you necessarily appreciate math.
In fact, before listening to these lectures, it may be the case that you don't appreciate math very much, hopefully by the end you will.
At any rate, that's an example of a flawed application of logic,
or a place where logic tells us that there are flaws in the reasoning.
And if we think of it in terms of sets and subsets, for me at least, that works very well,
because I can see in my mind there's a big circle and a little circle contained completely in that big circle.
If you're in the little circle, then you're in the big circle.
However, you can be in the big circle without being in the little circle.
Our sentence is logical.
Well, they can be, but they need not be, but then they seem dead wrong.
And here's an example, I am alive and I am dead.
A mathematician or a logician would say, you've simultaneously said P and not P,
and we'll talk more about this in a minute, but it might even be stranger to write,
I am alive and I am not alive.
Your mind just can't really accept both those things at the same time.
It seems bizarre that they could coexist, that something could be one thing,
and at the same time, it's exact opposite.
So that's a sentence that's not logical, or better yet, it's a constellation of ideas that together do not make sense.
Now there's a way that even that sentence could lead to a poetry or a rhetorical effect,
neither of which are necessarily logical at all.
I am alive and I am dead.
Alive and kicking, but dead tired.
And if a person said that, you might think, oh, that's kind of witty,
it might even move you in some different way.
But the effect of it in terms of logic is that there is something extremely wrong going on.
