So, by contrast, good examples of logic are usually when someone uses that most important
reasoned argument, that most important syllogism that we talked about above, and by doing so,
they find an interesting subset from the set of initial interest, just like you could find the
subset of people who appreciate math inside the bigger set of power, or things that are powerful.
So an example from popular culture is that Spock and Star Trek, frequently when things
happen in an episode, will look at Captain Kirk and he'll say, flawlessly logical.
And I always wondered when I was a kid, is that really logical?
What just happened? And as I've grown older, I realized that the script writers, it sounds great
and Vulcan is a planet that's supposedly based fully on logic, but really Spock is often saying
different things. And I'm going to run through now what I take some of the things Spock to be saying
and try to explain the differences, because they all tie in together with what the power of logic
is, and how it helps us sort out things that are true of interest, or things that make sense,
or don't make sense, or things that correspond to the world well, and don't correspond well to the
world. So oftentimes, what Spock really means is, that's a brilliant idea, or related. That's an
insidiously clever plan, not that a Vulcan could say it quite like that, or much more importantly,
these ideas are consistent, or what you said is valid. So in almost no case is Spock saying,
you've produced a reasoned argument from premises that I find to be true and believe,
and now have resulted in a surprising, yet valid conclusion. So let's look at what some of these
words mean to help understand how people think about reasoning. There are four ideas that I
just mentioned, logic, consistency, validity, and truth. So let's take a look at what their
differences and similarities are. They work together usually in different ways to help us understand
things. So logic, for the purposes of this lecture, it's a set of rules of allowable deductions,
of ways of drawing inference. Logic is how we start off with axioms, or premises,
some initial ideas, and then in a way that we agree with, we find the conclusions that follow
from it. Almost always in ways that you'll encounter, buried in it, even if it looks much
more complicated, it will be that most important reasoned argument, the prominent syllogism,
the one that we did an example of, where you have a set, and you have a tiny subset of it,
or maybe large subset of it, and you find that by starting with a set, and then the subset,
that the subset is contained in the set, which sounds true, and it sounds like it has to be true,
and that's because it is true. I guess part of the idea of logic is that you end up finding things
that you know to be true if you start with things that are true. So again, logic, consistency,
validity, and truth. That's logic. Consistency is what we also just talked about above. It's no
contradictions allowed. Now here's a couple of silly sentences that I can say together.
The moon is made of Swiss cheese. The sun is made of American cheese. Now these are two extremely
silly kinds of remarks, but they are not contradictory of each other to say that the moon is cheese is
false, to say that the sun is cheese is false, but they don't in any way speak towards each other,
and they don't contradict each other. So in a sense, there is logic there because
by being statements that don't contradict each other, we may accept them simultaneously
into an argument, into a reasoned argument. Of course, our reasoning capability also says
these don't seem to correspond well with the world, and that's a problem, but at the same time,
and I want to emphasize this, as goofy as they are, they do not contradict each other.
