So we've talked about logic and consistency.
The idea of validity is that a logical argument is correct.
The moon is made of Swiss cheese.
Mice love eating Swiss cheese.
Therefore, mice love eating the moon.
This is silly again, and it's not true,
but it's actually a valid argument.
There's not a flaw in the reasoning.
The syllogism, the reasoned argument is correct.
We started with a set.
Things made of Swiss cheese.
We put the moon in that set.
Then we looked at the set of things that mice love to eat
and said Swiss cheese was included in it.
So in other words, everything that was in Swiss cheese
is part of what mice love to eat.
If the moon is made of Swiss cheese,
then mice will love to eat Swiss cheese.
So that's a circle, completely contained in another circle,
contained in a third circle.
We have the moon as a circle contained in the circle of Swiss cheese.
And we have the Swiss cheese circle contained in what mice love to eat.
So we've made a logically correct deduction.
It's a silly one.
The moon's not made of Swiss cheese, but everything else is true.
Mice do love to eat Swiss cheese.
And if the moon were made of Swiss cheese,
then mice would love to eat the moon.
So in a sense, this is an example of a logically correct, yet terrible argument.
And this is something that we have to be aware of, I think,
when we read newspapers, well, or read our iPads,
or androids, or anything that we happen to read,
or listen to the radio, or TV.
A lot of times, people might start with crazy kinds of premises.
Something as crazy as the moon is made of Swiss cheese,
but not quite as clear as that one.
Then they perform a valid argument and arrive at a conclusion and they claim it's true.
But this is not exactly what truth is.
It's a bit hard to give a good definition of truth.
But I think what we want to say is something is true if the premises,
if the axioms correspond accurately to the real world,
that's the hardest part to gauge.
And then a valid argument is made with no inconsistencies
and a logical inference is made.
This is logic at its best.
We start with what seems to be a true premise,
then we make a valid logical deduction.
There are no inconsistencies and the conclusion we arrive at is true too.
Sometimes the conclusion is shocking and it might not even agree with what we think.
But this is the power of logic and logical reasoning.
If we agree that the premises are true,
if we agree that the reasoning was done correctly,
if we spot no inconsistencies,
if we decide to obey the iron laws of logic,
we must accept the conclusion.
And that can be very powerful.
Sometimes it can help point us in directions we wouldn't have otherwise gone.
Sometimes it can provide strength or a crutch in a situation
where we might otherwise feel weak.
If we know we're correct, if we know that everything's correct,
it's having true belief in something.
And we can resist the temptation to deviate our course.
A related question is, is logic necessary for truth?
I'll say that again, is logic necessary for truth?
Well, I think logic is certainly not necessary for truth.
And this is a mistake made by many,
probably more scientists than poets, I would think, or artists.
Truth just is.
And logic may not capture it.
We'd like our experiences or our decisions to be logically deducible from something.
And this was Descartes at his finest.
He thought, what is the one thing that when I reflect by myself here by the fire,
I can unassailably decide is a true place to begin all my reasoning from?
And he thought, and he thought, and he thought about thinking,
and he knew that he was thinking, and he thought, I think, therefore I am.
In other words, he took the idea of thinking and made that his premise.
He made that the basis for everything that was going to come after.
He thought, I am thinking, I know I'm thinking, I can't not be thinking,
and because I'm thinking, I am here.
And then this led to a whole school of philosophy that's persisted through centuries.
It's a pretty interesting and fairly compelling way to think about things.
I'll start with something I know unassailably to be true,
and from that I will derive all I possibly can from it.
Descartes tried to logically derive all of human existence and everything that we might experience
from this one axiom, one unassailable truth that he thought.
Now that's a way to go, and everything that you derive from that,
you can say logically follows from it,
and now you've built up a logical framework for understanding the world.
And it's a powerful way of understanding the world,
but it doesn't seem to take into account all the kinds of experiences that we do actually have,
or all the sorts of phenomena that the world has.
It seems also an unusual place to begin that I think,
rather just beginning with I am and the universe is.
But beginning with that, pretty much is the same as saying everything is true
and everything is true, because the things that are true are and the things that are are true.
So that doesn't help so much either.
But let me try to give a more concrete example of why logic might not necessarily be exactly the same as truth.
