It seems to us, and hard to imagine otherwise, that one of two things must be true.
Either the universe must be infinite, or it must be finite.
It doesn't seem possible that it could be both infinite and finite at the same time.
In fact, that sounds inconsistent.
And I suppose there are ways that one could possibly imagine where the universe was both infinite and finite.
But if that was true, then that would I think pretty much throw our logic fully out the window.
It would be inconsistent.
It would be both one thing and its exact opposite at the same time.
If we believe that the universe is either infinite or finite,
there are plenty of reasons to believe one possibility or the other.
Although for it seems about the past 50 years or so,
cosmologists have been leaning towards finite.
They have accumulated some evidence that suggests the universe doesn't go on forever.
And the idea of the Big Bang, if we believe that, and there's a lot of reason to believe it,
also suggests that the universe is most likely finite.
At any rate, it is possible that we do have an infinite universe, an infinite time.
And both are very hard to envision.
Just think about that a second.
A universe that stretches on and on and on forever.
It's hard to imagine.
Or time.
It's always been the universe.
The universe will always be.
There's never been anything but a universe that extends in all directions forever, for all time.
Our minds are not well adapted to understand the infinite,
which is one of the reasons we'll talk about infinity in lecture seven.
But given that the universe is one or the other, how can we decide which it is?
Can we use logic?
I mean, one of them is true, not the other.
We can't have both at the same time, or at least both at the same time in logic.
We have no logical reason to believe one or the other.
There's not anything we can derive that from.
We can either believe it's infinite, or we can believe it's finite.
There may be scientific evidence that accumulates over time
to allow us to think one or the other is more likely to be true.
And then logic will have helped us perhaps come to a correct conclusion about the universe,
that it's infinite, or it's finite.
But at the moment, there's no way of finding that logic.
And more importantly, the fact of the universe is regardless of what our logic says.
So that's an important idea that logic is a marvelous method,
a powerful method for helping us think about things that are true or false.
But it doesn't tell us that something is true or false.
It helps us see it, or confirm it, or have a richer understanding of it.
From that, it follows logically, the truth is, in a sense, independent of logic.
And if I can make a quick pitch for science, scientists investigate what they believe to be true.
They endeavor to create logical frameworks from things we believe
that end up with what experiments show.
They use mathematics, they use reproducibility,
they use all the experience of what we have from living in the world and trying to understand the
world, and they create a constellation of ideas that suggest that, therefore,
something is true or false.
And from that, they continue to build the scaffolding.
That's logical scientific truth.
And at its best, science acts like this.
If experiments give us inconsistent results, like in early quantum mechanics,
scientists do their best to try to understand it and figure out
how to reconcile the inconsistencies.
At its worst, science just tries to quash the inconsistencies and says,
well, one of them's wrong, this is what we always believe,
so something must have gone awry.
It's very tempting to say that in the past 100 or 200 years,
that kind of reasoning is mostly gone, because that's bad reasoning.
