without wanting to go into too much detail over how they go because they sound a little silly.
What Zeno was trying to think about was what is the problem of motion? How do things move?
How do they move from one point to another? And it depends in part on whether or not the
universe is granular, meaning that in the small it's finite, that we could shrink down and down
and down and down and we see it's like a tic-tac-toe grid or some kind of grid that if we got small
enough the universe is a bunch of little boxes, very, very tiny, and things occupy a finite number
of very tiny boxes. Or if the universe was a smooth continuum, infinite in the small,
like the number line or the Euclidean plane, that there's points all pushing and piling
up against each other everywhere and there's infinitely many of them. And one of his paradox
is asked, if the universe is granular, how does an arrow move from point to point? We don't have a
good answer, really. We know we can say that at one time an arrow is exactly at one place or the
tip of an arrow is exactly at one point and at another time it's exactly at a different point,
but how does it jump from point to point to point? When we thought about the universe and how it
might be infinite, our mind bulked at that. It seemed too large for our mind to encompass. And now
at the other end, if we look at the small, if we imagine that it's granular and that it's just a
bunch of tiny, tiny points, but finitely many of them, then that has problems too. Again, it's
very difficult for our minds to conceive. Another one of his paradoxes was addressing the problem
that if it's a smooth continuum, how can something touch infinitely many points? This one seems to
have many answers, but it does have one logical issue that's not well resolved. Assuming that the
arrow is trending towards a point, what guarantee is it that it will actually reach that point?
So Zeno sought to get people concerned about an arrow touching infinitely many points in finite
time, but I think our understanding of math and science allows us to overlook that concern.
However, one concern that we have not had a good answer to, even though arrows clearly move and get
from point to point, is if they are trending towards something, is there a logical necessity
for it to actually reach that? And the answer is no. And that also seems to violate our common
sense a bit. If we accept mathematics and science, then we just ignore this problem and move on.
Another ancient Greek paradox is the Saraites paradox. Saraites was the Greek word for heap,
so this is sometimes called the paradox of the heap. I think of it as the paradox of a hill of
beans or the straw that broke a camel's back. Here's how it works. If I say I have a heap of
beans, imagine now a giant stack of beans, beans as big as the Great Pyramid in Egypt,
and I remove one bean, I still have a heap of beans or a hill of beans or a giant pile of beans.
I can remove another one, I still have a pile of beans. I keep removing beans, and if I had a pile
of beans at one time, and I remove one single bean, then I still have a pile of beans. Eventually,
I'm going to remove enough beans that there's only a few beans left or no beans. And certainly,
at that point, you could not say there's still a heap of beans there or a hill of beans. There's
just one bean, and you'd laugh at me. But then I say to you, when did the heap stop being a heap?
There had to be a moment that the heap wasn't a heap any longer. And if not, then what that's
saying is that words are very imprecise. The similar example is the straw that broke a camel's back.
If you have a camel that's carrying a bunch of hay, and you can keep adding hay to the camel,
the camel can carry it. But eventually, there'll be so much hay that the camel's back will be
broken. There will be no way that the camel could carry, say, 100 tons of hay. So somewhere along
the way, there had to be one straw that broke that camel's back.
