The conclusion that I take from this paradox, and it's a fun one to think about, is that
language is very imprecise, and this is one of the other reasons that math is powerful.
Math does not have imprecision built into it the way natural language does.
There are no words like heap and math where the notion is poorly defined.
Part of the sensational character of math is how diamond perfection is buried in the
definitions, that something is exactly what it is.
Now you may laugh at me and say that there's something paradoxical there too, because even
though they're mathematical ideas, we use natural language ideas to define them.
And I agree, that is kind of a problem.
But again, what I take from this, language does not capture reality.
Logic does not capture truth.
The last paradox I want to talk about is probably the most important.
It's called the Liars Paradox, because the original version was a Cretan saying, all
Cretans are Liars.
Now there are several ways to resolve that paradox, but a much more compelling version
of it is this following statement.
This sentence is false.
Let me say that again.
This sentence is false.
So now let's try to interpret that.
If the sentence is false, then it said this sentence is false, so that's true.
On the other hand, if the sentence is true, then that means this sentence is false.
So if it's true, it's false.
In other words, we've gotten inconsistent outcomes from this.
If it's false, it's true.
If it's true, it's false.
It's both true and false.
There's no way of reconciling it.
It is inconsistent.
You might worry that self-referentiality there seems to be the problem, but there are modified
versions that have no self-reference.
And so there's something buried deeply inside of it, where trying to talk about truth and
falseness and swirling them around each other somehow produces something very powerful that's
beyond natural language and beyond that sentence, and it's worth pondering that.
It's so powerful that it led to Godel's incompleteness theorem.
Now, Godel's incompleteness theorem is probably the most profound breakthrough in 20th century
mathematics, and it's not a theorem about Roger Godel, the commissioner of football,
and incomplete passes, although that would be wonderful if there was a Godel's incomplete
pass theorem.
What it really says is that if a theory of finitely many axioms is rich enough to produce
basic arithmetic on the integers, then there are theorems that are consistent with those
axioms but are not logically and validly provable by the axioms.
That was a real mouthful, so let me try to break that down.
In a somewhat misleading shorthand, if you have axioms that allow you to logically build
up arithmetic, then there are theorems that are true and consistent that cannot be proved
from those.
That's a little bit disturbing.
In imagery, build everything possible with the axioms you start with.
You'll get all of arithmetic, but there will be holes everywhere, infinitely many of them,
that cannot be filled, even though they should be able to be filled.
So if we think of mathematics as a structure that's built up out of the axioms we start
with using logical, valid deduction, then we can end up with this great, magnificent
edifice of all of mathematics that we know and love, but there will be infinitely many
holes everywhere where there are true theorems that are consistent with everything we believe
and understand but are not provable.
And that's a little disturbing and strange.
Now the point of Godel's incompleteness theorem regarding this is it's logical, it turns in
on itself and it uses the liar's paradox decisively to prove the truth of the theorem
that limits the truth of other theorems.
It's a magnificent example of how logic and language can be used in the hands of a genius
to turn back on itself and understand the limits.
Summing up, this lecture has explored logic and reason, their power to help understand
truth and the limitations of truth and our understandings.
Problems are not and there are many.
Logic is still the single most important tool of human thought.
The next lecture investigates how computers and calculators are able to actually compute
numbers.
Surely it can't be that there are magic elves inside finding the answers for us, can it?
Actually it's the power of the most simple mathematical functions, polynomials that allow
us to compute.
This ends lecture two.
