These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by The Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening for less than an hour a
day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website
and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors carefully
selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching
excellence. These lectures are titled Questions of Value, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Patrick Grimm. Dr. Grimm is the Distinguished Teaching Professor
of Philosophy at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Graduating with highest
honors in both anthropology and philosophy from the University of California at Santa
Cruz, Professor Grimm was named a Fulbright Fellow to the University of St. Andrews, Scotland,
from which he received his Bachelor of Philosophy. Professor Grimm received his Ph.D. from Boston
University with a dissertation on ethical relativism.
Professor Grimm is published widely in scholarly journals in philosophy and other fields including
theoretical biology, linguistics, decision theory, artificial intelligence, and computer
science. Professor Grimm is the author of The Incomplete
Universe, Totality, Knowledge, and Truth. He is the founding co-editor of over 20 volumes
of The Philosopher's Annual, an anthology of the best articles published in philosophy
each year. Professor Grimm is the recipient of several
honors and awards. In addition to being named SUNY Distinguished Teaching Professor, Dr.
Grimm has been awarded the President and Chancellor's Awards for Excellence in Teaching
and has been elected to the Academy of Teachers and Scholars.
Professor Grimm prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures. The course
guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
modes, and a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful
to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Questions of Value
I am Patrick Grimm. I am Professor of Philosophy at the State University of New York at Stonybrook,
and I'm going to be your guide through this series of lectures.
In this first lecture, I want to outline my role as a guide, the broad nature of the
questions of value that this course covers, the resources that we'll draw on, and in
the course of doing so, I want to list eight objectives for the course as a whole, things
you can expect to get out of it. I'll finish with a brief roadmap of the course.
So let me start with my role as guide. I will be trying, first of all, to give you information,
information regarding abstract theory, but also information regarding concrete issues.
I will, however, be trying to give you something more than information. I'll be laying out
patterns of reasoning for your consideration, patterns of reasoning taken from classic sources
in the broad history of philosophy, but also patterns of reasoning regarding issues of
crucial importance in our lives. Patterns of reasoning are something you can understand
only by reasoning them through yourselves, and I'll be your guide in that as well.
This is a course of lectures on questions of value, and they're important philosophical
strategies that bear on questions of that kind. Learning intellectual strategies of
that kind, that too works best by example. My attempt in every lecture will be to provide
some good examples of the kind of methodology I'm trying to talk about, getting the initial
questions clear, separating issues that are really distinct, knowing where to cut the
relevant distinctions, exploring conceptual alternatives with the necessary depth, and
ultimately trying to hone in on reasonable approaches and things that start to look like
real answers. So, information, patterns of reasoning, philosophical strategy, in all
of that I'm going to be your guide. I also expect, however, to be your gadfly. That's
the term that Socrates used about 400 BC. He called himself a gadfly. He characterized
himself as an annoying insect provoking a reaction from his fellow citizens of Athens.
He was out to stimulate deeper philosophical thought. I'll be giving you some important
information on the questions we address. I'll be laying down patterns of reasoning for your
consideration. I'll be trying to teach some lessons in philosophical methodology as we
go through, teaching them by example. But I will also be trying to figure out where
the truth lies in some of these important issues. I don't guarantee that you'll always
agree with me. Indeed, if you agree with every position I take throughout the course, there's
probably something wrong. Where you and I disagree, however, I will be laying out my
reasons for thinking as I do, even where you end up disagreeing with me. That procedure
should stimulate you to further thinking and to further understanding of your reasons on
the other side. That's how I see my role in regard to the questions of this course.
Let me also talk about the particular kinds of questions that are at issue. The really
fundamental questions of our lives are questions of value. Physical creatures that we are,
we of course have to deal with matters of fact. And economic creatures that we are,
we of course have to deal with questions of finance. But the really fundamental questions
of our lives, the questions of how we can shape our lives, questions of what form our
lives ought to take, those are questions of fact, those are questions of finance, those
are questions of fundamental value. What this course is designed to concentrate on are precisely
those kinds of fundamental questions of value. So questions like these, what is it that's
really worth striving for? What is it that really makes a life worth living? Those are
questions about what values to choose, but there are some deeper questions under those
questions of what values to choose, deeper questions about the nature of values themselves.
What is it that gives something, ultimate value? What is it that is the source of genuine value?
Is all value, for example, is all value subjective? A crucial assumption of all value deliberation
is the assumption that we have choices to make. But if the universe is deterministic,
if the universe is essentially a matter of physical particles or forces obeying physical
laws, then how can there be this crucial thing called choice? If choice is fundamental to
value, but if a deterministic universe doesn't have a role for choice, that's a challenge
to the very nature of value. There are also questions about the particular situation we
find ourselves in with respect to value. As cultural creatures, for example, and as
inevitably mortal creatures, is value something that's merely culturally defined and therefore
culturally bound, or are there values that transcend cultural differences?
Death is a crucial and inescapable boundary to our lives. We will all die, and how does
that impact questions of value? Those are deep and philosophical questions about the nature
of value, about our situation with respect to value. They're so deep, they're so hard
that they not only often go unanswered, those questions are so deep and hard they often go
unasked. But they're far from optional. Without some kind of answer to those abstract questions,
we don't really have an answer to immediate questions regarding our own lives either.
Questions about what things are really worth striving for, and what kinds of lives are really
worth living. So we'll be talking about fundamental questions of value, fundamental questions about
the nature of value, including questions about our situation with respect to value, those
underlying these questions about what kind of life is worth living, and what things to
choose in trying to live such a life. Socrates was certainly not the first philosopher. Thales
is usually given that honor, but he is often regarded as the first great philosopher in
the Western tradition. He is in a sense the founder of Western philosophy. I have to make
a confession here, our founder I have to admit was a convicted criminal. Socrates was put
on trial by the people of Athens in 399 BC. He was tried, he was convicted, he was condemned
to death by compulsory suicide, by drinking poison hemlock. Socrates could have escaped.
His friends had the route all laid out for Socrates' escape, but he chose to act in
accord with the jury's decision, and he drank the fatal hemlock. Plato's earliest dialogues
are about that event. The dialogue called the Apology is about the trial, and the Crito
is about the death of Socrates. It's from the Apology, from the passage in which Socrates
is addressing the jury, that the famous quote comes, the unexamined life is not worth living.
The unexamined life is not worth living. The contemporary philosopher Robert Nozick,
among other people, have thought that was too harsh. Surely even an unexamined life could
be a good one. Surely it's too harsh to say that the unexamined life is not worth living.
Couldn't you have a very decent life that wasn't an examined life? So Nozick, among
others, had thought that was too harsh. However, you can say this, that without examination,
a valuation of one's life and of major portions of one's life is impossible. Without examination,
that means that certain deliberate choices that can be made regarding a life are going
to be foreclosed as impossible. If you don't examine a life, you don't see some of the
options that are there. So the unexamined life is in a sense a foreshortened life. It has
fewer options. The unexamined life is a life with fewer possibilities because it fails
to evaluate itself in terms of the alternative possibilities. So even if the unexamined life
isn't a life that's not worth living, it is a life that's smaller than the examined life.
An unexamined life, then, is a more limited life. And at least this much has to be true
that the unexamined life will never know whether it's worth living. Without examining the life
in terms of values, you can't know whether it's a life worth living. So the nature of
the questions we're after and Socrates' goal of an examined life indicate two of the objectives
of this course. The first objective is to develop a deeper understanding of value, both in the
abstract and in the concrete. The second objective is to apply that deeper understanding to issues
in a life, to use that deeper understanding of values towards Socrates' goal of the examined
life. The questions that arise in the examined life are perhaps central to what this course
is about. But the course is also broader than that. I'm a philosopher, and what I want to
lead you through is a philosophical examination of questions of value. The course draws from
all periods of philosophical history. From ancient philosophy, we will draw repeatedly
from Plato, from Aristotle, but also from Epicurus and the Epicureans, Lucretius, the
Stoics, Sextus empiricus, and the skeptics, from the Renaissance and what's called modern
philosophy. We will talk about Montaigne, Hobbes, Rousseau, Hume, Kant, Bentham, Mille,
and the utilitarians. We'll talk about Nietzsche and Kierkegaard. We'll focus on a number of
20th century philosophers on the work of G. E. Moore, W. D. Ross, A. J. Ayer, and John
Rawls. And recent thinkers will also get their due, recent thinkers like Alastair McIntyre,
Bernard Williams, Thomas Nagel, and Derek Parfit. Let me make it clear, however, that
I don't think of philosophy as a limited discipline. Quite the contrary. The fact that this is
a philosophical examination of value doesn't exclude any category of value, nor do we
exclude any viable approach to values. You'll find that the lectures also draw on many disciplines
beyond academic philosophy because it's not merely philosophers that have had interesting
things to say about value. So materials from anthropology appear repeatedly through the
course of lectures, as do materials from psychology, from economics, from the formal disciplines
of decision theory and game theory. Let me say something about economics, since we're
on that right here. Economics is often thought of as a science, or as the attempt at a science,
regarding money. But actually, money plays a very small role in the foundations of economics.
The central concept of economics isn't money. The central concept of economics is utilities.
And what are utilities? Utilities are an abstract measure of how much something is worth to
a particular person. Utilities are an abstract measure of satisfaction in terms of what an
individual values. So crucial even to economics is not the concept of money, but in a sense
the concept of value. So we'll be using materials from anthropology, psychology, economics,
and some of its formal sub-disciplines. I'll be using materials from sociology and criminology
where they're appropriate, from theoretical jurisprudence and from political science. Theoretical biology
becomes important in talking about questions of evolution, evolution, altruism, and ethics.
And even bits of physics play a role in these lectures, as do some concepts from computer
science. What we're after, after all, is an understanding of values. And in pursuit of
that understanding, we'll use anything that comes to hand that may be suggestive or informative
or of value to the argument. Questions of value are some of the deepest and the most
important questions of our lives. It's therefore hardly a surprise that these kinds of questions
show up at the core of some of our most serious literature. So in the course of these lectures,
we will be using a number of literary sources as well, starting with the work of Jorge Luis
Borges in the next lecture. We'll be talking about Dickens at some point, the work of Mark
Twain, Dostoevsky, Ursula Le Guin, Peter S. Beagle, and even the vampire novels of Anne
Rice. Many of the questions addressed in these lectures are abstract questions, questions
about the general nature of ethics, the general nature of value, about what counts as subjective
and objective, about the relationship between culture and individual history and an individual's
values. But there are also concrete examples. In addition to the abstract, there are also
concrete examples that we will use throughout, examples from business, examples from law,
examples from medical practice. So we'll talk about DNA evidence and its impact on the death
penalty. We'll talk about the tragic case of Dax Coward and the issue of euthanasia.
We'll talk about John W. Hinckley and Patty Hearst and the insanity defense. We'll talk
about the Ford Motor Company's estimate of the value of human life in cost-benefit calculations
regarding the Pinto gas tank. So we'll be talking about those concrete issues as well
as the abstract issues that lie behind them. In terms of all this, we can outline two more
objectives for the course. Three, on the basis of the varied sources we'll be drawing from,
you'll have perspectives from a range of disciplines with which to approach questions of value.
And a fourth objective, against the background of the examples used, you'll have a set of
conceptual tools applicable to cases, concrete cases, including concrete cases within your
own experience. The questions of value that will be at issue are all kinds of questions
regarding all kinds of values. Many of our core values are ethical values or moral values.
And a number of the lectures in this course turn on central concepts in ethics, central
concepts in morality. But this is not a straight course in ethics. If anything, this is a course
if there's a word for what this course is about, the word is axiology. This is a course
in axiology. Axiology is a less familiar term than ethics, either outside of philosophy
or even within philosophy. Axiology is the study of values in general. And that's what
we're after. One thing that marks axiology is the concern with different and multiple
categories of value. There are ethical values, values of right and wrong, of duties and obligations,
values of rights and responsibilities. But beyond ethical values, there are also epistemic
values, values having to do with knowledge, values of seeking truth and attempting to
justify belief. There are also aesthetic values, values tied to beauty and appreciation.
There are spiritual and communal values. There are values and virtues of character and personality
that are deeper and broader than single choices on particular occasions. There are values of
human contact and values of love and friendship. All of those fall under the general category
of axiology. The contrast between ethics is a category of philosophical inquiry and the
wider category of axiology becomes clear in considering the strange case of Aristotle's
Nicomachean Ethics. The Nicomachean Ethics was written about 350 BC. It is universally
recognized as one of the absolute landmarks of ethical thought, and we'll return again
and again in the course of the lectures to Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics. But despite
the fact that this is universally recognized as one of the really great books on ethics,
Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics also looks strange to a modern eye. It has a major treatment
of the moral virtues, that's what you'd expect. But it also treats, it spends as much time
on a whole range of intellectual virtues, rational deliberation, intuitive reasoning.
What do those have to do with ethics? It has an extensive treatment of the joys of friendship,
very extensive treatment on happiness. What do those have to do with ethics? The reason
that the Nicomachean Ethics looks strange to modern eyes is that the Nicomachean Ethics
isn't just the Nicomachean Ethics. It is, in fact, the Nicomachean Axiology. It is concerned
with the full range of values, ethical values only some among them, and from the overriding
perspective of value in a human life, value in a good life. That will be the broader
perspective of these lectures. So a fifth objective of the course is this, development
of an appreciation for the range and interrelationships between different categories of values. Let
me add a sixth objective. The sixth is cultivation of conceptual skills and philosophical sensitivities
that are crucial to a serious approach to questions of value. This will be a philosophical
examination and conceptual clarity is a philosophical hallmark. We can't expect to get clear answers
unless we start with clear question, and often the greater part of the philosophical task
is not in answering the question, but in getting the question clear enough to try to answer
in the first place. With that said, it seems I should start with a definition of what I
mean by value. So let me tell you honestly, I can't give you a good definition of value.
Often the issue is whether something has a value for someone, and perhaps a particular
someone. That will be a matter of whether they want it, or desire it, or fear losing
it, whether they strive to obtain it, or protect it, or take it as a goal. But there's also
a more abstract sense in which we talk not merely of whether things are valued, but whether
they are worth valuing. To say that something has value in this sense is to say not just
whether people want it, whether people desire it. People can want and desire a lot of things,
some of which they live to regret. In this more abstract sense, to say that something
is of value is not merely to say that someone does want it, but that they should want it,
that it's worthy of their efforts, or worthy of our efforts, that it's worthy of our desire.
Another way of approaching the field is to say that things of value are good things.
But they're good things in the full range of ways that something can be good. It may
be something that's of value because it's a good thing to have. It may be that something
has value because it's a good thing to do. It may be that something has value because
it's a good thing to be.
All of that should give some indication of what I mean to include, the great breadth
of what I mean to include as a category of value.
But a hard look at the outline I've given reveals really a cluster of synonyms and near-synonyms.
In trying to outline value, I've spoken of wants and desires and needs, but I've also
talked about what's worth striving for, what merits are regard, things that are good to
have, or do, or achieve, or to be.
And when you look at that hard, that's little more than a fairly tight circle of related
terms and close synonyms.
None of that gives us a real definition of value.
That's not an unusual situation to find ourselves in.
It's related to something that might be called the dictionary paradox.
We know that it would be impossible for us to define every term we use in a meaningful
way.
Consider, after all, a dictionary that attempted to give a meaningful definition of every term
we use.
Imagine the ultimate dictionary.
Because definitions are always in terms of words, the words that appear in the definitions
would themselves have to appear somewhere in the ultimate dictionary.
So their definitions would in turn be phrased in terms of words, and those words would have
to appear in the ultimate dictionary.
Now if every word gets defined, in order to have an ultimate dictionary where every word
gets defined, you're going to have to have circles of some kind, circles of definition.
One term is defined in terms of a second term, a second term is defined in terms of the third,
and then the third term turns out to be defined in terms of the first one you started with.
Actual dictionaries do display this kind of circularity.
If you look up the word red, or you look up the word yellow, you're likely to be told
they are primary colors.
If you look up color, you're likely to be told that the primary colors include red
and yellow, a very small circle.
This is not just a point about dictionaries.
It's a point about our concepts.
Our concepts often form clusters.
Diffusion within the cluster is possible, but it may be difficult or impossible to define
a term without using another term from the same cluster.
Ethical terms are like that.
Value terms in general are like that.
It may be simply impossible to define ethics without recourse to ethical terms, and it
may be impossible to define any ethical terms without recourse to other ethical terms.
So conceptual clarity is at the core of any philosophical inquiry.
The conceptual clarity is more than formal definition.
The legendary Louis Armstrong was once asked to define jazz.
Louis Armstrong was asked what jazz was.
And his legendary reply was, if you got to ask, you ain't never going to get to know.
Luckily, despite the fact that I can give you no better definition, you do know what I mean,
when I'm speaking of value.
By the end of the lecture, you can also expect satisfaction of a seventh objective, a clearer
understanding of the nuances of our cluster of value concepts.
Conceptual clarity, I've said, is the core of any philosophical inquiry.
Philosophy's other core emphasis is on rational argument, with the entire scope of history,
scope and history of human thought as a resource.
Now by argument, I don't mean disagreement, although the issues we'll cover, on the issues
we'll cover, there's plenty of disagreement as well.
The philosopher's emphasis on rational argument is a search for rationally compelling reasons
for belief, reasons for thinking that one approaches right and one is wrong, or that
one theory is closer to reality than another.
Logic plays a role here, but the search for reasons is a broader search, where an analogy
is helpful, literary or otherwise, we'll use the analogy, where questions of evidence
are important, scientific or otherwise, we'll want the evidence.
The goal is always reasoned, rational and supportable views, rather than just off-the-cuff opinions.
There may indeed be things that are merely matters of opinion, but the fact that people
disagree on an issue doesn't relegate it to mere dueling opinions.
Our eighth objective then is this, a deeper understanding of the structure of rational
argument regarding questions of value.
Let me finish with a very brief roadmap of the course.
Ludwig Wittgenstein was one of the most interesting, but also one of the most cryptic of 20th
century philosophers.
At one point, he uses the analogy of a rope with regard to a line of philosophical inquiry.
What Wittgenstein points out is that the strength of a twisted rope need not be in any single
strand.
The strength of a twisted rope may come from the overlap of many strands.
In fact, none of those strands may even continue through the whole length of the rope.
It's the overlapping strands together that give the rope its strength.
And the lectures of this course are like that.
So let me outline four of the major strands.
One strand is a family of questions regarding the basic nature of value.
This appears in our next lecture regarding facts and values.
It appears in two lectures shortly after on rival theories on the foundations of ethics,
theories of the good and theories of the right.
Questions of the basic nature of value appear in other lectures on religion and values,
on the objective side of value, on the genealogy of our morals, on ethical rationality and
rules, and on moralities in conflict and moralities in change.
A second strand addressed is a family of challenges, challenges to the very idea of value.
Skepticism regarding values is addressed in a lecture on how we know right from wrong.
And the challenges of relativism are tackled in two lectures on cultures and values, emphasizing
anthropological work on the Trobriand Islanders, the Hopi, the Navajo, and the Ike.
Other lectures focus on questions that evolution raises regarding ethics, and on the age-old
problem we've already mentioned of free will and determinism.
There are a range of lectures on specific issues, such as whether a cash value can be
put on human life, a philosophical picture of a just society, whether there's such a
thing as a moral luck, and several questions that overlap ethics and the law, the ethical
justification for punishment, and the very different ways in which we treat the crimes
of murder and attempted murder.
The fourth strand of the course, a very important strand, is the choice of values in a life.
The third lecture concentrates on the goal of a good life, on lives to envy and lives
to admire.
Later lectures concentrate on images of immortality, on the proper response to life's horrors,
on whether anyone could literally be better off dead, and on the crucial task of ordering
priorities in a life.
I won't present these strands sequentially in the lectures.
Issues of value in a life appear in one lecture, they submerge, and they reappear later.
I'll always try to explain simpler concepts earlier, building on them later, but all of
these themes will intertwine and reappear throughout the course.
They're like the strands of a rope in that way.
They're like the complicated and interrelated values of our lives.
There you have it, how I see my role as guide and gadfly, the broad nature of questions of
value, all kinds of value, that are the focus of the course.
That's a brief look at the resources we'll draw on, not only from philosophy, but from
a range of other disciplines, the philosophical emphasis on clarity and argument, and a brief
roadmap of the questions before us.
In the next lecture, we'll start on the distinction between facts and values.
