Lecture 2 – Facts and Values
What we emphasized in our last lecture was that the really fundamental questions of our
lives are questions of value.
What I want to do in this lecture is to make it clear what kind of questions those are
by contrasting them with a very different kind of question.
The basic philosophical contrast that I want to emphasize in the next half hour or so is
the contrast between questions of value and questions of fact.
In concentrating on questions of value, I don't want to say that facts aren't important.
Of course facts are important.
There's no denying that questions of fact play a major role in our lives.
As individuals, we want to know some very particular facts.
We want to know the reality of the situations we find ourselves in, the very particular
situations that we find ourselves in.
We need to know the facts.
We also want to know, and here the we can be taken collectively, we want to know some
general facts.
We want to know the general situation, the cosmic situation that we find ourselves in
as a species say.
Are we alone?
Is the human species the sole intelligent species in the galaxy, in the universe?
That's an intriguing question of fact, but it is a question of fact, falling squarely
in the realm of scientific exploration.
In major and important respects, it's the scientific inquiry that we rely on to give
us the facts.
I'm going to question some of the standard terminology in a minute, even some of the
standard terminology that I'm using, but there's no denying that there's a distinction
to be made here, a distinction between the realm of objective fact that's discovered
at least paradigmatically by science and through scientific exploration and the realm
of value that's explored or maybe better developed through a different kind of thinking
or a different kind of reflection or a different kind of experience.
Questions of value play a different role in human life, in our individual human lives
and in the life of humankind.
One way of emphasizing the difference is this.
Science is sometimes thought of as aiming at knowing all the facts, at putting together
the complete factual picture of the universe as a whole, but you could know all that.
You could see the complete factual picture of the universe and yet still not know the
first thing about which of the facts are important or even whether any of the facts are important.
Which facts are important and why they are important and what use we should make of those
facts, those are questions of value which in some way reach beyond mere questions of fact.
All of that's pretty general, but I think I could make it more specific.
I mentioned the question of the existence of other intelligent life in the universe.
If at least we are given and we have to work with some workable definition of intelligent
life, then the existence of intelligent life elsewhere seems to be a factual question.
But as a factual question, its importance is no greater than any other factual question.
Whether there are other planets with the same ratio of copper to uranium, as ours say, or
with larger or smaller planets in the same ratio as ours relative to a central star, whether
there's intelligent life on another planet, whether there's a certain amount of copper
on a planet, as facts, those stand on precisely the same footing.
Neither is more important than the other.
If we think one is, if we think one of those is an important question, that's not just
a question of fact, that's a question of what we value.
Let me give you another example of the contrast.
Let me say this, considered purely as fact, facts all have exactly the same status.
If we think the answers to some are more interesting or more important, which is exactly our attitude
toward the question of extraterrestrial life, that's because of our values, not because
of the factual status of the question itself.
The existence of other life and the existence of other intelligent life is important to us
because we value life and because we value intelligence.
So let me give you another example of the contrast.
You could know all the facts about, say, executions.
You could know all the facts about death by hanging and lethal injection and electrocution
and the like.
You could in fact know the entire history of execution technologies and still not know
the first thing about whether a death penalty is justified.
Why?
Because that question of justification is a question beyond those facts.
That's a question, not just a fact, that's a question of value.
Imagine if you can, seeing the universe entirely in terms of fact and not at all in terms of
value.
I'm not sure that you can or that I can.
We are so used to seeing the universe in terms of both fact and value that the idea of trying
to see it purely in terms of fact and not at all in terms of value, that's at least
a very difficult exercise.
It may, for creatures like us, be an impossible exercise.
To see the world entirely without value would be to see no fact as more important than any
other fact.
All facts would have the same status, they're just facts.
So the fact that there's a cat sitting on the wall would have no more importance to
you than the fact that there's a man bleeding in the gutter or vice versa.
The fact that the sun is shining and the fact that 150,000 people lay dead from a tsunami,
both facts with the same character, all the same, all without value.
Even facts regarding you in particular would have no sorting in terms of value if you saw
the universe entirely in terms of fact and not at all in terms of value.
So you might see food before you, you might even be aware of the fact you were hungry,
but you'd see no value in eating because you'd see no value in anything at all.
Even if you're not colorblind, you can imagine what the world would be like if it was drained
of all color.
A world purely of fact or perceived purely in terms of fact would be an even stranger
world.
It would be a world not drained of all color, but a world drained of all value.
Both psychology and neurophysiology underline the point that value pervades our lives.
There doesn't appear to be any psychological syndrome that's tied precisely to a world
drained entirely of value.
There are psychological syndromes that characterize things such as people losing the ability to
recognize faces as faces, but there doesn't seem to be a psychological syndrome that's
limited precisely to being unable to see things in terms of value.
A partial draining may happen in certain forms of depression, but in those forms of depression,
it's not just that things lose value, things take on a distinctly negative value, but it's
a value all the same.
I know of people for whom nothing that doesn't impinge on them personally seems to be a value.
That's a world creeping toward valuelessness.
In order to be really drained of value, they'd have to be equally indifferent with regard
to anything about themselves.
Unlike many things, we said facial recognition, unlike many things including language and
color vision, a sense of value doesn't appear to be localized in the brain.
Here's a quote from Patricia Smith Churchland, who's a philosopher deeply involved in neuroscience
that gives an indication of how many parts of the brain are involved.
Churchland says, discoveries in neuroscience reveal that learning right from wrong, acquiring
a conscience, is dependent on late myelinating neural tissue in the ventromedial frontal
cortex that's up here, and on circuitry in the hypothalamus amygdala and singulated
cortices, hypothalamus and amygdala are under the bottom of your brain.
It also depends on the balance of activities of the diffusely projecting neuromodulatory
systems originating in the brain stem at the top of the spinal cord.
In terms of our brains and in terms of our lives, value doesn't appear to be a localized
add-on.
Value pervades our brains just as it pervades our lives.
We can make the contrast between facts and values more personal as well.
Your life, as you've lived it, has taken a certain path so far.
The future is as yet before you.
You don't know how that's going to turn out.
But suppose you knew all the facts in this sense.
You knew that if you did this, if you took this job, or you pursued that interest, or
you got a divorce, or you worked with this person rather than that, suppose that you
knew that if you did that, then this would happen.
Suppose you knew all the contingencies.
And suppose you knew all that not only about your past, about your future, but about your
past as well.
Because our lives follow just one path of decision making, we wonder about the paths
that weren't taken.
What if I'd pursued another career?
What if I'd married my first love?
What if I'd gone to a different school?
What if I'd taken a different job?
We don't know what if.
We don't know those what ifs.
We don't know those things, though they may haunt us in our dreams.
But suppose we did.
Invisage your life as a series of branching paths with choices.
In math it's called a tree diagram.
Your actual life is one course through the tree, where you have taken particular decisions,
and then other decisions incumbent on those, and other decisions down the line.
All we've seen is this one line, but imagine that you could see the whole tree of possibilities
for your life in terms of choices you made, choices you didn't make, what the consequences
would be now if you made certain choices, what the consequences would have been had
you made certain choices in the past.
The point about facts and values is this.
It'd be possible to know all of that.
All the contingencies of our own history, past and future, and still not know either
what you should have done at some branch in the past, or what you should do now.
Questions of what you should do are questions above and beyond questions of what did happen,
what will happen.
They're even beyond questions of what will happen or would have happened if.
Questions of what you should do or should have done are something different.
Those are questions of value.
Allow me to take two of these points a little further.
The Forking Paths idea of a life and the way value pervades our lives.
So first let me talk about the alternative paths of a life.
The great Argentinian poet Jorge Luis Borges built a story around this theme.
It's called The Garden of the Forking Paths, and it was written in the early 1940s.
Borges is justly famous for what might be called philosophical fiction.
These are fictional stories that play with a philosophical theme or that make a philosophical
point.
Borges grew increasingly blind through his life.
In 1955 he was appointed director of the National Library of Argentina.
But by that point he could no longer see well enough to either read or write.
He says, this is a quote from Borges, little by little I came to realize the strange eyes
and irony of events.
I had always imagined paradise as a kind of library.
Others think of a garden or of a palace.
There I was in the center in a way of 900,000 books in various languages, but I found I
could barely make out the title pages and the spines.
Toward the end of his life Borges would rehearse his ficciones, his stories to himself, polishing
them letter perfect in his mind, and then dictating them word for word.
The Garden of the Forking Paths is written in the style of a hard-boiled detective story.
Borges starts with metaphors of physical gardens, gardens of forking paths, and with
metaphors of labyrinths.
One of the main characters of this story, Tzu Pan, described as chess player, famous
poet and calligrapher, Tzu Pan is spoken of as retiring to write a great book and to
construct a labyrinth.
After his death all it's found in place of a great book is a chaotic manuscript composed
of meaningless and disconnected passages and of the labyrinth nothing is found at all.
In the denouement of the story Borges reveals that the great book, the chaotic manuscript,
is itself the labyrinth.
There weren't two things, the book and the labyrinth, the book was the labyrinth, and
the reason it's chaotic is it's a labyrinth of branching possibilities.
The possibilities are the possibilities of a human life, of your life for example.
The labyrinth is the tangle of past and future possibilities that make up your life.
The actual life as you are actually living it, and all the possible lives that you might
have chosen instead.
You can think of all the possible courses of your life up to now, all the possible courses
of your life from now, those are the branching paths.
Once you make a decision then some of the branches are eliminated.
Those are choices not taken, branches of your life that you didn't in fact live.
I think there's actually a very different perspective on these matters when you're young
and when you're old.
When you're young, this idea of the branching paths, branching possibilities in a life is
a glorious vision.
All those possible courses of your life laid out before you.
All of those options that may open up, all of those decisions yet to make.
If you're old, the picture is not nearly so enticing.
A major portion of the important decisions in your life have already been made.
What you see is just a single line of the decisions that have already been made.
But those background possibilities, although they're no longer live possibilities, those
background what ifs, they don't go away.
Those things come back to haunt you in your sleep.
Our lives take only one path among all their possibilities.
The point here is that the course of a life can look very different from different perspectives
on it.
The other point I want to emphasize is this, that though there is a deep and intuitive
distinction between facts and values, values show up inexorably in the way we deal with
facts.
Let me give an indication of the limits of mere fact and the meaningless of an attempt
simply to collect or store up facts by adapting a parable from the great Danish philosopher
Soren Kierkegaard.
Kierkegaard tells the story of a madman who escapes from an institution, but he knows
that the authorities will be looking for him, and he knows that if they identify him, he'll
be sent back to the lunatic asylum.
So he develops a plan to disguise his madness so that he won't be sent back.
He will disguise it by speaking only the truth.
So imagine this lunatic walking along the road confronted by a policeman.
The earth is round, says the lunatic, and that's true.
There's a cat on the wall, he says, and that's true.
There are cracks in the sidewalk, he says.
Everything he says is true.
He has all the facts right, but of course it's immediately obvious that he's the escaped
lunatic and he's taken back.
The point of the story for our purposes is this, both facts and values are important
in our lives, but how we handle facts.
What facts we seek, what facts we call attention to, that is itself a matter of value.
What gives Kierkegaard's lunatic away is not his mastery of facts, he's got the facts.
Everything he says is true.
What gives him away is his lunatic handling of the facts.
A handling of the facts without a recognition of when they are of value or when they are
of importance or when they are of interest and when they are not.
Even in our use of science, we look for important facts regarding some end that we value, something
of importance for what we are trying to bring about.
That's a clue that although there does seem to be a crucial distinction between fact and
value, and although the realm of fact is paradigmatically the realm of scientific exploration, still
science as we know it is something that's guided by our values.
How could it be otherwise?
Science is a human endeavor and our human endeavors are guided by what we value.
There's a deep and important contrast then between questions of value on the one side,
questions of fact, the contrast has a long philosophical history and has been spoken
of in many ways.
The earliest appearance of this distinction between fact and values in Western philosophy
is perhaps in Plato's dialogue, the Euthyphro, in the contrast between two different kinds
of disagreement.
What kinds of disagreements, Plato asks, produce hatred and wrath.
Socrates, Plato's character says to Euthyphro, if you and I were to differ about numbers,
or on the question which of two was the greater, would a disagreement about that make us angry
at each other and make enemies of us?
Shouldn't we settle things by calculation and so come to an agreement quickly on any
point like that?
Yes, says Euthyphro, certainly.
What sort of thing then is it about which we differ till unable to arrive at a decision
we might get angry and be enemies to one another?
See if it's not the following, right and wrong, the noble and the base, the good and the bad.
But Socrates is pointing to is the difference in our approach to questions of fact and our
approach to questions of value.
We can skip to the 20th century and find the distinction again in the work of G. E. Moore.
Moore talks about what he calls the naturalistic fallacy, the attempt to deduce values from
mere facts.
That more insists is a fallacy, a crucial failure of logical reasoning.
You cannot get values from facts alone, and it's a fallacy to think that you can.
The same distinction is often spoken of as a contrast between descriptive approaches
and normative approaches.
Where the descriptive labels matters of fact, the matters of fact side, the normative labels
the evaluation side, the values side.
The philosopher Karl Popper put the matter like this, this is a quote from Popper, decisions
can never be derived from facts or statements of facts, although they pertain to facts.
The decision, for instance, to oppose slavery doesn't depend upon the fact that all men
are born free and equal and no man is born in chains.
Even if they were born in chains, many of us might demand the removal of those chains.
The making of a decision, the adoption of a standard is a fact, but the norm which has
been adopted is not.
That most people agree with the norm thou shalt not steal is a sociological fact.
But the norm thou shalt not steal is not a fact, and it can never be inferred from sentences
describing facts.
It is impossible to derive a sentence stating a norm or a decision from a sentence stating
a fact.
This is only another way of saying that it's impossible to derive norms or decisions from
facts.
The distinction between facts and values appears from Plato to Moore and Popper then and throughout
the history of philosophy.
But the most famous philosophical passage regarding the distinction comes from David
Hume's Treatise of Human Nature published in 1739.
Hume's treatise has been one of the most influential books in the entire Western tradition, but
initially it had a very unpromising history.
Hume himself remembered, quote, never literary attempt was more unfortunate than my treatise
of human nature.
It fell deadborn from the press without reaching such distinction as even to excite a murmur
among the zealots.
There was one major review of Hume's treatise published in 1740.
It's an overwhelmingly positive review, although it does have some negative points.
It talks about the curious reasoning of the treatise and the author's opinions as peculiar
to himself.
All major scholars are now agreed that the author of that review of Hume's Treatise of
Human Nature was written by Hume himself.
So not only did it fall deadborn from the press, but the reviewer had to be him.
In time, of course, the treatise was recognized for the masterpiece it is.
So here's a passage from the treatise.
Hume is talking about passing from talk of what is and what is not, what we've been calling
matters of fact, to talk of what ought and ought not be that's in the realm of questions
of value.
This is worth a full quote from Hume.
In fact, this may be the most important single paragraph in all of Hume's work.
Quote, In every system of morality, which I have hitherto met with, I've always remarked,
that the author proceeds for some time in the ordinary way of reasoning and establishes
the being of a God, or makes observations concerning human affairs.
One of a sudden I'm surprised to find that instead of the usual copulations of propositions
is and is not, I meet with no proposition that's not connected with an ought or an ought not.
This change is imperceptible, but is, however, of the last consequence, for as this ought
or ought not expresses some new relation or affirmation, it is necessary that it should
be observed and explained, and at the same time that a reason should be given for what
seems altogether inconceivable how this new relation can be a deduction from others which
are entirely different from it.
The point is precisely the one we've been making, that questions of value are something
above and beyond facts, interestingly in Hume's passage, above and beyond even any fact regarding
the existence of God.
That's why Hume insists you cannot derive answers to questions of value from mere facts
alone.
The impossibility of deriving an ought from an is has become known as the is-ought gap.
The principle that you cannot derive an ought from an is or a conclusion of value from premises
concerning facts alone has also been spoken of both as Hume's law and Hume's guillotine,
the guillotine cutting matters of fact from matters of value.
The really fundamental questions of our lives are questions of value rather than questions
of fact.
Having done my best to make the distinction between questions of value and questions of
fact, however, I also want to backtrack a bit.
That's a standard philosophical trait, it's one I'll probably do repeatedly, to make
a claim, defend it with example and argument, and then look at it skeptically again to see
if it needs major qualification.
One qualification that has to be made is this.
The distinction between fact and value is a conceptual one.
It's not a linguistic one, and there's no guarantee that it'll always be clearly marked
in the way we speak.
Often we say it's a fact that as a way of saying it's true that.
We use either of these to emphasize a point, whether the point made is normative or descriptive.
If we have no doubt that the decision was a wrong one, we'll say it's a fact that the
decision was wrong.
So confusingly enough, the fact that we say the fact that doesn't itself flag that what
follows isn't quite deeply an issue of value.
Distinction might be clear when we use the phrase scientific fact.
One thing we don't say is it's a scientific fact that the decision was wrong.
I think that's because even in our normal speech we do recognize this basic distinction
at issue.
Here's a related qualification.
Although there does seem to be an important distinction between fact and value, and although
Hume's passage is taken as the classical statement of that distinction, it doesn't appear that
Hume's claim can be defended in precisely the terms that Hume uses.
It doesn't look like we can defend the impossibility of moving from is to ought in precisely those
terms.
In particular, the distinction between fact and value is not purely a distinction between
the word is and the word ought.
If it were, things would be simpler.
We could track claims of fact and distinguish them from claims of value simply by looking
for the terms is and ought.
But our lives aren't that simple.
Our thinking isn't that simple.
It'd be a surprise if our language were that simple.
The philosopher John Searle makes such a point by giving an argument which he says allows
one quite directly to derive an ought from an is.
Precisely what Hume and Moore and Popper say that you cannot logically do.
What Searle does is track the following chain of reasoning.
First step, Jones said to Smith, I hereby promise to pay you $500.
So Jones promised to pay Smith $500.
So Jones put himself under an obligation to pay Smith $500.
So Jones is under an obligation to pay Smith $500.
So Jones ought to pay Smith $500.
But could be simpler.
We've gone from I hereby promise that I'll pay you $500 to he promised, so he put himself
under an obligation, so he's under an obligation, so he ought to pay it.
But could be simpler, says Searle in his inimitable style.
The first step, though, Jones said, I hereby promise to pay you $500, seems like a straight
matter of fact, something that could fall under Hume's is.
The last step, Jones ought to pay Smith $500, contains an explicit ought.
The steps in between seem smooth and convincing.
So just when did we slip from matters of fact to matters of value?
I think that's a complex question, involving our practices of promising, the value ladenness
of that kind of practice, and the structure of human interrelations that give value to
that kind of practice.
But Searle is clearly right about one thing, that any move from fact to value is not signaled
by a simple move from is to ought.
There are plenty of claims regarding value that are expressed with an is rather than
an ought.
There may even be cases of pure fact that are expressed using an ought.
Here's one, if that lump of stuff is radioactive, it ought to make the Geiger counter click.
The distinction between fact and value then, though conceptually real, is not linguistically
as simple as Hume seems to indicate.
So let me sum up.
Facts and values are both important in our lives.
The distinction between them is a conceptual one rather than a simply linguistic one, but
it is a deep conceptual distinction.
In the end, imagining a world of fact without value is quite nearly impossible for creatures
like us.
Our lives are woven in terms of the things we value.
Facts alone, isolated from the normative side of the distinction, would have no value
at all.
In the next lecture, I want to broaden our considerations to the evaluation of entire
lives.
Next time, I want to talk about lives to envy and lives to admire.
