Lecture 3 Lives to Envy, Lives to Admire
The previous lecture emphasized the basic distinction between facts and values. Here
I want to emphasize a different kind of distinction in a question central to axiology as we outlined
it in our first lecture. The question, what makes a life a good life? This is a question
far too rarely asked. It's a question far too rarely thought about. People tend to live
their lives headlong as if they knew what they were aiming for, as if they knew what
was going to make their lives good, and all they had to do was get that thing. How peculiar
that people spend so little time trying to figure out what it is that they, what it
is that really would make their lives good, what they really want, what it really is worth
striving for. Many people seem to spend more time trying to figure out which is the better
brand of jeans to buy, or the better car to drive, than which is the better life to lead.
I guess that's one of the things that philosophy is for. What I want to do today is to pose
the question seriously, but also to outline a basic difficulty that I think hides in the
question. At several points I'll be drawing from two dialogues of Plato, the Republic
and the Philebus, and from Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics. Both Plato and Aristotle come close
to the tension I want to talk about in this question what makes a good life. But both
of them try to duck the basic problem I want to pose. I think they're wrong in that. I
think the basic tension is inevitable. I think there's a problem in trying to come to terms
with the question, what makes a life a good life? I think there's a problem, a tension
there that can't ultimately be ducked. The crucial difficulty I see hiding behind the
question is this, that there are radically different ways in which a life can be thought
of as good. What I want to do is to disentangle two of those ways, two major but ultimately
conflicting senses in which one can seek to make one's life a good life. There are, first
of all, lives that we envy. There are in fact many types of enviable life. One kind of life
we might envy is a life of adventure, a life filled with the joys of exploration, perhaps,
or the ecstasies of discovery. There are lives that glow with a sense of accomplishment,
lived with boldness and gusto. Who wouldn't want such a life? Now there, we think, is
a good life. That's the kind of life you'd want for yourself. That's the kind of life
you'd wish for your children. We can all think of people who seem to have enviable lives.
Bill Gates might be on that list, for some people at least, or Johnny Depp. More seriously,
consider the remarkable life of Benjamin Franklin. We have a successful businessman and publisher.
He's applauded worldwide for his inventions and for his fundamental discoveries regarding
electricity. He's a towering statesman. He's a father. He's also one of the founding fathers
of our nation. Now there was a life. Enviable lives are lives that we can imagine feeling
from the inside, as it were, and we envy that feeling. Wouldn't it have been great to be
Teddy Roosevelt? To feel the bravado, the energy, the curiosity, and the ambition of
pursuing that life. That looks like a bully life. Abraham Lincoln's life doesn't look
nearly so attractive from the inside. Despite his jokes, his is a life pervaded with a deep
melancholy. Trapped in a bitter marriage, seeing a son die, rising to the presidency,
only to face the bloodiest war the country had ever seen. When you look at photographs
of Lincoln in 1860, and you look at photographs of him five years later, it could be a different
man. He looks like he's aged 20 years in those five. And of course, his life ends with an
assassin's bullet. Who would wish that life on their children? So some lives are worthy
of envy, and some are not. Those are what I'm calling enviable lives. But enviable lives
are not the only kind of good life. There's another kind of good life. They're also admirable
lives. Lives the living of which we admire. It's on this list that Lincoln's life belongs,
for example. Although it was far from enviable, far from a life we'd want to live from the
inside, Lincoln's life was surely a life that was well spent. Without Lincoln, without Lincoln's
life, without that life, some basic moves toward the abolishment of slavery in our country,
some basic moves toward justice either wouldn't have been made or wouldn't have been made
so soon. It's on this radically different list of admirable lives that belong biographies
of self-sacrifice and biographies of dedication to others. Maybe FDR's life belongs on that
list, complete with its polio and its pain with the horrors of the depression and World
War II. Maybe the lives of Gandhi or Martin Luther King belong on that list, the list
of the admirable lives. It's here that we should, that should be listed those lives
dedicated to some greater cause. Lives often full of the suffering incumbent on trying
to further that greater cause. These are the lives we admire. We wish our lives could
have the impact and the consequence of those. But we often know that those lives were far
from pleasant. Much as we admire the accomplishments that come with those lives, the accomplishment
that those lives represent, we don't envy the living of those lives. There's a phrase
in Aristotle's Nicobakean Ethics, which was written sometime before 322 BC that makes
the kind of distinction I'm after. Here it is in the W. D. Ross translation. We'll get
back to W. D. Ross later on. But here's his translation of Aristotle of this particular
passage. W. D. Ross translates it as, these questions having been definitely answered,
let us consider whether happiness is among the things that are praised or rather among
the things that are prized. That's the distinction I'm after, though I'm not talking about happiness,
but about lives. There are about lives as a whole. There are lives to be prized and there
are lives to be praised. I'm applying that distinction to good lives. So I'm talking
about lives to be envied. Those are the lives to be prized and lives to be admired. Those
are the lives to be praised. Okay, I'm applying the distinction to good lives. Aristotle,
in the passage I just quoted, applies it to happiness. That sounds radically different,
but in fact, in the end, it's not so very different. The core term in Aristotle, the
core term throughout the Nicomachean ethics, is eudaimonia. In our opening lecture, we
talked about the Nicomachean ethics as a work of axiology, as a work of value theory in
general. Eudaimonia is what the Nicomachean ethics is really all about. It's about what
eudaimonia is and how you go about getting it. The term eudaimonia is standardly translated
as happiness. If you translate eudaimonia as happiness, since the Nicomachean ethics
is all about eudaimonia, what that would tell you is that one of Aristotle's central concerns
is what happiness is and how we are to obtain it. But as many translators of Aristotle will
tell you, happiness is an extremely poor translation for the original Greek term eudaimonia. A
much better translation is well-being. So the Nicomachean ethics isn't all about happiness,
it's about well-being. Some people suggest the term human flourishing. If you translate
eudaimonia as human flourishing, then the central concern of Aristotle's Nicomachean
ethics is what human flourishing is and how you obtain it. So Aristotle is talking about
whether eudaimonia, human well-being, or human flourishing, and this passage we just quoted,
he's talking about whether eudaimonia, human well-being, or human flourishing is something
to be praised or something to be prized. And that's not ultimately so distant from what
I'm asking, in asking whether it's an enviable life or an admirable life that makes something
a good life. Now despite the way I'm setting it up, there's not just one type of enviable
life. There are many kinds of enviable life, precisely because there are a range of aspects
of a life that we may find enviable. There are lots of things in life that we might prize.
We may envy a life that's filled with the joys of family or that carries clear marks
of contribution and respect within a supportive community. We may envy a life of creativity,
a life brimming with resources of imagination or with the time to pursue learning for its
own sake. There are also many sorts of admirable lives. There are lives that are admirable
for dedication to and pursuit of some abstract good that somehow removed from the human or
even from the physical. These are admirable lives that are lives dedicated to the pursuit
of say mathematical understanding or aesthetic truth. On the other hand, there are lives
that are admirable for precisely the opposite, not for pursuit of the abstract, but for dedication
to and alleviation of the all too human and all too physical ravages of hunger or ignorance
or disease. There are lots of kinds of enviable lives because there are lots of things to
envy in a life. There are lots of kinds of admirable lives because there are lots of
different kinds of pursuits that are admirable. I think there are both admirable and enviable
lives and that these constitute importantly different categories, but I don't want to
suggest that they constitute simple categories. There are different types of enviable life
and different types of admirable life. Much of the ethical tradition in ancient Greek
and Roman philosophy, which was carried over into medieval philosophy, much of that tradition
is an attempt to paint a consistent picture of the good life that brings these two ideals,
the enviable and the admirable, together in some kind of harmony. Throughout Greek and
Roman and later medieval philosophy, you find the pursuit of the summum bonum, the highest
good, or the good life as something that's somehow going to combine these two aspects,
the enviable and the admirable in a life. One attempt at reconciling those two things
appears in Plato's dialogue The Republic. What I've called the admirable life is what
Plato calls the life of virtue. What I've called the enviable life is what Plato calls
the life that's good for its bearer. So the life of virtue, the life that's good for its
bearer, the admirable life, the enviable life. In The Republic, Plato's attempt is to insist
that those two kinds of lives are ultimately the same, that it is the admirable life that
is really the enviable life, that it is the life of virtue that is ultimately the life
that's good for its bearer. So Plato's attempt is to equate the two, the enviable and the
admirable life, the life of virtue and the life that's good for its bearer. I think there's
something right in Plato's attempt and something admirable in Plato's attempt to equate those.
I think there's also something that's definitely wrong. What's right is that aspects of an
admirable life, aspects of an admirable life, contribute to a genuinely enviable life. In
fact, aspects of an admirable life may be necessary for a genuinely enviable life. Here's the
argument. Could one rationally and on reflection envial life that was dedicated purely to the
pursuit of the bearer's own pleasure, to the pursuit of pleasure of the person whose life
it was, could one rationally and on reflection envial life that was self-centered in that
sense? I don't think so. Could one genuinely envial life that was pursued merely for the
sake of its own subjective pleasures? I think not. Because imagine a life as full of subjective
pleasures as you like. So imagine a life that's filled with the excitement of opening night
theatricals and the thrill of symphony overtures and the applause of millions and the whirl
of constant party celebration, easy ecstasies of sexual climax. Add to that life whatever
else you might want in the way of glittering fashion or travel. That life, no matter how
much you glitz it up, would be merely the life of a supreme spectator. In that description
there was nothing about real contact with another human being. There was nothing about
real love. And nothing was said in there for that matter of curiosity or hard work or
a genuine achievement. It was just the life of the ultimate subjective spectator. What
we've imagined there is the ultimate playboy life. And would that be enough for a genuinely
enviable life? Well, it certainly wouldn't qualify as enviable in comparison to a life
which also contained elements of achievement and joys of genuine accomplishment or moments
of human sharing. And the crucial truth about all those things, about achievement, genuine
accomplishment, moments of human sharing, the crucial truth about those things is that
they all involve some aspects of self-sacrifice. Accomplishment and achievement and sharing
can't be mere spectator sports. They necessarily involve some element of the things that are
admirable in a life. So we have at least, this is a conclusion, that a life without
elements of the admirable couldn't be fully enviable. A fully enviable life, a life that's
fully acceptable even from the inside, must at least have some of the marks of self-sacrifice
in pursuit of something larger. That's what I think is right about Plato's effort at reconciling
the admirable and the enviable at painting a consistent picture of the two categories.
That's what I think is right about it, is that you'd have to have elements of the admirable
in order to have a fully enviable life. What's wrong, I think, in Plato is the attempt
to equate the two categories, the claim that they are simply one and the same. What's wrong
is the insistence that it is the purely admirable life and only the purely admirable life that
is the truly enviable. In the Republic, Plato seems to have wanted that to be true. It would
have been so clean and neat for it to be true if these were to be equated, if they were
one and the same. But in the end, I think we have to admit that Plato's picture doesn't
ring true of life as we know it. A simple observation shows that the two forms of good in a life,
or the two forms of good life, can't be strictly identified. They can't be strictly equated.
And the simple observation is this, that a truly admirable life can, nonetheless, be far from enviable.
You could have a fully admirable life and not have an enviable life. A life can be deeply
admirable and yet constitute even pure torment from the inside. That could be a life filled
with essentially nothing but the toll of self-sacrifice. That doesn't mean, of course, that that kind
of life would be without value, or even that it was perceived as without value from the inside.
In terms of one category of value, the category of the admirable, that would be the supremely
good life. But it might still be a life devoid of value from the other category, from a different
category. A life can be admirable in the highest degree and enviable to almost no degree at all.
So the reasoning to this point can be summed up as a two-part conclusion. First of all, the things
that make a life enviable and the things that make it admirable are, to some extent, complementary
goods. Because a fully enviable life could not be entirely without aspects worthy of admiration.
So to some extent, these are goods that go together, that even necessarily go together.
But these are also, to some extent, exclusionary goods. A life lived purely for the sake of the
enviable couldn't be fully admirable. And a fully admirable life can be expected to be
unenviable to a high degree. At this point, it's almost inescapable that we attempt to reach for a
higher and overarching sense of good above these two kinds of good life. The genuinely good life, we
think, can't be just the enviable life. That alone isn't possible. It can't be just the admirable
life. The genuinely good life, we think, must be a life that achieves the goods of both categories.
A life that is both admirable and enviable. And indeed, a life can have both elements. A truly
enviable life, we've said, must have both elements. One can therefore picture a life with major aspects
of admirable pursuit sprinkled with major elements of the enviable. So you can think of a life of
dedication to a larger purpose, but which also boasts the joys of support from a loving family,
say, and the spectator joys of travel or a thrilling concert. In that picture of the mixed life, it's
important that our categories are still not symmetrically situated. So even if you have a life that has the
goods of the admirable and the goods of the enviable, they're not just side by side. They're not
symmetrically related. There's one of them that has to be at the core. For the good mixed life, it's one of
these things that would be at the core and the other that would be peripheral. For a good life, it's the admirable
part that belongs at the core. The best life overall is one with a core of dedication and self-sacrifice to some
larger good, and then that has elements of the enviable life that fill in at the edges. Okay, that's at
least a much more satisfactory picture of the good life than one of a life that's most centrally dedicated to
the spectator pursuit of pleasure and which only begrudgingly lets in elements of self-sacrifice in order to fill
out its empty edges. If you're picturing a good life, you're going to have the admirable stuff at the middle,
the enviable stuff at the edges, not the enviable spectator pleasures in the middle with some superficial
overlay of the admirable at the edges. So the mixed life is going to have the admirable at the middle, the enviable
at the edges. We said that in the Republic, Plato tries to identify the good life as the life of virtue alone.
In a different dialogue, a much later dialogue written later in his life, the Philebus, Plato too sees the virtues of a mixed
life, at least in terms of the pursuit of pleasure and the pursuit of wisdom. There, Plato argues for a mix of these
two elements in life, but Plato's mix, just like we just said, is one in which the wisdom, that aspect of the admirable life,
has pride of place with pleasure at the edges. Aristotle's sketch of a good life in the Nicomachean
Ethics is similar. It's a life of active excellence, crowned by the happiness it deserves. That too is a life with admirable
virtue at the core, filled out with the enviable goods of happiness at the edges. That pretty picture of a mixed life is better
than the attempt to equate the good life with the admirable life, but it's still a picture that I want to challenge,
because I think even that pretty picture of a mixed life is still too good to be true. There are two aspects to a good life,
the enviable and the admirable. The good life overall does seem to have to include them both, and does seem to have to make the admirable
the core values of a life. But the fact that these are very different sorts of values in a life doesn't, I think, ultimately allow for a pretty
picture of how to mix them. These two categories of value in a life, the enviable and the admirable, remain incommensurable.
Here's the problem. Suppose you construct a life, suppose you construct your life with the admirable at the core and the enviable around the edges.
So you've got a life of striving and achievement, of service to others. It's got self-sacrifice at the core perhaps, but it has the joys of family,
of friends, small pleasures around the edges. It'll always be true in constructing that picture of a mixed life that you'll have to decide where the edges are.
It's got the admirable at the core. It's sprinkled in with these small pleasures at the edges. You're always going to have to decide where the edges are.
How much of pursuit of the admirable is enough so that you can say here is where we can leave off in order to enjoy the innocent elements of the enviable life at the edges.
Take any border you might draw in such a life. You might say the weekdays are for the admirable and leave the weekends for the enviable.
A 12-hour day devoted to admirable pursuits and the remainder for innocent joys with friends and family.
The problem is for any border we draw we face inevitably the possibility of extending the life of virtue further at the cost of shrinking that portion of the life that we allow for pleasure.
And the problem is that the spirit that drives the stuff at the core, the spirit that drives our admirable pursuits will always urge that the border be pushed further.
Once you strive for the admirable it threatens to take the whole life with it.
In your admirable moments needed even for a minimally enviable life you'll think that more energy should be allotted to the admirable and less wasted on the merely enviable.
If that's right then the best life must be a life of mixed good, a life with elements both of the admirable and the enviable.
But because the core, the admirable, is always trying to take over it's going to be a life with these two things, it's going to be unstable in any mix.
Paradoxically then the best life to live will be one that's constantly struggling to become a different sort of life.
A life with more virtue and less enjoyment with more admirability and less enviability.
If that best of lives were to succeed in becoming what it strives to change itself into however it would no longer be the best of lives.
It would then be a life purely of self sacrifice, an unenviable life suitable only for admiration.
So what life should we seek then?
If what we're asking is either what kind of life to seek in order to gain a purely enviable life or what kind of life to seek in order to achieve a purely admirable life, for those questions the answer is fairly easy.
But each answer is ultimately unsatisfactory, only a life with both elements resonates with a full portion of good.
And that life I think we have to recognize will also be a life in which the two types of good remain in tension, a life in which the enviable and the admirable are never quite reconciled.
The job of the philosopher is not just to present positions but to probe them.
So let me try one last attempt at resolution even if it's an extreme one.
What if we could teach ourselves to value only the admirable?
What if we could teach ourselves to value only the virtues of self-sacrifice?
Then maybe our lives could be stable in value.
That sounds like the path of sainthood perhaps, of complete virtuous self-denial, the path of asceticism.
Even that attempt at resolution I think is ultimately unsuccessful.
First of all, what would it mean to teach yourself to value only those things?
The other aspects of life, the enviable, are genuinely good things in a life.
That includes joys of family, joys of community, joys of curiosity and play and self-expression.
And speaking of a life of self-sacrifice, it's precisely these that we envisage being sacrificed.
But because they are genuinely a value, a life of self-sacrifice without certain things of value would be a life without certain things of true value.
In that sense, it would be a life worse in certain regards than it could be.
George Orwell was the author of 1984 and Animal Farm.
And here's a quote from George Orwell that makes something like this point.
He says, it's too readily assumed that the ordinary man only rejects sainthood because it's too difficult.
In other words, that the average human being is a failed saint.
It's doubtful whether this is true.
Many human beings genuinely don't want to be saints.
And it's probable that some who achieve or aspire to sainthood have never felt much temptation to be human beings.
A second point is that even a life devoted to self-sacrifice might also not ultimately be as consistent as it looks.
The aesthetic goal is to value only the self-sacrificial virtues of the admirable life.
But we're one to pursue a life of self-sacrifice for others.
Precisely what would it be in others' lives that one was sacrificing for?
There's a quote to this effect that may come from Evelyn Wall, author of Bride's Head Revisited.
I know that we are here for others.
What I haven't figured out is what the others are for.
In a life of sacrifice, one is sacrificing oneself so that others can suffer less or enjoy more.
Can benefit the opportunities of self-development and self-fulfillment.
Can feel the warmth of the sun on their shoulders and glory and the joys of their children surrounding them.
But those are the enviable aspects of life.
So despite the attempt then, one doesn't value only the self-sacrificial virtues in such a life.
It's still the enviable aspects for which one is sacrificing.
If those things are of such value in other people's lives moreover, they must still be of potential value in one's own life.
So even within the ideal of a life dedicated to the pursuit of the purely admirable, there is still this basic tension.
This discussion has been on a pretty abstract level.
One emphasis has been on aspects of the enviable life and aspects of the admirable life.
The conclusion is that there can be no good life that isn't pulled by a competition between those two very different kinds of good life.
It's not in the abstract, I believe, but only in the course of living that we can try to work out the tension between them.
In the next two lectures, we'll concentrate on ethical values and look at two rival theories of the foundations of ethics.
