Lecture 4 Foundations of Ethics – Theories of the Good
In the previous lecture, I talked about lives to envy and lives to admire, and the basic
question of what makes a life a good life.
In this lecture, I want to talk about ethics or morality, and in talking about ethics,
I want to go straight to the foundations.
What are the foundations of ethics?
What grounds ethical belief?
What is it built on?
One way of posing the question is to ask, what is ethics about, really?
What is the core concept in ethical decision?
The 20th century philosopher W. D. Ross, who we met last time as a translator of Aristotle,
W. D. Ross is famous for a book called The Right and the Good, in particular for a chapter
entitled What Makes Right Acts Right?
That's another way to ask the basic foundational question that I'm after.
We all agree that some choices sometimes are the ethically right choices to make.
We all agree that some things we do are ethically good things to do.
The question is, what makes the ethically right acts right?
What makes the ethically good things good?
There are two clean and pure theories of the foundations of ethics.
These are two outstanding intellectual achievements in the conceptualization of what it is that
ethics is all about.
Both of these are beautiful.
They're powerfully enunciated.
They're consistently thought out.
Both of them have a pure intellectual core.
So we've got two clean and pure theories of the foundations of ethics, both powerful and
pure, both compelling and plausible.
Unfortunately, these two pure theories of ethical foundation, these two theories of
the core concept in ethics, are diametrically opposed.
Both are plausible.
Both seem to capture something that seems basic and real to ethics.
And yet if either of them is true, the other can't possibly be.
One of these is a pure theory of ethics built on the idea that the core concept is the concept
of the good.
The alternative is a pure theory of ethics built on the idea that the core concept is
the concept of the right.
This is a big enough topic that I'm going to divide it into two lectures.
In this lecture, I want to concentrate on the first pure theory, the theory that's built
on the concept of the good.
In the next lecture, I'll turn to the rival pure theory built on the concept of the right.
So the first thing I want to do is to outline good-based theories.
I want to do, outline them in their full and compelling plausibility, in as strong a case
I can make for good-based theories.
But the second thing I want to do is to indicate reasons to think that such a theory can't
possibly be correct, it can't possibly be right, it at least can't be the whole truth
regarding the foundations of ethics.
In looking for the core concept of ethics then, we're looking in this lecture on the
concept of the good.
In the next lecture on the concept of the right, let's start with the concept of the
good.
The structure of good-based theories is breathtaking at simplicity.
The basic structure is this.
There are things of genuine positive value in the world.
Those are the good things.
And collectively, they constitute a category, a category called the category of the good.
So at the base of this theory is the idea that there are the good things, the things
of positive value in the world.
There are also actions.
There are actions that produce those things and there are actions that don't.
The actions that produce the good things are the good actions.
There are actions toward the good things.
Those are good actions, good things to do.
The actions that don't lead to those good things are not good things to do.
And those that actively hinder production of good things are the bad things to do.
So the basic structure of the theory is that there are things of positive value in the
universe and there are actions that facilitate them.
The things of basic value in the universe, the actions are judged in terms of whether
they produce the things of genuine value in the universe and the actions that produce
them are the good actions or the right actions to produce them.
Now, so far we haven't talked about motivation.
That's where a distinction between good and right comes in, but we can add that to our
good base theories.
There are actions that are motivated by the attempt to produce the good and there are
actions that stem from baser motives.
The actions that are motivated by the attempt to produce the good things are the right actions,
the right things to do.
So far we really have the things of positive value in the universe, the good things, the
actions that lead to them, those are the good actions, actions that are motivated toward
them, those are the right actions.
And finally, there are certain character traits that tend to result in right actions, that
tend to result in good actions, that tend to result in producing good things.
Those character traits are the virtues.
The basic distinctions here are distinctions that any adequate theory of ethics is going
to have to recognize, that any adequate theory of ethics is going to have to include.
People tend to think of ethical matters as matters of right and wrong, but that's too
simple.
If you think of it as just matters of right and wrong, it's as if all of ethics had to
do with just the on-off switch about whether it was right or the off switch of whether
it was wrong.
Consider cases in order to see some of the complexity, consider cases in which someone
does something that's genuinely valuable, but their motives are somehow self-serving.
In such cases we say they did the right thing, but for the wrong reasons.
That's not an on-off switch, that's more complicated.
There are also cases that are the other way around, cases in which someone does the wrong
thing, something genuinely harmful, despite the fact that they're acting with the best
intentions and with the purest of motive.
The truth is that we evaluate things ethically at importantly different levels.
At one level we just evaluate the things that happen, good things that happen and bad things.
That's at one level.
But we also evaluate actions, what people do.
So there's another level of evaluation there.
In considering motives, we evaluate what people do in a richer sense.
At that level, we evaluate not only what they do, but we evaluate them.
So all ethics is evaluation of different levels, recognition of those different levels, those
different evaluation of states of affairs, of actions leading to them, of people, of
traits of character.
Those complexities are going to have to characterize any theory of ethics.
They're built into the theory of the good.
So those are some of the complexities built into our ethical concepts.
The theory based on the good recognizes those complications.
It analyzes them as a strict derivative hierarchy.
At the base are those things that are genuinely a value, the good things.
Actions are evaluated, even before we consider motivations.
Actions are evaluated in terms of whether they produce the good things or not.
The good actions are those that do.
With an eye to motivation, we speak of right actions.
Those actions that are motivated by the attempt to produce the good things, those count as
the right action.
And the traits of character that result in right actions, those are the virtues.
This is a basic structure that appears across much of ancient Greek ethics.
The ethics of Plato and Aristotle is essentially good-based, is this kind of good-based theory.
The theory that appears in the Epicureans and the Stoics is a good-based theory as well.
This is an ethics characterized in terms of the summum bonum, a highest good, and the
strains of a good-based ethics of this sort continue into medieval philosophy as well.
The structure is very much the same in a more modern instantiation in the history of utilitarianism.
There are three major figures in the history of utilitarianism, Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart
Mill, and G.E. Moore.
Start with Bentham.
Jeremy Bentham announces the basic principles of utilitarianism in his Introduction to Principles
of Morals and Legislation in 1780.
The fundamental good for Bentham is pleasure.
The fundamental evil is pain.
Here's a quote from Bentham.
Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure.
It is for them alone to point out what we ought to do as well as to determine what we
shall do.
On the one hand, the standard of right and wrong.
On the other, the chain of causes and effects are fastened to their throne.
They govern us in all we do, in all we say, in all we think.
Every effort we can make to throw off our subjection will serve but to demonstrate and
confirm it.
In words, man may pretend to abjure their empire, but in reality he will remain subject
to it all the while.
The principle of utility recognizes this subjection and assumes it for the foundation.
That's the end of the quote.
Bentham's central principle of utility is this, that the right action, the ethical action
is simply that action that produces the greatest amount of pleasure for the greatest number
of people.
On such a theory, this is simply what it is for an action to be ethically right for
Bentham.
That it produces the greatest amount of pleasure for the greatest number of people.
On such a theory, we can calculate what the right thing to do is.
Bentham was quite serious about the proposal.
He called it the hedonic calculus or pleasure calculus.
The idea is this.
When we come to a branch in our lives deciding which of two alternatives, alternative actions
to take, what we have to do is to figure out how much pleasure will be produced for how
many people if we take each of those courses.
That course of action which leads to the greatest amount of pleasure for the greatest number
of people is the right course of action.
The other one that doesn't lead to the greatest amount of pleasure for the greatest number
of people, that one is ethically wrong.
So Bentham says, when thus interpreted the words ought and right and wrong and others
of that stamp have a meaning, when otherwise they have none.
Let me fill you in a little on Bentham's background.
He studied law under the great Blackstone, but Bentham remained horrified by the way
that British law was constructed and the way that British law was enforced.
After reading Hume's treatise of human nature, which I talked about in the lecture on facts
and values, Bentham said he felt as if the scales had fallen from his eyes.
From that point on, he says, he learned to see that utility, the greatest pleasure for
the greatest number, was the test and measure of all virtue.
Using that principle of utility, Bentham and his followers, the Benthamites, proved to
be a tireless political force, influencing in deep and permanent ways the history of
English law.
The Benthamites also founded University College, London, and on his death Bentham willed his
body to University College for scientific study.
They kept it, and if you go to University College today, you can still see Bentham.
You can see Bentham's embalmed body in this big glass case.
I kid you not.
He's one of the few dead Western philosophers currently on exhibit anywhere in the world.
Lenin may count as one in his glass case in Moscow.
There is unfortunately not just one skull of Descartes in Paris, there's also another
one in Stockholm and part of one somewhere else.
So enough on Bentham.
The history of utilitarianism is the history of three thinkers, of Jeremy Bentham, John
Stuart Mill, and G.E. Moore.
Their lives, as it happens, were historically intertwined.
Jeremy Bentham had a close friend and disciple named James Mill, and Bentham was a strong
influence in the early education of James Mill's son, John Stuart Mill, born in 1806.
From before his birth, the plan was to train John Stuart Mill to be a philosopher.
Philosophers usually don't come that way.
They appear by happenstance.
They develop their interests and abilities later in life.
John Stuart Mill is the exception.
John Stuart Mill was trained from infancy to be a philosopher.
As an adult, he had no memory of when he began to learn Greek.
He couldn't remember never not knowing ancient Greek.
But he evidently learned Greek when he started to learn Greek when he was three.
By the age of eight, he had read the whole of the works of Herodotus, Xenophon, Diogenes
Laertes, and the major dialogues of Plato in Greek.
And at the age of eight, he started Latin.
His father was an economist who trained John Stuart Mill in mathematics until Mill had
far outstripped his father's abilities.
From there, Mill went on to logic, economics, and political theory.
By the age of 21, John Stuart Mill was at the core of a brilliant debating society.
He'd founded a literary magazine.
That was when he had his breakdown.
But perhaps that's a topic for another time.
Mill is known for an important transformation in utilitarianism.
His formulation is the greatest happiness principle.
That action is right, which produces the greatest happiness for the greatest number.
Now remember, Bentham speaks of the greatest pleasure for the greatest number.
And Mill speaks of the greatest happiness for the greatest number.
That doesn't look like much of a difference.
And Mill's quick to say that by happiness, he means pleasure, which makes it look like
even less of a difference.
There is nonetheless a deep and important difference between these two forms of utilitarianism.
Between utilitarianism in the founding form in Jeremy Bentham and in the later form in
John Stuart Mill.
Bentham is out for the maximization of pleasure, period.
And he's indeed quite scathing of anyone who proposes that one type of pleasures, the
pleasures of one group, or the pleasures of one class are somehow superior to those of
others.
The influence of the Benthamites on British law is entirely in character with this.
It was very much a leveling, anti-class, not recognizing the power of aristocracy for
others in British law.
Mill in contrast thinks there are different classes of pleasures.
He thinks that some of those are more valuable than others.
In Mill, for example, the pleasures of, quote, the intellect, of the feelings and imagination
and the moral sentiments, they are of higher status and of greater worth than what he calls
the animal pleasures of mere sensation.
This mill's quote, it's better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied.
Better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.
So in Bentham's, Bentham's is the greatest pleasure for the greatest number.
It's explicitly a principle about pleasure.
In Mill, you get the greatest happiness for the greatest number and happiness has built
into it precisely the kind of distinction between different kinds of happiness or different
kinds of pleasure that Bentham was at pains not to include.
Bentham's utilitarianism had been this important leveling force in British law, an important
corrective to a system built on the privilege of the aristocracy.
Mill's utilitarianism is often seen as a sellout, classifying some pleasures as higher
than others and conveniently it's the aristocratic pleasures that are categorized as the highest.
So we've got the entwined lives of Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill.
The entwined lives continue.
Jeremy Bentham, we said, had a close friend and disciple in the father of John Stuart Mill.
John Stuart Mill, in turn, had a close friend and disciple in the father of Bertrand Russell.
From Bentham to John Stuart Mill to Bertrand Russell, we have three generations of philosophical
influence.
The third stage of utilitarianism, however, is due not to Russell but to his deep friend
and his intellectual soulmate, G.E. Moore.
Moore and Russell met as undergraduates at Cambridge and together they changed the entire
course of 20th century philosophy.
Moore is not convinced, not convinced at all, that pleasure or happiness are the only
categories of good.
He thinks intelligent understanding of the world is itself good, whether it produces
pleasure or not.
Possession of a good character is itself something valuable, whether it makes you happy or not.
Moore's utilitarianism, this third stage of utilitarianism, attempts to incorporate
these ideals, and from Moore the formulation is both more abstract and simpler.
So in Bentham you had, that action is right which produces the greatest pleasure for the
greatest number.
In Mill you had, that action is right which produces the greatest happiness for the greatest
number.
In Moore you have, that action is right which produces the greatest good, where a good for
a greater number of people is itself a greater good.
In terms of clarity perhaps, in terms of specificity and applicability, that may not look like
in advance.
Things look much clearer and more concrete when we're just talking about pleasure and
pain.
They become less clear and more abstract when we're talking about higher and lower forms
of happiness, and may seem least clear and most abstract when we simply have the abstract
category of the good.
In terms of pure transparency of structure however, Moore's formulation is perhaps the
best.
With an almost Greek purity, all judgments of right action and all ethics are based
on maximization of the good.
Good based theories and ethics then have a long and interesting philosophical pedigree.
The theoretical structure is beautiful in its simplicity.
Unfortunately there are compelling reasons to think that such a theory can't possibly
be correct, at least that this kind of theory can't be giving us the whole truth about
ethics.
Here's the first argument.
For Bentham and Mill we are out to maximize the greatest pleasure or the greatest happiness
for the greatest number.
Let me therefore offer a thought experiment.
Suppose that you opened up your bank statement for the month and you found amazingly that
there was $1,000 more in there than you expected there to be, $1,000 unexpected dollars in
your bank statement, free and clear.
Imagine how happy you'd be, I expect that would make you pretty happy.
Now suppose that we could do it not just for you, but for everyone across the country.
This month when they open up their bank statements everyone finds that they have $1,000 more
than they thought they did.
Imagine your happiness at finding $1,000 multiplied by the number of people in the country, that's
a lot of happiness for each of them and it's spread across a large number of people.
So suppose we could do this, suppose we could produce this amount of happiness but could
do it at a cost.
In order to produce this great good for this great number just one person has to suffer,
Mr. Jerry Irving of Lexington, Nebraska.
You don't know him, you don't know why things are set up this way, but in order for everyone
to get that $1,000 we have to sell Jerry Irving into slavery.
How's that for a deal?
Well it's not great if you're Jerry Irving, but after all that's just one guy and think
of all that happiness from all those surprised people opening up their monthly statements.
Now this is a thought experiment and we can do with it what we like.
It's a thought experiment, we can ring whatever changes we want in constructing the example.
So maybe we don't have to sell poor Jerry Irving into slavery.
We just have to bind and gag him in the bathroom for a week and a half or we have to cut off
his little finger in the least painful way.
And maybe people don't get just $1,000 in their bank statements, they get $10,000.
And maybe it's not everyone in the country, it's everyone in the world.
The point of the story, the point of the thought experiment is not in the details.
The point of the story is this.
For any formulation of the greatest good for the greatest number theory like utilitarianism
there'd be some payoff for a lot of people despite some cost to poor Jerry Irving that
would make an action like that the ethical thing to do, the right thing to do, indeed
the obligatory thing to do.
If we're interested only in the total sum of happiness, individual happiness times number
of individuals, it'll be the right thing to do to sacrifice poor Jerry Irving for all
that happiness for the rest of us.
That's where utilitarianism leads.
That's where any formulation of the greatest happiness for the greatest number leads.
And that conclusion seems definitely wrong.
What's gone wrong?
I think your action is probably the same as mine, that there are major questions of justice
and there are major questions of people's rights that have been left out.
But this example shows that there's something important that this form of good-based theory
fails to capture.
Something about justice, for example.
Any theory that leads to that kind of conclusion can't at least be a complete theory of ethics.
There's an echo of this kind of thought experiment example in Dostoevsky's Brother's
Kermetsov, which we'll turn to for other purposes in a later lecture.
An example of precisely this type is at the core of a science fiction story by Ursula
Le Guin called The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas.
Le Guin describes a festival in Omelas, a city full of people technologically and artistically
blessed, a people with all that they need, joyous and happy in the deepest sense, happy
in a deep, passionate and mature sense.
But that happiness is bought at a price.
Here's a quote from the story.
In a basement under one of the beautiful public buildings of Omelas, there's a room.
It has one locked door and no window.
In one corner of the little room, a couple of mops with stiff, clotted, foul-smelling
heads stand near a rusty bucket.
In the room, a child is sitting.
It could be a boy or a girl.
It looks about six, but actually is nearly ten.
It's feeble-minded.
Perhaps it was born defective.
Perhaps it's become imbecile through fear, malnutrition and neglect.
It's afraid of the mops.
The people at the door never say anything, but the child, who hasn't always lived in
the room, and can remember sunlight and its mother's voice, sometimes speaks.
I'll be good, it says.
Please let me out.
I'll be good.
In Le Guin's story, another quote, all the prosperity and beauty and delight of Omelas
could wither and be destroyed for the child released.
Those are the terms to exchange all the goodness and grace of every life in Omelas for that
single small improvement, to throw away the happiness of thousands for the chance of happiness
of that one.
That in literary form is the same kind of argument against utilitarianism.
In Le Guin's story, some don't accept those terms.
Some don't accept the injustice.
Those are the ones who walk away from Omelas.
W. D. Ross has a simpler argument that applies to even the purest form of utilitarianism.
G. E. Moore is what he calls G. E. Moore's ideal utilitarianism.
More you remember, reduces utilitarianism to its purest, good-based core.
The theory is just that that action is right, which produces the greatest good.
How could that theory be wrong?
That action is right, which produces the greatest good.
W. D. Ross's argument that it is wrong turns on the issue of promising.
Suppose I've made a solemn vow to you to do something, to be there for your wedding,
say.
To take care of your wife and children after you're gone.
All that matters is that it's something important and that I've given you my word.
Now being there for your wedding would produce an important amount of good.
Taking care of your wife and children after you're gone would produce an important amount
of good.
But suppose, says W. D. Ross, suppose it becomes clear that I could produce a slightly greater
amount of good if I break my promise.
More good for somebody else if I don't show up for your wedding.
More good for someone else's wife and children, mine maybe, if I neglected yours.
Would that be okay?
No.
Even if I could produce a little bit more good by breaking the promise, I promised.
I gave you my word to think it was ethically okay to break a promise each time it looked
like something else would produce a little bit more good, whatever you mean by good.
That would be to miss the ethical importance of things like promises.
That's another aspect of our ethical thinking to which good-based theories seem inadequate.
The conclusion then is that theories based entirely on the good, although they're simple
and elegant and compelling, can't be the whole story on the foundations of ethics.
There's something important that such theories leave out, something about justice, something
about rights, something about the kind of commitment that comes with promises.
So in the next lecture, I'll focus on an alternative possible foundation.
Then I'll talk about ethical theories based not in the concept of the good, but in the
concept of the right.
