Lecture 6 Thoughts on Religion and Values
We've talked about values in several ways in previous lectures.
The distinction between facts and values, the different kinds of values in lives to
envy and lives to admire, values of the good and the right and the different theories
that take each of these is the core concept of ethics.
One thing we haven't yet talked about is religion.
To some people, that may seem incredibly strange.
How can one possibly talk about values, ethical values, for example, without talking about
religion?
In this lecture, I will be talking about religion.
In the first lecture, I said I'd be not only your guide, but your gadfly, and that you
might not agree with me on everything, and that warning certainly applies to this lecture.
In this lecture, I'll be talking about religion and values, and I want to start by explaining
why most contemporary philosophers not only think that one can talk about values without
talking about religion, but think that one should talk about values without talking about
religion.
This will seem incredibly strange to those holding the view that ethics has to be grounded
in religion, that religious belief is the source of values, or that it's religious belief
from which values ultimately come.
I think that view, the view that religious belief is the source of values, or that religious
belief is that from which values ultimately come.
I think that view often involves an empirical belief, a belief that people who don't have
the same religion that you do, and certainly people who have no religion, will be people
who have no values.
It's an empirical belief.
You'll be able to see this by the fact that they don't act ethically.
That kind of belief might be sustainable in an appropriately segregated community, as
long as you're a Protestant who has no contact with anybody but Protestants, or a Jew with
only Jewish contacts, or a Muslim who has no contact with anyone but Muslims.
As long as that's the case, it's probably easy to believe that only you and your kind
can act ethically.
If you are so isolated as to never come in contact with anybody from the other group,
you won't have to put that kind of belief to the test.
You won't have to risk disconfirmation.
But if that empirical claim is given any kind of exposure to people of other persuasions,
it's simply going to be insupportable.
Any Christian who thinks that no Buddhist can act ethically hasn't had any experience
with Buddhists.
Any religious believer who thinks that atheists can't act ethically hasn't had any real experience
with atheists.
There's another way of looking at the view that ethics has to be grounded in religion.
On this approach, it's not an empirical claim, but a conceptual claim.
The claim is that something is the right thing to do because God says it's the right thing
to do.
That you should do one thing rather than another with your life because it follows God's commandments.
You should be fruitful and multiply, or you should not suffer a witch to live by commands.
A view like this appears in the Declaration of Independence.
The Constitution of the United States, interestingly enough, is remarkably free of God talk.
But the Declaration of Independence, that other founding document, is full of it.
So the Declaration of Independence talks of it becoming necessary for a people to assume
the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle
them.
That's the kind of view we're talking about, that the laws of nature and of nature's God
entitle you to something.
That's where the values are coming from.
Or even better, we hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal,
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights.
Where do the rights come from?
They're endowed by the Creator.
People are endowed by the Creator with certain inalienable rights.
At base, what's at issue is a divine command theory of ethics.
If we stick just to questions of right action and wrong action, the view is that the actions
that are right are right because God commands you to do them.
And the wrong actions are wrong because God forbids them.
Now the reason that contemporary philosophers spend very little time on divine command theories
like this is because they think they are inadequate.
They think they are obviously and transparently inadequate.
The argument that such a view has to be inadequate is as old as Plato's dialogue of the Euthyphro,
which comes from roughly 400 BC.
Euthyphro is a character who's engaged in a course of action that he claims to know
is not merely right, but holy.
He also seems to be a believer in the whole incredible stable of Greek gods, in Zeus,
in Hera, in Aphrodite, in Apollo.
So Euthyphro is a good example then of someone whose judgments are based in a firm and convinced
religious belief, despite the fact that real belief in that kind of polytheism seems difficult
for us even to grasp.
OK, Socrates in this dialogue, as elsewhere, wants to burrow into the central concept of
issue.
Euthyphro thinks that what he's doing is holy.
So what exactly does holy mean?
Now Socrates doesn't just want to know, doesn't just want examples.
He wants to know what it really is for something to be holy.
And at a crucial point in the argument, after Socrates has pressed him, Euthyphro does give
a definition.
He says, the holy is what's pleasing to the gods.
That's just what being holy is.
What's pleasing to the gods is holy, and what is displeasing to the gods is unholy.
And then Socrates asks, is the holy holy because the gods approve it, or do they approve it
because it's holy?
Euthyphro takes the second option, that the gods approve of these things because they
are holy.
But if that's so, it can no longer be maintained that being holy just is being approved by
the gods.
If they approve of things because they are holy, then the fact that they are holy is
something different, something separate, something beyond the gods.
It's something that guides even their actions.
If we bring this argument up to date, we can ask, is this action right?
Take a right action.
Is this action right because God commands us to do it?
Or does God command us to do it because it's right?
For anyone who thinks that God himself has moral worth, that he is worthy of praise,
for example, the second answer has to be the right one.
That God commands us to do it because it's right.
For anyone who thinks that God's beneficent, that he acts rightly, that he's good to his
creatures, that he's morally perfect, this second answer has to be the right one.
That God does what he does because it's right.
He produces what he produces because it's good.
If you took the other Horn of the Dilemma, if you thought instead that good was just
a name for what God does, it would make very little sense to praise God for being good.
If the good is whatever God does, then whatever he did would count as good.
Were he to produce universal suffering to no purpose, to no end, that would be good.
Were he the ultimate sadist producing beings to suffer just so that he could glory in their
suffering, that would be good.
It has to be then that God does what he does because it's right.
He produces what he produces because it's good.
But that means that whether something is the right thing to do, whether it's a good thing
to produce, is something beyond God.
It's a standard that even he has to meet.
So it looks like any divine command theory of ethics will crash against the rocks of
the Euthyphral argument.
For grounds ethics, it can't be divine command.
There's another argument worth considering here.
The force of this argument is that there's a tension between ethics and religious belief
that makes it harder for a believer to act ethically.
So this is an argument not only that religion can't be the foundation of ethical belief,
the Euthyphral argument shows that.
This is an argument that there's even a tension between ethical and religious values in a
certain way.
So the force of this argument is that there's a tension between ethics and religious belief
that makes it harder for a believer to act ethically.
The idea is this.
Among many religions, including both Christianity and Islam, action in this life is rewarded
or punished in the next life.
In the crudest form, the idea is that appropriate action here, loving your neighbor or tending
to the sick or enduring humiliation in my name, that will bring you reward in the next
life.
Indeed, the reward is so great that there is no question as to what you should do.
Any pain here suffered for God's sake will result in eternal reward in the next life.
And on the other hand, will result in eternal damnation.
Well, that's a no-brainer.
Should I do good things or not?
Bliss or pain?
Indeed, eternal bliss or eternal pain.
Now let me think.
But if anyone is doing what the Bible commands in order to get into heaven, or is avoiding
doing what the Bible prohibits in order to avoid the torments of hell, it looks like they
aren't really acting ethically.
Here's the analogy.
A little boy who stops beating his sister because he's threatened with getting beaten
himself isn't acting ethically, he's just acting in his own self-interest.
And a little girl who helps her mother in the kitchen in order to get a cookie or in
order to get an hour of TV, she isn't acting ethically, she's just acting in her own self-interest.
In the same way, the person who does what the Bible commands in order to get into heaven
isn't acting ethically, they're just doing the self-interested cookie trick on a large
scale, in fact on an infinite scale.
He who aids his neighbor or doesn't commit adultery in order to avoid the torments of
hell isn't acting ethically, he's just acting in his own self-interest.
It's like the boy avoiding a beating.
So to the extent that reward or punishment in the afterlife is your motivation, your
actions may mimic ethically good actions.
They may even look like ethically good actions.
You may help the right people at the right times with the right effects, but genuinely
ethical action isn't just doing the right things.
Ethical action is doing the right things for the right reasons.
In the case of ethical action, it's doing the right things just because they're the
right things.
That's one way of reading Kant's quote from last time, the only thing good without qualification
is a good will.
That's one way of reading that passage.
So the conclusion of this argument is this, that the historical motivators that have been
a major portion of many religions, not only don't they ground ethical action, but there's
this argument that they make it difficult for a true believer to act in genuinely ethical
ways.
Now stand back and look at that argument.
Does that argument really show that ethics and religion are incompatible?
Well, it doesn't show that for ethics and all religion.
For one thing, it's an argument that demands the notion of eternal reward and eternal punishment.
That's the argument that you would be, if you're acting in pursuit of eternal reward
or avoiding eternal punishment, you're not acting in a genuinely ethical way.
And although it's common in Christianity and Islam, that notion of eternal reward and
eternal punishment is by no means universal among religion.
So this argument doesn't at all establish that every religion creates that tension for
ethics.
Even within a religion that has a heaven and hell moreover, someone might do the right
thing for ethical reasons, just because it's the right thing to do.
Indeed, if you try to paint this in the most plausible way, the most plausible picture of
a heaven of rewards would be a heaven in which the rewards are reserved for those who act
in genuinely ethical ways, who do the right things for the right reasons, not because
of what they'll get from doing them.
So it would, among other things, mean that heaven would be reserved for people who did
what they did, not merely in order to get into heaven.
The tension, however, is still there.
If you're a religious believer, if you're certain that you will be rewarded for ethical
action, if you really believe the story about heaven and hell, how can you be sure that's
not your motivation?
And if you can't be certain that's not your motivation, how can you be certain that you
are really acting ethically at all?
Okay, so far I've offered two arguments regarding values and religious belief, the youth of
pro-argument against divine command theories, and the argument that religious belief, at
least religious belief of some sorts, can make genuinely ethical action harder.
There are also a range of other value questions, relevant to religion.
One question is this, is religious belief itself a good thing?
Now here I'm going to go with the contemporary philosophical consensus.
This is a consensus that's shared, of course, by many believers.
The contemporary philosophical consensus that there's no proof of the existence of God.
There's no compelling conceptual argument.
There's no compelling empirical or scientific evidence that God exists.
Even if that's so, we can still ask whether religious belief is a good thing.
There are two quite different ways in which to consider that kind of question.
One is to ask what the consequences of religious belief have been in the history of the world
as a whole.
Is religious belief something that has made life better in general, on the whole, or is
religious belief something that's made life worse?
Call that the external evaluation of religious belief.
Another way to approach the question, another whole set of question, is to ask what the
value of religious belief is inside a life.
Is a life that includes religious belief better than a life that doesn't?
So let me talk briefly about both questions.
The external question about whether religion in general has been a good thing in the history
of the world.
And then secondly, the question about whether religious belief inside a life makes that
life better.
Similar with the external question, Bertrand Russell wrote a famous article called Ideas
that Have Harmed Mankind.
In that article, superstition and religious belief are high up on the list of ideas that
have harmed.
What Russell emphasizes are the negative external consequences of religious belief.
And certainly, there are many.
Without our history of religious belief, we wouldn't have our history of religious wars.
Without religious belief, we wouldn't have the centuries of bloodshed in Ireland, or
the ravages of the Crusades, or the present and worsening tensions between a Christian
West and an Islamic Middle East.
Or at least, we'd have to find other reasons to justify the slaughter.
Without religious belief, we'd be spared the ravages of religious persecution and the
threat of religious terrorism.
In honest evaluation, all the horrors committed in the name of religious belief have to be
ranked against it.
But hasn't religion also had good consequences of the external form as well?
Haven't the hungry been cared for from religious motivation, when they otherwise wouldn't have?
And the sick been tended.
So in behalf of religious belief, we also have to consider the legacy of goods brought
about by the tradition of martyrs and missionaries.
Now where religious belief considered purely externally in terms of that kind of consequence,
what would the evaluation be on balance?
Has religious belief produced more good overall in terms of missionary medicine and feeding
the hungry?
Or has religious belief produced more harm overall in terms of persecution and blind cultural
destruction, religious wars, and religious terrorism?
There have indeed been those who have been fed, who wouldn't otherwise have been fed.
But all too often, even that service has been performed in a context of political imperialism
and cultural destruction.
The destruction of Hawaiian culture was an inevitable cost of Christianizing its population.
And it's far from clear that that change brought more happiness than misery.
The toll of missionary activity in the various cultures of Africa offer a similar story.
And it was Christian motivation, not just political greed, but Christian motivation
that fueled the atrocities of the conquistadors.
On the other hand, in the wake of the Hawaiian missionaries, there was a decrease in female
infanticide.
In the wake of the conquistadors, ritual human sacrifice was stopped.
And in the wake of 20th century African missionary activity, medicine was available that hadn't
been available before.
In each case, there was also a desperate cost in terms of cultural disintegration and economic
exploitation and death.
So personally, I'm not sure what the balance is.
I do think there have been some good things motivated by religious belief.
I also think there have been some horrible things that can be laid at religion's door,
both horrible out of ignorance and horrible out of deliberate religious conviction.
I'm not sure what the balance is.
Whatever the balance is, it's interesting that it's not entirely positive.
From an external perspective, at least, it's not at all clear.
It's not at all obvious that religion is a good thing.
There is, however, a catch in any attempt to do this kind of calculation, this kind
of balancing evaluation.
That catch, once again, has to do with the afterlife.
The conquistadors and the Hawaiian and African missionaries all thought of themselves, first
and foremost, not as teaching agriculture, not as administering medicine, but as saving
souls.
Each soul they saved participated in the infinite bliss of heaven after death, and any unsaved
soul was relegated either to limbo or maybe to hell.
On that view, the total balance of external consequences must take into account not only
gains in this world, but gains in the next.
And given the infinite bliss of heaven and the infinite torments of hell, any earthly
inconveniences of slavery and disease and death pale into insignificance.
So on a religious view, then, the external tally of religious activity is going to end
up being overwhelmingly positive.
Interestingly, then, whether religious belief has had a positive or a negative balance of
consequences is a question that's not independent of religious belief itself.
If one's a believer, one will count the consequences positively, all those souls saved, all that
eternal bliss.
Now, of course, to use that as an argument would be to beg the question of the truth
of the religious belief.
So this kind of evidence, the religion is a good thing considered externally, is therefore
that kind of evidence, that religion is a good thing considered externally, is evidence
that would beg the question.
There doesn't appear to be any overwhelming evidence that religion has been a good thing
overall that doesn't beg that kind of question.
Okay, that's the attempting an external tally of the value of religious belief.
What about an internal evaluation of religion?
Here the question is whether religious belief is a good thing from the inside.
Is a life that includes religious belief better than a life that doesn't?
Now that's a question with many facets.
Let me pick just one.
Let me pick just the question of rationality.
Is it more rational to have a life that includes religion or not?
Now, you may think that I'm stacking the deck here against religious belief, but there
is an argument.
Even given all we've said about lack of evidence, there is an argument that religious belief
is rational.
Let me start with the opposite side of the story.
The argument that the religious life is irrational, or at least that it's not rational.
If the current philosophical consensus is right, there's no compelling conceptual argument
that God exists, and there's no empirical evidence that God exists.
But then there's simply no reason to believe that God exists.
And if there's no reason to hold a belief, it's irrational to hold it.
To adopt religious belief without evidence, so the argument goes, is to sacrifice an aspect
of rationality in your life.
And irrationality certainly seems to be a bad thing in a life.
If on the other hand the case were different, if we had scientific evidence that religious
beliefs were true, well, then you wouldn't have the irrationality problem, but they wouldn't
have the status of religious faith, would they?
Religious claims would then be just one more scientific fact among others.
Okay, that's the argument that religious belief, or including religious belief in a life, is
irrational, or at least not rational.
But here's the argument on the other side, that a life of religious belief is rational.
Even if there's no adequate evidence for its truth, in a nutshell the proposal is that there
may be a pragmatic reason, or a range of pragmatic reasons for religious belief.
If pragmatic reasons are genuine reasons for belief, religious belief might be rational,
even if it's epistemically unsupported.
It has said that religious belief gives one's life an internal significance that it wouldn't
otherwise have.
It's also said that religious belief gives one an ability to weather life's storms.
All lives have some measure of tragedy and loss and pain, and religious belief allows
one a perspective in which these make sense.
Religious belief may have very real and measurable benefits, both psychological and social.
It's often proposed, for example, that religiously based marriages are longer lasting and more
psychologically satisfying.
And that those with religious belief have fewer illnesses, have less severe and less
extended disability when they do fall ill.
Now aren't those arguments that a religious life is a better life?
And isn't it rational to make one's life as good as possible?
And so isn't religious belief rational after all?
What's of interest here is that the arguments regarding the rationality of religious belief
on the two sides are such very different arguments.
They in fact embody different models of rationality.
One model is this, that whatever else is at issue, it's an internal virtue in a life
to guide one's belief by the evidence.
There is an ideal of evidential rationality.
It's the philosopher's ideal, if you will, in which all belief should follow the pattern
of argument and evidence regardless of the conclusion.
W.K.
Clifford puts this succinctly in a classic piece on the ethics of belief.
Here's a quote from Clifford, it's always wrong, pardon me, it is wrong always, everywhere
and for anyone to believe anything on insufficient evidence.
That's one model of rationality that's at issue here.
The other model of rationality we might call economic rationality, acts so that you maximize
expected benefits.
If it can be demonstrated that religious belief in a life makes the life longer or allows
one to weather life's inevitable storms better, then in terms of means toward desirable ends,
it looks like it would be rational to adopt religious belief.
On this question of religious belief, viewed just in terms of the individual life, it looks
like these two notions of rationality conflict head on.
So is religious belief rational after all?
It's important to remember that there are two very different notions of rationality on
the table.
The argument isn't that religion is evidentially rational or epistemically rational.
The argument is instead that it's pragmatically rational.
The religious belief does good things for you and in that sense it's rational to adopt
even if the evidence is against it.
Even in this sense, however, there are some important provisos.
In order to conclude that religious belief is pragmatically rational, we need to know
that the benefits claimed for religion are true.
In fact, the claims linking religion and happy marriage are not true.
Results from the Barna research group indicate that divorce rates are higher among Christians
and Jews than they are among atheists and agnostics.
There are intriguing studies that seem to link regular attendance in religious services
with lower blood pressure, with better immunological response in breast cancer cases, and with
longer survival with AIDS.
Those studies invariably end with a statement that more research is needed.
We also need to know whether the benefits touted for religion accrue from the belief
itself.
One thing that religion may offer, for example, is a clear support community.
So it may not be religion per se, but community that we need.
And a final proviso is this.
To believe something, to really believe it, isn't merely to believe that it will be good
for you to believe it.
To really believe it is to believe that it's true.
Pragmatic arguments can lead you to think it'd be good for you to believe something.
But they don't offer anything like evidence that the belief is true.
And of course, belief that it's true is the only true belief.
That goes together with a point we made earlier in the lecture.
The vision of heaven and hell will not bring someone to genuine ethical action, because
ethical action is action that isn't motivated by thoughts of reward and punishment.
And pragmatic arguments, likewise, won't bring someone to true religious belief, because
real belief has to be founded in something more than pragmatic motivation.
In the next lecture, I want to return to the general axiological question of what makes
a life a good life.
But I want to do it in a very concrete and immediate way, looking at how to order priorities
in your life.
