Lecture 7 Life's Priorities
The previous three lectures concentrated on ethics, on the foundations of ethics and on
thoughts regarding religion and ethical values.
In this lecture, I want to return to the broader scope of axiology, the question of
the good life.
In this lecture, I want to focus on priorities in life, but in a particular life, in your
life.
If you have something precious, something that must be spent rather than simply held,
you'll want to spend it well.
Well, you do have something precious.
You have a life.
It can't be simply held.
It has to be spent.
So of course, you'll want to spend it well.
If you're five years old and someone offers you a plate of cookies with the admonition
that you can pick just one, you're going to try to choose the best one, probably the
biggest one.
If you're at the used bookstore and you have your choice of different copies of the book
you want, they're all the same price.
Some of the copies are well kept.
Some of them are abused.
Some of them are clean.
Some of them are marked up to the point of illegibility.
You're going to want the best one, and if you've got a life to choose, and you do, you're
going to want to choose a good life.
Choosing, of course, isn't all there is to life.
There's much that's beyond our control, but there's also much that's within our control.
Part of what's in our control, amazingly, are aspects of how we handle those aspects
of our lives that are not in our control, that are out of our control.
One of the good things in a life is for a life to have a character that makes it possible
to weather the bad things.
The Stoics, Seneca and Epictetus, for example, writing in 50 and 100 AD, took this to an extreme.
They held that the type of character one wants is a character that's impervious to whatever
battering may come your way.
Unfortunately, that can also make you impervious to delight in the good things that come your
way.
Sometimes the best things in life are things that you couldn't have put there by design.
You wouldn't have known they would have been that good.
Those are things that you should also leave yourself open to.
So what makes a life a good life?
That's the topic of this lecture.
If there is a best life among your choices, what would the best life be like?
And that, of course, is Aristotle's and Plato's question.
Many people, I'm sorry to say, live entire lives without asking such a question.
Of all the pathetic costs of unthinking irrationality, this is probably the most pathetic of all,
the fact that entire lives are filled with petty choices of what clothes to buy, what
shows to watch, without any effort to choose the shape and form of the life as a whole,
without any reflection on life's real priorities.
The aphorism from Socrates, you remember, is the unexamined life is not worth living.
In many ways, the unexamined life isn't a life at all.
It's not something that's yours.
It's something that happens to you when you're not looking.
What's even more pathetic is this, that the basic question doesn't, in the end, seem to
be terribly difficult.
There are deep philosophical questions about what things are valuable in themselves.
We've looked at some of those.
There are deep perplexities as to how value can be written across the face of a merely
physical universe.
Those are hard questions.
Those are deep and difficult philosophical questions.
But the question we're after here is far simpler.
It's just, what do you want out of life?
This may not even be a question in ethics.
It may just be a question in your own pragmatic psychology, and I'm going to treat it that
way.
The psychologist Abraham Maslow is famous for a hierarchy of human needs, with physiological
needs on the bottom, safety needs above that, and self-actualization at the top.
What we're after is psychological like that, but it's something more detailed and more
individual.
We're after a prioritized map of your values.
Let me start by giving you just a list of good things in life.
This will just be a list.
It's unsorted, it's unstructured.
These are just in the order that they occurred to me.
As I list these, you may notice gaps, things that aren't on the list, things that you
think should be there and aren't, things I haven't listed.
That'll be important.
It'll be an indication that there are things important to you that I haven't included.
As I go down the list, you may also note peculiar emphases and make a mental note of those too
as I go down the list.
Those are an indication that your priorities are different than mine.
Who'd expect anything different?
So here, then, is just a list of good things in a life, accomplishment, love, fun, money,
a fulfilling sex life, a good job, children, long life, travel, recognition, respect, meaningful
work, a nice car, freedom, fame, a good education, a big house, vacations in the Bahamas, contentment,
leisure, enjoyment, happiness, spirituality, contribution to something outside oneself,
friendship, entertainment, safety, intelligence, recreation, honesty, adventure, romance, creativity,
knowledge, wisdom, generosity, self-discipline, talent, good health.
This list is intended as a list just of life's goods.
These are all intended to be things that are positive.
If you were handed a questionnaire with such a list and the question, would you like this
to be in your life, the idea is that you'd write yes on every line.
Now, that list might serve as a start.
A real portrait of your priorities for your own life would be this kind of list, but changed
and structured in certain ways.
Now, I'm going to talk as if you were really manipulating a physical list.
I think this is an extremely valuable thing to do, that it's worth sitting down with pencil
on paper and actually doing it.
It may well show you things about your own values that you're not aware of.
The conceptual points that I'm going to make, however, can be made in just imagining that
you're manipulating this kind of list.
One problem with my starter list is that it may be far from complete.
There are undoubtedly many wonderful things that I've left out.
In constructing your own list, you'll want to add those.
That's why I told you to look for gaps.
The second problem with the list is it doesn't yet exhibit conceptual structure to the extent
we need.
It's just a list.
The starter list, for example, is bound to be redundant.
There are three items that I gave on the list just now.
Respect, recognition, and fame.
Now, even if those aren't quite the same, respect, recognition, and fame, they belong
in the same category.
In carving out your priorities, you might want to have a basic category with subcategories
under it.
To me, in this case, recognition seems the better general category.
Respect is an important subcategory.
Fame might be nice, but it's more an ideal extreme than a really important part.
So, if you start with this kind of list, if you fill in the important parts that have
been left out, if you then start massaging it into major subgroupings, it'll start to
reveal its own structure, except, of course, it's not the list's structure, it's your
structure.
It's the structure of your priorities.
When you can separate items on the list into major groupings, you've taken a major step
toward really understanding this crucial question of what it is you value.
My list, for example, has these kinds of categories.
Has a category called love, under which I've got friendship, and romance.
Got a category called recognition, under which I've got respect and fame.
Got a category called talent, under which I've got intelligence and creativity.
Now those, of course, are just my categories.
I'm not trying to make them yours, but there are, I guarantee you, general categories of
things you value.
And with a pencil and a piece of paper and a little time, you can make those explicit.
Some of the things on the initial list are abstract concepts of things that are good
in life, like love, respect, creativity.
Those are pretty abstract.
Some of the things I gave you on the initial list are examples of quite concrete things
desired.
A nice car, a big house, vacations in the Bahamas.
I think it's important to include concrete realities as well as abstract ideals on this
kind of list.
As I'll argue later, the concrete examples can be very important.
But they should be marked as such, marked as concrete examples.
So for example, you might have a category like this when you massage the items on the
list into significant categories.
You might have a category of leisure under which entertainment and recreation are subcategories,
and then you list a concrete example, vacations in the Bahamas.
Let me also add a warning about the initial list.
There are some dangerous categories on the list because there are some dangerously vague
categories on the list.
The vaguest of all, perhaps, is this one, happiness.
For our purposes, that category is simply going to be too vague.
Happiness is perhaps just a name for getting what you want, whatever it is you want.
So you haven't learned anything when you've learned that you want happiness, if it's
just a name for getting whatever it is you want.
What we need is something far more specific.
What we need to know on this kind of list of priorities is precisely what it is that
would make you happy.
One thing that's very interesting when you try to do this with a list is that it ends
up untidy.
In particular, there are categories that belong under several major headings or that appear
under several major headings.
What that means is that there may be categories of good or categories of good things which
include aspects of different kinds or even examples of concrete goods which instantiate
several different abstract categories.
Consider travel, for example.
Is that something desirable on its own, or is it part of recreation, or is it part of
education, or is it part of both?
Most people, unfortunately, live their lives without ever trying to figure out what it
is they value, without ever even asking what it is they're aiming for.
So they make it a job without knowing whether that's what they really want to do.
They may become entangled in a variety of projects by chance without really knowing,
without really asking whether those projects represent what they really want to do with
their time.
They may meet people and fall in love and get married and have children without ever
thinking what they're doing all this for.
And then they die.
That seems more than a little short-sighted.
The alternative is to figure out what you do want your life to look like, and it can
start at any point in your life.
There's no reason not to approach this kind of question with the same simple, calculating
intelligence that you use when you're balancing your checkbook.
I'm going to push this even a little further.
Once you have this list of important categories, so you can imagine having different categories
of value, you've taken a list of good things in life, you've filled in the gaps, you've
added things that are missing, once you've massaged that into various important subcategories
of things you value, then you can focus on which of these are the most important.
So consider, for example, just these three categories, love and recognition and talent.
Which of these is the most important to you?
The crudest test for this kind of ranking is the one that Plato uses in the dialogue,
the Philebus.
If you could have only one of these things, this is the Platonic test, if you could have
only one of these things, which would it be?
Would you go for a life that has love, even if it has no talent and no recognition?
Would you go for a life with recognition?
Even if that entailed a sacrifice of real love, and even if it was at base without talent?
Or would you go for a life of developed talent, even if it had to go unrecognized, and even
if it was developed at a sacrifice in human contact?
The crudity of this test, of course, is that it makes our choice an all or nothing choice.
There's a less crude alternative.
A less crude test is to consider a life as allowing a certain range of investment in
different values.
So in order to do this kind of a test of the relative importance of different things to
yourself, think of yourself as having 100 value points.
You've got 100 value points to put in those areas you value most.
So say if you had 100 points to distribute between love in your life, between recognition
and talent, where would you invest those points?
Where would you put those points?
Would you allot 60 points for love, perhaps, with 30 for talent and 10 for recognition?
Or is recognition more important than that?
Is it important enough to sacrifice some love?
Is it important enough to sacrifice some real talent?
If you do that, if you decide how you're going to lot those points, and if you do that across
the list, 100 points of importance across the list of values, with allotted points,
a categorized list can come alive as a vivid illustration of the things you really value
and how much you really value them.
And if it's done honestly, it can also surprise you.
Now to this point, we have talked, we have treated all values as if they could stand
side by side, as if we could choose between one aspect of value and another, assigning
points individually to those things that we valued most.
But in the end, the picture of any set of values is going to be more complicated than
that.
Some things, some genuinely desirable things, are desirable only because they're ways of
getting other things.
A prime example is money.
If you ask people what it is they want out of life, at least part of the answer will
often be money.
And the strange thing about that is that nobody, or at least nobody sane, could possibly want
money for its own sake.
Here's a thought experiment.
Suppose I were to tell you that I was about to hand you an envelope containing exactly
$20 million.
That money is to be yours, tax-free, on just one condition.
The condition is that you can never use it.
You can never spend it.
You can never transfer it.
You can't give it away.
You can't even allow it to be stolen.
The one condition, in fact, is all you can do with your $20 million is keep it in a box
at home and count it.
Indeed, part of the agreement is you can't even let anyone else know that you have it.
Now, the point should be clear.
With this kind of limitation, $20 million loses its value entirely.
It becomes a mere pile of green paper.
It's useful only for secret counting.
So money is a clear example.
It is, in fact, Aristotle's example of something that is a value only instrumentally.
It has no intrinsic value.
It only has instrumental value.
It's a value only instrumentally.
Money is a value because of the other things you can do with it.
It can give you the freedom to travel, perhaps.
It can give you a sense of security.
It can give you the ability to be generous.
Money has, then, no intrinsic value.
Its value is merely as an instrument, merely as a means.
So why do so many people say money when they're asked what it is that they really want?
A generous answer would be to say that maybe they recognize the range of things for which
money can be used.
They want it because of the things that it can afford them.
A less generous answer is that perhaps many people don't ever think about what's truly
valuable in a life, even in their own life.
And they say money as a kind of, for lack of any deeper answer.
Maybe it's an interim answer, a default response.
They're just postponing the real question of what it is they really want.
When they get the money, then they'll figure this out.
All of this is an exercise in establishing what it is that's really a value in a life.
Here just what's really valuable to you in your own life.
Here are three reasons why establishing what your life values really are is so important.
The first one can be put like this.
Be careful what you want because you just might get it.
One thing that happens in people's lives is that they work for years to get a certain
thing, to get a job, a position, a house in the suburbs after decades of effort and frustration.
They finally achieve their goal and yet they end up with a question.
Is that all there is?
That story is as tragic as it is common.
It reads like the story of someone who aimed too low.
Better perhaps to aim high and miss the mark than to pick a set of values that are all
too achievable and all too disappointing when they're actually achieved.
That's one reason to take the prioritization of your own values seriously.
A second reason for close value examination is this.
People sometimes seem to think they want something.
They tend to the point of devoting all their efforts toward that thing and yet they act
in a very peculiar way when they actually get it.
So people sometimes spend immense amounts of effort.
They make enormous sacrifices in order to get something which in the end they act as if
they don't really want.
That should give a serious pause.
The whole trajectory of life for a rock star, for example, or a movie star is to seek fame.
The whole name of the game is notoriety.
The whole idea is for everyone to know your name, to seek your autograph.
The whole idea is to get your picture on the cover of every tabloid.
And yet a lot of rock stars and movie stars, once they've achieved this kind of fame, do
something very peculiar.
They build big estates with very high walls and they hire people to guard their privacy.
But isn't privacy precisely the opposite of notoriety?
Could it be that these people live their lives so as to maximize something, public exposure,
which wasn't in the end, what they really wanted?
A final point is that people need to examine what it is they really value because they
may neglect the easy routes to what it is that they really want.
In talking about putting together a list of priorities, I said that concrete examples
should be on the list and this is why.
Consider the prospect of lots of money.
Now admittedly, that's going to take a great deal of work to amass.
But having a lot of money would be great, right?
Now picture to yourself exactly what you would do with each day once you became filthy rich.
Try to paint the picture in the most concrete terms possible of what you do when you are
filthy rich, what you do with a particular day.
So today's Wednesday and you're worth $120 million.
What do you want today to be like?
You wake up, you've got $120 million, you can do anything.
What would you do?
Go for a jog, take a swim in the ocean, take some time to play badminton with the kids,
go for a walk in the woods.
The point is that you can do all of these things without $120 million.
You can do all of those things for free or nearly free.
If you can picture what you would do with all that money, it may be possible to get
what you are really after without the years of work and pain and effort.
It would be silly to make a great deal of money so that you could relax by going fishing.
You can relax by going fishing with almost no money at all.
Some things are valuable because they are means to other things.
Those are the instrumental goods.
Some things are valuable not as means, strictly speaking, but as prerequisites for other things.
And here we're still talking about the structure of things on this list of things you value.
Health and liberty are like this.
There's a phrase that used to appear in a geritol ad.
It went, I figure if we've got our health, we've got just about everything.
And that's clearly not true.
One can have one's health and have almost nothing else at all.
What is true is not that if you have your health, you have just about everything, but
that if you don't have your health, there's a lot you don't have.
You don't have the ability to appreciate everything else, perhaps, or the ability to enjoy a rich
family life or rewarding work and recognition.
So it's not that good health gives you everything else of value, but it is a prerequisite for
just about everything else.
It's something you need in order to appreciate everything else.
So it's not that if you've got your health, you've got just about everything, it's that
if you don't have your health, you have just about nothing.
That's what I'm calling a prerequisite good.
The same would hold for freedom, to the extent that you're unfree, you're unfree to seek
what you value.
So freedom is less something to be sought for its own sake than necessary prerequisite
for seeking everything else.
It's in a sense a transparent good.
It's a fundamentally transparent good because what makes it good is the things that you
get with it that you cannot achieve without it, that you cannot access without it.
It's a transparent good, but a fundamentally necessary good for the possibility of obtaining
any other.
And life itself is a value like this.
What's wrong with murder is not that it hurts so much.
You can cause great pain without killing someone.
And you can kill someone with almost no pain at all.
What's wrong with murder is that it's depriving someone of everything of value in their lives
by depriving them of life itself.
And freedom is like that too.
What's wrong with slavery is not just the physical degradation, not just the endless
work and not just the whippings.
What's wrong with slavery is it's the denial of this most basic of goods, the good of freedom.
Without freedom, you can't choose a life or build a life around one's choice of values.
In the Greek tradition, in Plato and Aristotle, for example, the effort of axiology is to
isolate the good as if it were a single thing.
And this is a compelling picture of what a structure of values could be like, a picture
with a single highest good toward which all other goods are mere prerequisites or necessary
instrumental means.
That would be a picture of one single greatest good, all other goods are steps up the ladder
toward that good.
In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle offers a proof that all goods can't be instrumental.
All goods can't be means.
But in the same passage, he seems to use that proof as support for the claim that there
has to be a single highest good.
Here's the quote from Aristotle.
Now, if of things we do, there is an end which we wish for its own sake, whereas the other
things we wish for the sake of this end, and if we do not choose everything for the sake
of something else, for in this manner the process will go on infinitely and our desire
will be empty in vain, then clearly this end would be the good and the highest good.
Now, I think there is something incoherent about the notion of all values being instrumental
values.
So Aristotle's first point seems right.
But I'm dubious about a move from that, that not all values can be instrumental values
to the assumption of a single highest good.
And the fact that all values can't be purely instrumental, it follows that some values
must be at least partially intrinsic, that at least some things must have an intrinsic
value, a value in themselves.
At least some things must have an intrinsic value beyond what they lead to.
But it by no means follows that there must be then a single non-instrumental good.
And by no means follows that there must be one monolithic source of value called the good.
Let me illustrate the point by going back to the list of values.
If you carefully work out your priorities, I expect that you'll find a map in which a
variety of things have intrinsic value, with a range of other goods in position as instrumental
means and necessary prerequisites.
That's what my map of values looks like.
It would be a rare life, I think, and perhaps even a dangerous one that took one and only
one thing to be of ultimate value.
The good things in life, life's goods, are too many and too various for that.
In the next lecture, I will focus on another question about lives, about whether human
life has a cash value.
