Lecture 8 – The Cash Value of a Life
The Pinto was a car that the Ford Motor Company manufactured from 1971 to 1980.
It was manufactured when Lee Iacocca was head of production, and it was thought of
the Pinto was thought of as Lee's car.
Iacocca wanted a car that would outdo the competition, with Volkswagen as the major
target, but also increasing Japanese imports.
It generally takes about 43 months to put a car into production.
Ford took 25 months to develop the Pinto, and Iacocca's specifications were that
the Pinto wasn't to weigh an ounce over 2,000 pounds, and it wasn't to cost a penny
over 2,000 dollars.
The Pinto had a rear-mounted gas tank that was an invitation to disaster.
If a Pinto was hit from the rear at 30 miles an hour, the rear end of the car buckled up
to the back seat.
In such a collision, the gas tank would be bashed against differential housing, which
had four sharp protruding points that would gash holes in the gas tank and spill out the
gas.
With a spark from anything, including scraping metal, that gas would burst into flame.
That was if it was hit at 30 miles an hour.
If the car was hit at more than 40 miles an hour, there was a very good chance that the
doors would be jammed and the passengers would burn to death.
The topic of the last lecture was life's priorities.
In this lecture, I want to use the Pinto story to raise another value question regarding
lives, a question regarding the value of a life.
At least 500 burn deaths resulted from the Pinto gas tank placement.
A number of those resulted in lawsuits against Ford, and it was in the course of those lawsuits
that the details I'm going to talk about came out.
In pre-production planning, there was a different placement for the gas tank that was considered.
That other placement that was considered was the placement that Ford used in the Capri,
and in that placement, the gas tank writes not behind the rear axle and differential,
but on top of it.
That other placement was so successful that Ford used it in an experimental safety vehicle,
and that vehicle withstood rear-end impacts of 60 miles per hour with none of the Pinto
problems.
So why didn't they use that design, the gas tank on top of the differential design?
Why didn't they use that in the Pinto?
The answer appears to be trunk space.
As one Ford engineer said later, and this is a quote, you missed the point entirely.
You see, safety isn't the issue.
Trunk space is.
You have no idea how stiff the competition is over trunk space.
Do you realize that if we put a Capri-type tank in the Pinto, you could only get one
set of golf clubs in the trunk?
It also turned out that there were ways to modify the Pinto so as to avoid the collision
problem.
Ford knew that they could install a fire prevention device in the gas tank.
It would have saved hundreds of burn deaths, but it would have cost $11 per car.
And that, of course, threatened Iacocca's goal of not an ounce over 2,000 pounds and
not a cent over $2,000.
So why didn't Ford go for the $11 fix?
There was an $11 fix that would have avoided this problem.
Why didn't they go for the $11 fix?
This is where we get to the core of what I want to talk about.
Ford didn't do that because they calculated that it wasn't going to be cost effective.
Their decision was based on a cost-benefit analysis.
The core idea of cost-benefit analysis is simple.
You have alternative possible courses of action.
What you do is you figure out how much each course of action is going to cost you and how
much benefit it'll bring.
And the alternative that has the greatest benefit with the least cost is the rational
one to take.
In decision theory, this is almost always done using probabilities.
It's rare that a choice is guaranteed to produce this consequence with no possibility of an
alternative outcome.
Much more often, you know the likely consequences of each of your alternative courses of action.
You know maybe that an alternative has a 90% probability of producing a certain result.
So when this is done in decision theory, it's almost always done with probabilities.
Let me give you a simple example of a cost-benefit analysis.
Should I buy a lottery ticket or not?
Compare the two options.
My two options here are buying the ticket or not buying the ticket.
I want to know the probabilities of the outcomes on each side and I want to know how I add
them up.
So take one option.
One option is not to buy the ticket.
Suppose I don't buy it, then the dollar stays in my pocket for further use.
There's a 100% chance or pretty close that that dollar will stay in my pocket.
So we calculate by multiplying the 100% probability times the $1 payoff and we get what economists
call the expected utility of that course of action, the expected utility of not buying
the ticket.
The expected utility is 100% probability times the dollar.
The expected utility of not buying the ticket is, surprise, $1.
That's one course of action.
Now suppose I do buy the lottery ticket.
Today, as I speak, the New York Lotto has a first prize of $11 million.
The secondary prizes aren't significant enough to include.
$11 million.
The game is to pick six numbers out of 59.
That makes the odds of winning the first prize, one in 45 million.
And that's without calculating the probabilities of two people having to split the prize because
they picked the same numbers.
So let's say the probabilities of getting the $11 million are one in 45 million.
You get two sets of six numbers for a dollar.
So what's the expected utility of your Lotto dollar?
It's going to be two over 45 million.
That's the chances with two choices of six numbers of winning the first prize times the
value of the first prize.
It's going to be two over 45 million times $11 million.
If you work that out, the expected utility comes to 48 cents.
So the cost benefit analysis says that buying the ticket gives me an expected utility of
48 cents.
Not buying the ticket gives me an expected utility of a dollar.
The economically rational thing to do is to maximize expected utility.
So the rational thing to do on this analysis is not to buy the lottery ticket.
Now that's a simple example, but the basic principles are all there.
That's the kind of analysis that Ford did in deciding whether to spend $11 on each car
in order to install a gas tank fire extinguisher.
On Ford's estimates, the expected benefit of installing the device gave an expected
benefit of $49.5 million.
I'll talk about how Ford arrived at this figure in a minute.
So they're considering installing the tank.
The potential benefit is $49.5 million, but they made a lot of Pintos.
The cost of putting an extinguisher in each of those they made at $11 per car spread over
the whole run would come to $137 million.
So we're talking, or Ford was talking about a potential benefit of only $49.5 million,
talking about a potential cost of $137 million.
So the potential costs outweigh the potential benefits.
That was the simple reasoning involved.
I said we'd talk about in a minute how the benefits were calculated.
Okay, so how exactly did they calculate the benefits that got weighed by the, outweighed
by the $137 million cost?
Those benefits, after all, included preventing people from dying.
They calculated that without the $11 extinguisher, there'd be 2,100 more burned vehicles.
There'd be 180 serious burn injuries in those accidents, and there'd be 180 burn deaths
that there wouldn't be without the extinguisher.
The burn injuries, they estimated at $67,000 for each case.
And what about the lives lost?
How exactly do you calculate that?
In order to do this kind of calculation, you have to plug in the value for what is lost
when someone burns in a fiery car crash.
So what value did Ford use in their cost-benefit analysis as the value of a human life?
What value, well, what value would you put on your life?
The estimate that Ford used at the time for each life lost was $200,000.
They weren't solely to blame for that.
Their figure was only slightly less than the figure of $200,725 for a human life that
was used in a 1972 government report from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Now that seems really horrible to set the value of a human life at a monetary figure
of $200,000.
But I don't think it's just the amount of money that's horrible.
The same thought seems appropriate given any particular monetary figure, $2 million, $20
million, $200 million.
This is a life that we're talking about.
It's the idea of putting a literal price on human life that seems repugnant, not the
particular figure chosen in dollars and cents.
Okay, so what is the value of a human life?
Many people are tempted to give this as an answer, that each life is of infinite value.
I think that response is an understandable reaction in the face of cases like this, that
the problem is they put $200,000 on a life, even if they'd put $2 million on a life, it's
a life we're talking about, and the answer is that each life is of infinite value.
So I think that's an understandable reaction, but it can't be right.
This follows from some simple arithmetic regarding infinity.
Infinity plus infinity gives you infinity, nothing more or nothing less.
Any finite number times infinity gives you precisely the same amount, infinity.
So if it were true that every human life were of infinite value, it would follow by pure
arithmetic that any single life would be of precisely the same value as any finite number
of human lives, because infinity is the same as any finite number times infinity.
So on that kind of reasoning, the loss of a million human lives would be of precisely
the same value as the loss of just one.
That can't be right.
Consider a thought experiment.
Suppose we were forced to choose between a course of action in which someone dies, in
which we lose a single human life, we're forced to choose between that and a course
of action in which most people on Earth die, in which we lose the great majority of lives
on Earth.
If we have to choose, should we choose the option in which one person dies or the option
in which billions die?
If it were literally true that all lives were of infinite value, that decision would be
arbitrary.
We might as well flip a coin.
Here's another argument that the infinite value claim can't be right.
Where every human life of infinite value than any two lives would be of precisely the same
value.
I don't think we really believe that either.
Consider another thought experiment.
Suppose we can save only one of two lives, the life of a healthy 18-year-old or the life
of a healthy 80-year-old.
We can only save one of these two lives, which life should we save?
The universal intuition, I think, given only this information, is that it's the 18-year-old
we should save, even at the cost if necessary of losing the 80-year-old.
That certainly seems better than saving the 80-year-old at the cost of sacrificing the
18-year-old.
The conclusion is, once again, that the life of every person can't be of infinite value
because every life doesn't even seem to be of equal value.
Step back a minute.
Maybe that second argument is inadequate.
Maybe that comparison of the 18-year-old and the 80-year-old doesn't really show that all
human lives are of equal value.
We might say in clarification, we might say, no, human lives are of equal value if they're
considered as a whole.
In that case, were we given a choice between saving a person A or a person B and we knew
nothing more, there would seem to be no grounds for choice.
That seems right.
What distinguishes this case is that we're not saving whole lives but partial lives.
The 18-year-old might live to be 80.
In that case, when we save his life, we're saving 62 years of life.
The 80-year-old might live to be 85, in which case we're saving only five years of life.
The argument is maybe that was an unhelpful case because we're not really choosing between
the amount of years that we're saving and by saving the 18-year-old, we're saving 62
years of life and saving the 80-year-old, we're only saving five.
That seems right, but it clearly qualifies any claim that human lives are of equal value.
If we still claim that lives are of equal value, we have to concede that lives are not
of equal value at every point.
The longer one lives, the more rational it would be to sacrifice the life that remains
for that which remains in a younger life.
There may still be problems in the idea that every life is of equal value.
What if our thought experiment involves this kind of trade-off?
Here's another trade-off between lives.
Suppose our thought experiment involved this kind of trade-off, saving a life that's
say, doomed to pain and misery, or saving a life that's designed for far better things.
What if we faced a trade-off between A, saving the life of a drug-addicted pimp, and B, saving
the life of a promising young cancer researcher?
Isn't it rational here too, if a choice is forced, to save the second life at the cost
of the first?
There's a typical response, a typical response is that we can't know the true value of the
lives at issue.
But I think that skepticism regarding our knowledge is really a distraction here.
What we're after is the conceptual point.
Suppose you could know all about two lives.
One's a horrible life of pain and degradation, as horrible as you can imagine it.
Another is a life of joy and virtue and accomplishment, and if only one life could be saved, wouldn't
it be the life of pain that you'd let go?
There is still a way of salvaging the hypothesis that lives have equal value.
When we're considering some hypothetical sacrifice case, a life of pain and humiliation versus
a life of joy and achievement, say, you could argue that what's really doing the work here
is not the value, a greater value placed on one life rather than another.
What's really doing the work is the value we place on other things.
See what we're saying is not that one life is more valuable than another, but that pain
is worse than joy, that achievement is better than humiliation.
If you consider them purely as lives, we could still say the lives at stake are equal, even
though they're contents or not.
Now, I'm not so sure about that.
That approach asks us to separate considerations of lives as lives from considerations of them
in terms of their content.
Their joys and their miseries, for example, their promise for others or their threat.
The notion of my life somehow abstracted from its content doesn't make much sense to me.
It seems to me that our lives are what they are because they have the content that they
do.
They would thus seem to have value they do because of their content, and that would again
force us to conclude that in any real, contentful sense, lives may not be of equal value.
Here's where I think this leaves us.
It can't literally be true that lives are of an infinite value, and the conviction that
lives are of equal value can be defended only if it's shrunk, if that claim is shrunk to
something like this, that the mere fact that one life is the life of person A and the other
is the life of person B, that can't itself make one life of more value than another.
And that seems right.
It falls under a general concept in ethics, a concept we've seen in Kant that appears
throughout ethics, and that's the concept of universalizability.
The core idea of universalizability is this.
If something is wrong for one person to do in a particular context, it must be wrong
for another person to do in the same context.
Here's a similar principle, the fact that one life is an issue is mine, that one life
an issue is mine, and that another life an issue is yours, that can't spell a difference
in value because every life is someone's.
It's only in that sense that we found a defensible claim that all lives are of equal value.
Every life also has a particular content in terms of consciousness and unconsciousness,
pleasure and pain, promise and social threat, and those things are different in value.
This is better than unconsciousness, pleasure is better than pain, social promise is better
than criminal threat.
In terms of their content, we have to face the fact that the value of human lives may
be quite unequal.
Now here's the peculiarity, all of that chain of reasoning seems to leave us with a conclusion
that is at odds with our first reaction to the Pinto case.
We can't defend the claim that all lives have infinite value, and in any contentful sense
we can't even defend the claim that all lives have equal value.
And yet there does seem to be something valid in our initial reaction of revulsion regarding
a calculation like the Ford Motor Company.
So what is it that's particularly horrible about that calculation?
Notice what's repugnant is not the idea that lives have values, even unequal values, but
the idea of putting a monetary value on a life, of value in terms of money.
What that may show us is not that lives are of infinite monetary value, whatever that would
mean, but that the values at stake simply can't be compared, they are incommensurable.
Money qualifies as one kind of value, life qualifies as a very different kind of value.
Maybe what's repugnant is a formula that treats them as if they were the same kind of value.
So let me go back to the cost-benefit analysis.
The decision of the Ford Motor Company is often misrepresented, I think.
Despite appearances, their calculation doesn't have to be interpreted as putting a particular
monetary value on human life.
What the company was actually calculating was the likelihood of being successfully sued
and being successfully sued for how much in the case of accidents stemming from the
design of the Pinto's gas tank.
That other figure, the figure of $200,725 from the National Highway Safety Administration,
was in fact largely based on expected earnings through the rest of a life.
How big a paycheck you're going to bring in over the years that remain, and that calculation
is one that's often used in legal cases.
Now if you look at it that way, the estimate that was involved in Ford's cost-benefit
analysis is not strictly speaking an estimate of the value of a human life.
It's merely an estimate of the average amount for which Ford could be sued in fatal accidents.
Unfortunately, that reinterpretation of Ford's calculation doesn't make him look a whole
lot better.
On that reading, what's wrong about the Ford decision is not that it put the wrong value
on human life, but that it didn't reflect a value for human life at all.
They were just counting dollars and just counting how much court cases would cost them.
There were real lives at stake, and their calculation was a calculation about money
from start to finish.
The hypothesis I'm suggesting is that this kind of calculation is repugnant because the
value of life is incommensurable with money.
What's at stake are two radically different and incomparable, incomparable types of value.
So is the value of human life incommensurable with just monetary values, or is the value
of human life incommensurable with other values too?
All of the thought experiments that I've given so far are ones in which we envisage
sacrificing one human life in order to save another, or in order to save multiple others.
That would be consistent with the possibility that the value of human life could only be
evaluated in terms of the value of human life.
If we're going to test the contrary possibility that maybe human life is not incommensurable
with all other values, we have to ask whether any plausible thought experiment could be
constructed in which it appeared rational to sacrifice human life for some other value.
One way to approach that question is in terms of another.
Is there anything that's worth dying for?
Most of us, I think, believe that there are things that are worth dying for.
But if we're asked what, the easiest case is one in which we envisage dying in order
to save another person's life, our child's life perhaps, or the life of someone we love.
Another case where the answer seems to be yes, there is something worth dying for is
a case in which by sacrificing our lives, we can save a number of other lives.
I've met men who were trained to fall on a live hand grenade drawn into their foxhole
in order to save a greater number of men around them.
The idea is that their body will absorb the blow and the shrapnel, saving the lives of
their fellow soldiers.
I've even met one man.
His name was Nephi Schwab, who in World War II actually did fall onto a grenade in order
to save his companions.
Nephi was lucky.
That grenade didn't go off.
But those aren't the cases we want.
In those cases, one life is traded for another, or one life is sacrificed for many.
There are still lives that are being compared, and so the currency remains the same.
The question that's important for our exploration here is whether there's something other than
another life that's worth dying for.
Is there anything worth dying for?
An affirmative answer would also seem to be justified in cases where the sacrifice of
a single life might save a great deal of pain for others.
Maybe the sacrifice of a life, although it wouldn't actually prevent deaths, could end
a campaign of terror and torture.
What if the sacrifice of one life could make a hundred lives, or a thousand lives, or ten
thousand lives, livable?
If such a sacrifice would be justified, life doesn't have a value apart from all other
values.
It's not genuinely incommensurable with all other values.
Perhaps an even stronger case can be made in the name of justice.
If you were able, by the sacrifice of your life, to instantly rectify the injustices
of the world, worldwide inequity and distribution of basic needs, if you're able to end injustices
of oppression and exploitation, to wipe out the injustice of racism, wouldn't one regard
that sacrifice as ethically justified?
What about freedom?
Let me press the question still further.
Are there other things worth dying for?
We've got preventing others' pain, we've got justice, we may have freedom.
Are there other things worth dying for?
Some people have thought so.
There have been those who thought that the conquest of Everest justified the risk of
death.
Now, I think there have quite possibly been some people who thought that the accomplishment
of reaching the top might justify even a certainty of death on the way down.
Now, perhaps there are other abstract values for which this could be felt.
Perhaps there are aspects of scientific knowledge or depths of understanding regarding the universe
or mathematical insights, the grasp of which are worth dying for.
Some people have thought so.
I tend to align myself with those who have held these kinds of values.
But I don't know how to prove that those things are that valuable.
I don't even know how to elicit imaginative sympathy for that kind of view.
And I think I'd understand if someone thought such a view was itself revolting.
What?
A mathematical discovery more valuable than a human life?
Okay, I want to end with a major qualification in considering whether there are things worth
dying for.
What we've really pictured is the case of an individual who decides to accept their
own death for the sake of something else they hold to be of higher value.
The necessary qualification is that's a quite different matter to consider the sacrifice
of your own life for certain goals than to consider the sacrifice of another person's
life.
We can admire the man who struggles to conquer a mountain even when he knows he does so at
the cost of his own life, or at least we can admire certain character traits of such
a man.
But we feel quite differently about a man who sacrifices the life of a companion, justifying
it later with a claim that the abstract accomplishment at issue overshadows the loss of the companion's
life.
In the case of sacrificing another person's life, there's something more than life that's
being, more than that life that's being sacrificed.
When he decides to sacrifice his companion's life in order to reach the top of Everest,
say, it's not merely the companion's life that's lost, it's also his companion's right
to decide his own fate that's sacrificed.
So the violation, then, is not merely the loss of a life.
The violation is also a violation of quite fundamental rights.
The companion had a right to sacrifice his own life, but his fellow climber didn't have
the right to make that choice for him.
There may well be cases in which we think something is of such great value that we are
willing to sacrifice our lives for it.
The question as to whether something justifies the sacrifice of another life is harder, and
I think that question should be harder.
When thinking about sacrificing another life, the problem is that it's all too easy for
the fanatic to convince himself that the abstract values he happens to hold are of such magnitude
that they justify the loss of numerous lives and the trampling of people's right to shape
their own lives.
I can think of many historical cases in which people have trampled the most basic of rights
and have slaughtered scores in pursuit of some so-called greater good, some abstract
or political or religious ideal, the spread of God's word, or the defeat of communism,
or the purification of the Aryan race, or the glory of Allah, but I'm not sure I can
think of a single historical case in which such a slaughter was genuinely justified.
In the next lecture, I want to shift to a question of knowledge.
How do we know right from wrong?
