Lecture 10 Cultures and Values – Questions of Relativism
In the previous lecture, I talked about our ethical knowledge.
In this lecture, I want to raise a basic question regarding cultures and values.
Are ethical values culturally relative?
That seems to be a simple question, but it's not.
Within that apparently simple question, hide a number of different questions.
Any careful approach is going to have to disentangle those questions.
And that's the goal of both this lecture and the next.
Are ethical values culturally relative?
An affirmative answer to that question is ethical relativism, the claim that ethical
values are indeed relative to culture.
But as long as the phrase relative to goes un-clarified, what this gives us is not a
clear single claim, but a vague family of claims hidden in a fog of ambiguity.
When we penetrate the conceptual fog and carefully separate the questions, I think we find a
great deal of insight and truth in relativism.
And we also find some of the most dangerous ethical mistakes it's possible to make.
Let me begin with a form of relativism that I think is both one of the most interesting
and has the best shot at being true.
An action that is right in one culture may be wrong in another.
What's right and wrong varies from culture to culture.
Now I don't mean this merely as the claim that cultures disagree in their beliefs about
what's right and wrong.
I mean this is the claim that what's really right in one culture may really be wrong in
another.
Now I think that claim is true if it's understood in this sense that some things may be genuinely
right in one culture, or one historical epoch, and genuinely wrong in another.
The reason why this is true is because some issues of right and wrong hinge on culturally
and historically contingent factors.
Things can be wrong in one culture and not in another because other aspects of the culture
are different.
Now since this claim is merely that some things are wrong in one culture and right in another,
all I need is a few examples to show that it's true.
So let me try to give you some examples.
The philosopher Alastair McIntyre suggests the example of usury.
If you search among medieval manuscripts for the most heinous of medieval sins, you'll
find murder, adultery, blasphemy, and usury.
Medieval canon law reserves some of its strongest prohibitions and condemnations for this horrible
crime of usury.
Among the small number of offenses for which the Spanish Inquisition used torture to force
confessions were heresy, witchcraft, bigamy, and usury.
What is this horrible sin?
Usury is simply lending money at interest.
Not exorbitant interest in the sense of loan-sharking, but lending money at any interest at all.
So among the most strongly denounced vices of the medieval period then was the horrible
crime of lending money at interest.
What McIntyre suggests is that this wasn't merely a medieval moral mistake.
It wasn't that the Medevals were simply an error, thinking money lending to be evil in
ways that it wasn't and that it isn't.
What McIntyre suggests is that in the medieval context, usury wasn't merely thought to be
a vice, what he suggests is that in the medieval context, usury was a genuine vice.
Signorialism was the economic system of feudal society.
Signorialism is an economy based entirely on land ownership and a hierarchy of protection
and reciprocal allegiance.
At the head was the king.
Beneath him a hierarchy of nobles and lesser nobles.
Beneath them the seniors in their manor houses and their serfs.
The serfs were granted the use of the land and the seniors' protection in return for
the support, the economic support of the manor house and of the hierarchy above it.
The ideal of that senorial system is a self-contained and enclosed economy.
An economy that's stable and unchanging.
In the ideal of senorialism there are no imports or exports, there aren't any sales.
Senorialism knows no notion of economic growth.
Now in actual practice, of course, the system wasn't so pure, allowing for the possibility
of usury.
In the context of that kind of economy, McIntyre suggests, lending money at interest was a
genuine threat to social stability.
If a manor or a noble borrows money at interest, there will be no way to pay it back.
In that kind of economy, usury then is a genuine threat.
In that economic context, the idea is, usury is a genuine vice.
A capitalistic economy, in contrast, like ours, it is by definition based on the idea
of return on money, on interest on money.
So in this picture, the history of usury is not there for one in which we somehow came
to see that usury wasn't a vice at all, how silly of us.
The history is one of changing cultural circumstances.
It's because of different cultural circumstances, in this case a different economic culture,
that something that really is a vice in one context is not in another.
Let me also offer an anthropological example.
The great anthropologist Bronislav Malinowski described the social structure of the Trobriand
Islanders of Papua New Guinea in the early 20th century.
In the Trobriand Islands, children's relationships to their biological parents were quite different
from our own.
Malinowski claims, in fact, that the Trobriand Islanders were ignorant of the facts of conception.
A man was thought to open a woman so that an ancestor could grow in her again, but he
wasn't thought of as making any biological contribution.
The adult male who was considered next of kin to a Trobriand child was not the biological
father, but the mother's brother.
It was the mother's brother who, in essence, held the role of legal guardian in Trobriand
society.
It was the mother's brother who was held accountable for providing for the child and
for educating the child.
So your legal parents, in the Trobriand sense, were thus your biological mother and your
maternal uncle.
Your biological father's social role was much more informal and relaxed.
Your biological father was merely your mother's boyfriend.
So what Malinowski describes is a society in which there's a very different arrangement
for raising children.
We have no indication that it was any worse.
We have no indication that Trobriand children suffered in any way from such a structure.
And of course, children are not always well provided for in our system.
Now given this difference in cultural arrangements, there is a simple ethical matter that seems
to be culturally relative in precisely the sense that we're after.
As things are, here in contemporary America, I have very strong obligations regarding the
upbringing of my biological children, but I have fairly thin obligations regarding my
sister's children, regarding my nephews and nieces.
So I'm a good uncle if I send presents for birthdays and holidays.
But it would be odd if I were expected to say finance half of the schooling for my
nephews and nieces.
And note that it's not merely that I think my obligations are less stringent regarding
my nephews and nieces than regarding my own biological children.
My real obligations here and now really are less stringent regarding my nephews and nieces
than my own biological children.
But if I were a Trobriander in the society that Malinowski describes, on the other hand,
this stringency of obligations would be reversed.
It would be my sister's children toward whom I had the strongest obligations.
It would be my own biological children toward whom the obligation would be weaker.
Now here again it should be noted that it's not merely that I would think that the stringency
of my obligations would be different.
Were I a Trobriander, the obligations, the real obligations really would be reversed.
Were I a Trobriander, genuine parental responsibility would be different.
Simple cases like these are enough to show that our first form of relativism is true.
There are indeed some actions, the ethical status of which depends on cultural and historical
factors.
There are some things that are genuinely right in one context or a cultural or historical
context and genuinely wrong in another.
Unfortunately, this true and guarded claim is not the form in which relativism is usually
introduced.
Relativism is generally put forward as if we were speaking not merely of some values
but as if we were speaking of all values.
This is the claim of universal relativism that all values are culturally relative.
That there is no value that isn't merely a matter of one's culture.
Now in that absolute and universal form I think, relativism doesn't bring insight and
truth but it brings with it a blizzard of conceptual confusion.
And what I want to try to do is to disentangle some of those confusions.
There are three very different positions that tend to get tangled.
Despite the fact that these may sound alike, it's important to attend to the differences
between them.
The first position is descriptive relativism.
This is the claim that different cultures differ in their fundamental ethical beliefs.
It's the claim that what is believed to be right and wrong varies from culture to culture.
Now that position seems pretty obvious but in fact it has a number of complications that
we'll address in the next lecture.
The second position is ethical relativism proper.
The claim that an action that is morally right in one culture may be wrong in another.
This claim goes beyond mere matters of belief.
It's the philosophical claim that what's right in one culture is not only believed to be
wrong in another but really is wrong in another.
Everyone knows the distinction between belief and reality.
For example, whether it's believed that the earth is flat and whether it really is.
The question of whether there were historical periods in which it was believed that the
earth was flat, that's a very different matter from whether there were historical periods
in which the earth really was flat.
The analogy here is this.
Descriptive relativism is like the position that there were historical periods in which
it was believed that the world is flat.
Ethical relativism is like the position that there were historical periods in which it
really was flat, except of course we're talking about ethics.
So descriptive relativism is the position that moral beliefs differ from culture to culture.
Ethical relativism is the much more radical position than moral truth differs from culture
to culture.
And what I've argued for using the usury and the trobrian examples is a qualified form
of ethical relativism that some cases of what's right and wrong do vary from culture
to culture.
That doesn't of course show that all values are culturally relative.
But ethical relativism is usually put forward as that further unqualified claim.
It's usually put forward as universal relativism.
The claim that there are no universal moral truths.
That difference between qualified and unqualified claims will be of crucial importance to the
story I want to tell.
The third position in the tangle is prescriptive relativism.
Prescriptive relativism is the claim that it's wrong to condemn or pass judgment on
those with different cultural values.
In universal form it's the claim that it's always wrong to pass judgment on another culture.
And what we're dealing with then is three importantly different positions.
Prescriptive relativism is a descriptive claim about what's believed in different cultures.
Ethical relativism is a claim about what really is right and wrong in different cultures.
Prescriptive relativism is an ethical injunction not to pass judgment on other cultures.
One thing these have in common is that they sound alike.
That's why it's philosophically important to clarify their differences.
Another thing they have in common is that they tend to travel together as parts of a
single argument.
In the end, that's a bad argument and it's philosophically important to diffuse it.
The argument is often given as if it were a proof, a series of logical steps that prove
a conclusion, and it runs something like this.
Step one, different cultures differ in their fundamental ethical beliefs.
Step two, an action right in one culture may therefore be wrong in another culture.
There are no universal moral truths.
What's right and wrong varies from culture to culture.
Step three, it is therefore wrong to condemn or pass judgment on those with different ethical
values.
Now you'll note that the first step is descriptive relativism, a statement about beliefs.
Different cultures differ in their fundamental ethical beliefs.
The second step is presented as if it were derived from step one.
An action right in one culture may therefore be wrong in another culture.
That's ethical relativism presented in its full universal form.
There are no universal moral truths.
What's right and wrong varies from culture to culture.
The third step is treated as a deduction from the second and it is prescriptive relativism.
It's therefore wrong to condemn or pass judgment on those with different ethical values.
Now this is tricky and it will be important to attend to the details of the purported
proof.
So remember, step one, different cultures differ in fundamental ethical beliefs.
So step two, an action right in one culture may therefore be wrong in another.
There are no universal moral truths.
What's right and wrong varies from culture to culture.
Step three, it's therefore wrong to condemn or pass judgment on those with different ethical
values.
That argument is in the end a fallacious argument.
It's presented as if it were a proof but it doesn't meet the logical requirements of
genuine proof.
Its steps don't really follow.
It is, however, an argument with a long intellectual history.
Something like that standard argument can be found as far back as the work of Sextus
empiricus, writing about 200 AD.
Sextus empiricus is a skeptic.
Skepticism is revived in the Renaissance, most notably in the mid-1500s in the essays
of Michael de Montaigne.
Montaigne, like Sextus before him, starts with a catalogue, a blizzard of listed cultural
differences.
That's the first step, the descriptive relativism step, a listing of cultural differences.
Many of those seem funny today because Montaigne took them uncritically from everywhere, from
classical sources, from legends, and from travelers' tall tales.
So with a straight face, Montaigne tells us of people in the New Indies, he means America,
who raise and fatten spiders for food.
Quote, they cook them and prepare them with various sauces.
He tells of other nations in which our meats and foods are fatally poisonous.
He says, quote, there are countries where, except for his wife and children, no one speaks
to the king except through a tube.
Where people greet one another by putting their finger to the ground and then raising
it to heaven, where the men carry their burdens on their head, the women on their shoulders,
and where women piss standing men squatting, where they cook the body of the deceased and
then crush it until a sort of pulp is formed, which they mix with their wine and drink it.
From this litany of cultural differences, taken uncritically from sources solid and
unsolid, real and imagined, Montaigne draws the ethical relativism conclusion that custom
has no, no rational or ethical basis.
He says, quote, in short, to my way of thinking, there is nothing that custom will not or cannot
do.
And indeed, that we should be wary of the dictates of our own conscience, because that
is as much shaped by our culture as anything else.
Montaigne says, the laws of conscience, which we say are born of nature, are born of custom,
end quote.
The move from descriptive relativism to ethical relativism is also central to the work of
the Marquis de Sade.
De Sade's Justine alternates chapters of increasingly violent pornography with chapters in which
figures of authority outline how different cultures hold different beliefs so nothing
is really wrong.
So it's perfectly acceptable for two men to have sex with a woman at the same time.
Different cultures hold different beliefs so nothing is really wrong, so it's perfectly
acceptable to inflict pain on someone else in order to heighten one's own sexual pleasure.
Different cultures hold different beliefs so nothing is really wrong, so it's perfectly
acceptable to have an orgasm while watching people burn to death.
It is from De Sade, of course, that our term, sadism, comes.
Now, of course, the argument from descriptive relativism to ethical relativism doesn't
just appear in historical sources, it appears in philosophical conversations every day.
There's an important point at which one becomes aware of different ways of living.
One becomes aware that the pattern to which one's been acculturated isn't universally accepted
and probably shouldn't be.
That crucial realization is often expressed rightly or wrongly in a move like this, from
descriptive relativism to ethical relativism.
From different cultures have different values, no set of values is any better or worse than
any other and perhaps from there too it would be wrong to judge.
I think that anyone who has never been tempted by relativism in all of these forms has something
morally wrong with them.
They have never matured intellectually.
But I also think that anyone who remains satisfied with some of the relativistic positions we've
talked about also has something morally wrong with them.
They too haven't matured intellectually.
How good is the standard relativistic argument?
Let me remind you how the argument runs.
There are three steps in which what's offered is a proof, each of which is supposed to lead
logically to the next.
So step one, different cultures differ in their fundamental ethical beliefs.
Step two, so an action right in one culture may therefore be wrong in another, there are
no universal moral truths, what's right and wrong varies from culture to culture.
To step three, it's therefore wrong to condemn or pass judgment on those with different ethical
values.
Now when examined carefully it's clear that this argument is a bad one.
It's simply not the proof that it purports to be.
Let me outline three ways in which the argument fails.
Here's the first problem.
Step one is different cultures differ in fundamental ethical beliefs.
Step two concludes that there are therefore no universal moral truths.
In order for the argument to get even as far as that second step, the claim that there
are no universal moral truths, it isn't enough that there are some differences in fundamental
ethical beliefs.
In order to get to a conclusion that there are no moral truths across cultures, we would
at least need a premise that there is no ethical agreement that holds across cultures.
Is there that much ethical disagreement between cultures?
All of the classical sources, sex to Sympiricus, Montaine and the Marquis de Sade, all of them
offer a string of intriguing anecdotal stories about surprising cultural disagreements.
In order to establish an unqualified descriptive relativism however, one would have to show
that absolutely every ethical claim made in some culture is contradicted in some other
culture.
Are things that different?
Is there really a culture that believes, for example, that the ethical thing to do is to
kill children for sport?
Is there a culture that takes it as an ethical truth that one ought always to try to harm
oneself?
Or that we have an obligation to lie to each other whenever possible?
Is there a culture that prohibits the passing on of cultural traditions?
No.
There are no cultures that hold any of those things.
Indeed, it's not clear that any culture could hold such beliefs.
The cultures that we find across the globe are cultures that have had to survive and
perpetuate themselves.
Any culture that ate its own children couldn't self-perpetuate.
Any culture that had no presumption of truth telling couldn't pass on information.
Any culture that had an injunction against passing on cultural knowledge would be a culture
that was bent on its own destruction.
There's a sense then in which the argument doesn't even get off the ground.
We don't have reason to believe the unqualified descriptive relativism that would be necessary
to give us the unqualified ethical relativism that appears in step two.
That's one problem.
The argument would be fallacious, however, even if we were confident of an unqualified
descriptive relativism in the first step.
Because the first step is this.
Different cultures differ in fundamental ethical beliefs.
In the second step, it's concluded that there are therefore no universal moral truths.
It's a move from belief to truth.
The transition from the first step to the second is still a transition from supposed
facts about differences in ethical beliefs to the ethical claim that there are no universal
moral truths, that nothing is universally right or wrong across cultures.
The move from the first step to the second then is a move from facts about cultural beliefs
to a claim about ethics, about what really is right or wrong.
And that's precisely the kind of move from is to ought that is blocked by Hume.
Precisely the kind of move we saw to be illegitimate in the second lecture.
If value claims don't follow from factual claim, they don't follow from factual claims
about beliefs either.
So on that analysis, step two just doesn't follow from step one.
The move from step one to step two is also a move from statements about beliefs to statements
about how things really are.
But wait a minute.
It doesn't follow from the fact that different cultures disagree about whether the earth
is flat, that there's no geological fact of the matter.
It doesn't follow from the fact that different cultures disagree about whether infants inherit
characteristics from both parents, remember Malinowski's Trobriandas for example.
It doesn't follow from that that there are no biological facts regarding genetic inheritance.
And in precisely the same way, it doesn't follow from the descriptive fact that there
are cultural disagreements regarding ethics, that there's no ethical truth applicable across
cultures.
The move from disagreement in belief to claims regarding reality and dependent of belief,
that's as fallacious in the ethical case as it is in the others.
So the first problem is that step one doesn't hold in the universal form that would be required.
The second problem is that the move from step one to two would still be fallacious even
if it did.
A third problem is in the move from the second step to the third, from ethical relativism
to prescriptive relativism.
Step two is the claim that what's right and wrong varies from culture to culture, that
there are no universal moral truths.
Step three is the conclusion that it's therefore wrong to condemn or pass judgment on those
with different ethical values.
Now we have not established the universal ethical relativism of step two.
But even if we had, the move from step two to step three couldn't possibly be correct.
The claim in step two is that there are no universal moral truths, that nothing is universally
right or wrong.
The claim in step three is that there is something that is always wrong.
The act of passing judgment on those with different cultural values.
So far from step two leading to step three, those two claims cannot possibly be true together.
Far from supporting prescriptive relativism, ethical relativism contradicts it.
If it's always wrong to pass judgment on others, then there's something that's always wrong.
On the other hand, if nothing is universally right or wrong, it cannot be universally wrong
to pass judgment on another culture.
What I defended at the beginning of the lecture was a qualified rather than a universal form
of ethical relativism.
I defended the claim that there are some things, the ethical status of which genuinely differs
with cultural context.
Because I think that qualified claim is right, I also think a qualified form of prescriptive
relativism is right.
I think it's wrong to pass quick or precipitate judgment on those who have different values.
I think it's wrong to peremptorily try to make them conform to one's own.
The idea is be careful, given different cultural contexts, different values may be as valid
as one's own.
The whole topic of relativism seems to me to be a case in which people's standard motivations
are usually right, but their explicit formulations, the unqualified claims they actually make,
are almost always wrong.
In unqualified or universal form, both ethical and prescriptive relativism turn out to be
deeply contestable, and the argument that's standardly used to support them is a tissue
of fallacious reasoning.
In qualified form, on the other hand, ethical relativism seems right.
In qualified form, prescriptive relativism expresses a laudable motivation and an important
ethical principle.
It amounts to a plea for cultural sensitivity and a warning against precipitate judgments,
and that seems to me to be the right ethical attitude.
In the next lecture, I want to go deeper into descriptive relativism.
Just how different are ethical beliefs between cultures, and how fundamental are those differences?
