These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled Questions of Value, Part 2, Lecture 13, The Objective Side of
Value.
Are values purely a matter of subjectivity, or is there an objective side to value?
One way of putting the question I want to address in this lecture is this, are things
of value merely because they are valued by someone, or are there aspects of value that
go beyond that, objective aspects of value somehow independent of subjective valuation?
This is one of the issues that falls under the question, are values subjective?
But only one.
One of the claims people are making when they say that values are subjective is a claim
about ethical knowledge, about the epistemology of ethics, and we talked about that in a previous
lecture.
Another claim people are often making when they say that values are subjective is that
the claim that there are no universal values, that values are simply relative to culture,
and that too is an issue we've addressed in previous lectures.
Here the question is a question of the source of value.
Do things have value just because we value them, or is there something more to value?
Are the sources of value purely subjective, tied ultimately to people's subjective states,
or is there an objective side to value as well?
This lecture will turn on two major examples, so I'm going to outline the examples first
and then come back to them later.
The first is a magic button case.
Now like many philosophical cases, this is outrageously hypothetical.
Cases like this often tell us something about our concepts and do so by testing the extreme.
So here's the outrageous hypothetical case.
We now know enough about people and their brains to know that sensory inputs come along
nerves as electrochemical signals to the spinal cord and from there to the brain.
When you see something, what's involved is signals transmitted along your optic nerve
to your visual cortex.
When you hear something, when you feel something with your hands, our entire contact with the
outside world is via nerve impulses coming into the brain.
So suppose we took your brain and disentangled its incoming nerves.
Suppose we could keep your brain alive in a vat and hook up the nerve endings to a master
computer, a master computer that was able to feed you a series of impulses along those
nerves.
Now I told you it was outrageously hypothetical.
If you were a brain in a vat like this, you would think that you were running across a
beautiful mountain meadow.
But it would only be a series of impulses we were feeding you through your incoming nerve.
You would think you were performing a violin concert with masterful precision, but there
you'd be just a brain in a vat.
This philosophical example descends from Descartes' evil demon in the meditation.
It's nicely developed in Robert Nozick's anarchy state in Utopia, and it reappears
in the work of the philosopher Hilary Putnam.
It's too bad that neither Nozick nor Putnam patented the idea, since it was later used
as the central theme of the Matrix movie.
Now if we could hook someone up as a brain in a vat like that, with nerve impulses governed
by a master computer program, we could give them not just a single experience, we could
give them an entire life.
It would be a fake life, of course, but it would seem to them just like your life seems
to you now.
Now since we're fairly nice, we'd give them a fairly nice life.
Indeed, if we were after the utilitarian idea of the greatest good for the greatest number,
we'd be sure to give them the best subjective life we could.
I mean, the best life as felt from the inside.
So suppose now that we could do this.
Suppose we could do it not just for you, but for everyone in the world.
And suppose somehow we've also taken care of future generations.
Anyone that there would otherwise have been still comes into existence, bred in a test
tube, probably, and they're given their best possible life as a brain in a vat.
Now since all the lives are fake, we could have two people who are the world's most
famous violinist.
Or we could have 20 people who are simultaneously president of the United States, facing hard
choices but triumphant, overcoming obstacles and making the world a better place, hearing
the applause of millions.
Okay, now suppose there's a button here in front of you and me.
If you press that button, everyone in the world, and everyone there otherwise would
be, will instantly be made into a brain in a vat, living their best possible life.
The question in this case is, would you press that button?
The second example I want to use in this lecture is a contrast between two cases.
Consider first someone who takes pleasure in someone else's pleasure.
A parent, for example, who takes pleasure in the small pleasures of their child.
Or a friend who not only enjoys the movie, but enjoys the fact that you enjoy the movie.
Now contrast that with another case, a case in which someone takes pleasure in someone
else's pain.
A parent, for example, who takes pleasure in the small pains that their child receives.
Or a so-called friend who gleefully enjoys everything bad that happens to you.
In the case of parents, there really is a psychological disorder that falls roughly in the neighborhood.
It's called Munchausen syndrome by proxy.
Okay, those are the two examples that I want to put on hold.
The magic button case and the comparison of taking pleasure in pleasure and taking pleasure
in pain.
I want to leave them bubbling in the back of your brain and come back to them later.
What I want to argue here is that there is an objective side to value.
The subjective is, of course, a major and important part of value.
Pleasure and pain are important.
Our sense of injustice, our appreciation of beauty, the shiver of fear and the felt bonds
of love.
Pleasure and pain and injustice and beauty and fear and love are all things we feel.
They're part of our subjective experience.
The question is whether that's the whole of value.
Or whether there's an aspect of value beyond subjective experience.
And what I want to argue is that there is.
The question is whether there are things of intrinsic value.
Things valuable of themselves independently of how they are experienced, independently
even of the fact that they're experienced.
One of the most influential books in the 20th century, 20th century ethics, is Principia
Ethica written by G. E. Moore in 1903.
And in it, Moore offers the following test for intrinsic value.
This is a quote from Moore.
The method which must be employed in order to decide the question what things have intrinsic
value and in what degrees is this.
In order to arrive at a correct decision on the first part of the question, it's necessary
to consider what things are such that if they existed by themselves in absolute isolation,
we should yet judge their existence to be good.
And in order to decide upon the relative degrees of value of different things, we must similarly
consider that comparative value seems to attach, what comparative value seems to attach
to the isolated existence of each.
In order to figure out whether something is intrinsically valuable, valuable in itself
rather than dependent for its value on something else, imagine first a universe in which only
that thing exists and secondly a universe in which it does not.
Here in imagination, the relative value of those two universes, that's Moore's method
of absolute isolation.
You want to know whether something is intrinsically valuable, is valuable in itself.
You imagine a universe one in which only that thing exists, you imagine a universe two in
which it does not exist.
Then the question is, if you were a god, would you choose to create one of those universes
rather than the other?
Would you create universe one in which that thing exists or universe two in which it does
not?
Now, if universe one is better than the other or more worthy of creation, it must be because
of the intrinsic value of what it contains.
Since we've imagined it to contain only one thing at issue, that thing must be intrinsically
valuable.
If on the other hand, the choice between the two universes is a matter of total indifference,
then the thing at issue must not have any intrinsic value.
If the second universe is preferable to the first one, if a universe without the thing
is preferable to a universe with it, it must be that the thing at issue has negative value.
It's intrinsically bad.
Okay, that's the test.
The idea is to determine the intrinsic value of something by isolating it in thought.
Let me offer a first example of the test.
Now in this first case, I'll use something that's clearly a matter of subjectivity.
That's not objective value in the sense I eventually want to emphasize, but it does
give a feel for how Morris test is supposed to operate.
So the question in this first case, this first example of the method of isolation is, is pleasure
an intrinsically good thing?
In order to answer such a question using Morris test, we imagine first a universe with no
pleasure, no pain, a universe with no feeling at all.
This is a universe without consciousness, perhaps.
It's just empty planets orbiting unseen suns in the vacuum of space.
Imagine now a universe identical to the first, except that for a very short time, a minute
perhaps, a fragment of feeling appears.
Somehow for that single minute, this second universe contains a feeling of pleasure.
Okay, we've got two imagined universes.
Which of these imagined universes is better?
If you were a god with the ability to create only one, which one would you create?
The universe with no feeling, the universe identical to it with just one minute of pleasure.
If you're like most people, you find the second universe far preferable.
It has something of value that the first one lacks.
A universe with a momentary consciousness of pleasure is better than a universe without
it.
Indeed, it seems that such a universe is far better.
Even if that consciousness lasts for only a moment.
So pleasure, it appears, by Moore's test is intrinsically good.
In this first application, however, what we've tested for intrinsic value is something tied
conceptually to a consciousness or a subjectivity.
It's tied to a feeler, something that feels or a valuer or something that values.
It's therefore not enough to tell us whether there are things of value beyond that, beyond
subjectivity.
Now consider a second application of the test in which what is at issue are things of beauty.
Now I expect this to be controversial and it may not convince you.
I'm not worried.
I have some other arguments up my sleeve as well.
But here's the Morian argument.
Let me describe sunrise over the Grand Canyon.
As the sun rises over the edge of the Grand Canyon, the canyon glows in dusky reds and
startling oranges.
The sun climbs higher in a clear sky and the descending line of light dips deeper into
the canyon.
It awakens purples and shadowed blues.
What began as an atmospheric sliver of light, defined indistinctly with merely two-dimensional
shadows, broadens to a band with a symphony of contrasts that's fully three-dimensional
and gloriously solid.
Sunrise over the Grand Canyon is a thing of beauty.
Let me put it into Morris test.
Let me put it into the method of absolute isolation.
So once again, we consider in thought two universes.
The first universe I want you to imagine is one that has that kind of sunrise.
It also has sunsets that are bold across the evening skies, perhaps.
It has sharp white planets scattered across the purple night.
But that universe doesn't contain any people.
This universe I want you to imagine has glories of sunrises and sunsets, the sharp colors
and contrasts of planets, but no conscious beings at all.
It exists as a gorgeous universe unperceived.
Imagine now a second universe with none of this beauty.
It too has no consciousness, but maybe that's just as well.
The second universe contains none of the structure, none of the variety, and none of the brilliant
light of the first one.
It's a universe suffused with smudgy black clouds hung in a perpetual night.
That's a universe with nothing but smog in the dark.
No light.
No beauty.
Now the question is, is one of these universes better than the other?
If there could be only one of these, is there one that would be better?
Now personally, I think the answer is yes.
It's the first universe, filled with contrasts of light and color, filled with beauty.
I think that's the better universe.
Now if that's the correct verdict, and if our test is otherwise a plausible one, it
appears we do have something of value beyond valuers.
Even unperceived, certain kinds of beauty are of value.
If that's right, there's something to value beyond the subjective.
If that's right, there is an objective side to value.
Now I like that argument, but there are a lot of people who don't find it convincing,
and it may not convince you either.
So let me try another argument, that there is an objective side to value.
This is the magic button argument.
Consider the magic button I described at the beginning of the lecture.
The way we set this up, pressing that button will convert us and all our descendants into
brains in vats, living blissful pseudo-lives.
Now of course if you press the button, it wouldn't instantly be obvious.
If we are giving you the best possible simulated life, it won't be one in which you know you
were living such a life.
So if you pressed the button and it worked, something like this might happen.
You pressed the button.
Oh look, I pressed the button and nothing happened.
Oh well, what?
I won the lottery?
Hey, that's great.
And they've nominated me for the Nobel Peace Prize?
Well I do remember doing all that work in Uganda.
Okay, so consider the button that will convert us all and our descendants into brains in vats,
living blissful pseudo-lives.
There's the button.
The question is, would you press that button or not?
A utilitarian would have to say yes.
For a utilitarian you remember, the right action is that which maximizes the greatest
amount of happiness.
And in either bentham or mill, that happiness is essentially a subjective state.
Pressing that button would maximize subjective states.
It would maximize pleasure and happiness for all time.
For a utilitarian then, pressing that button would not only be a good thing to do, it would
be the best thing that anybody could ever possibly do.
It would be obligatory to press that button.
Now would you press that button or not?
I wouldn't press the button.
Not only don't I think it would be obligatory, I think it would be a horrible thing to do.
I can think of few things worse.
And if you and I were sitting by the button and if you were to try to push it, I'd do
everything in my power to prevent you.
Now I think you'll agree with me, at least in this, that there would be something bad
about pressing that button.
But what could that bad something be?
It can't be anything to do with subjective states.
The whole purpose of the button is to maximize positive subjective states.
If you try to say what's wrong with pressing the button, I think you end up saying that
there is something bad about it because the maximized subjective states would be delusional.
What you lose when you press the button is contact with reality.
No matter how real life seems to the brains and the vats, they're not in real contact
with the real world.
Their dreams, no matter how glorious, no matter how pleasurable, no longer fit the real world.
If that's what's bad about the idea of pressing the button, then here is something that is
of value.
The fact that your mental states are in contact with reality.
The fact that they do fit to a real world.
You don't just want nice beliefs or pleasant beliefs.
You don't just want comfortable beliefs.
You want beliefs that are really true.
Now that fit is something beyond subjective states.
It's an objective matter of how the subjective states mesh with something.
If the fit itself is of value, then one aspect of value is grounded in something objective.
Something beyond subjective states.
So the magic button case is a thought experiment.
What it seems to show is that there is an objective side to value.
There's another argument that uses the second example I introduced earlier.
That example involved a contrast between two cases, you remember.
In the first case, we have a person who takes pleasure in someone else's pleasure.
If it's a parent and a child, the parent may take a great deal of pleasure, even in the
child's small pleasure.
In the second comparison case here, we have a person who takes pleasure in someone else's
pain.
Maybe it's a so-called friend who takes a great deal of pleasure in your small pain.
Now there's something right and good about the first case, like the parent taking pleasure
in a child's pleasure.
There's something right and good about that, in which someone takes pleasure in another
person's pleasure.
There's something twisted and perverse in the second one, in which someone takes pleasure
in someone else's pain.
Here too, Moore's Principia Ethica has an idea to offer.
Moore proposes what he calls the principle of organic unities.
This is a quote from Moore, this principle is that the intrinsic value of a whole is
neither identical with nor proportional to the sum of the values of its parts.
The idea is that there are some things that have positive intrinsic value, some things
that are intrinsically bad, and lots of things that are just indifferent as to value.
But these things can also go together to form what Moore calls organic holes.
There is, for example, an emotion that one might have, and that emotion has a certain
intrinsic value.
There's a person toward whom which you may have that emotion, or there's a painting or
a symphony toward which you may have that emotion.
And that thing too has certain intrinsic value.
But then there's also this whole complex involving the relation between the two things, not just
the emotion, not just the thing you have the emotion about, but the fact that you have
that emotion about that thing.
Moore calls it a paradox.
The paradox, Moore says, is, quote, that the value of such a hole bears no regular proportion
to the sum of the values of its parts.
There are cases, Moore says, involving two good things in a certain relation where the
value of the hole is immensely greater than just the sum of those two values.
There are cases in which you have a good thing and an indifferent thing, but they're related
in such a way that the value of the hole exceeds the value of just the good thing in it.
Or two bad things may be related in such a way that the hole is worse than just the sum
of badness in its parts.
So the principle is clear.
In Moore's words, the value of a hole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of
the values of its parts.
And our second example falls under this principle.
In particular, suppose someone takes pleasure in some small pleasures of someone else.
What's the value of that complex, that taking pleasure in someone else's pleasure?
It's at least the value of the small pleasure that the one person has, plus the pleasure
that the other person takes in their pleasure.
It's at least the sum of the two pleasures, but it may be more valuable even than that.
The fact that it is pleasure taken in the pleasure of another may make it more valuable
than just the two pleasures put together.
Now take the second case, taking pleasure in someone else's pain.
The value of that complex doesn't seem to be just the pleasure that the observer has
minus the pain that the person observed has.
The fact that it is pleasure taken in someone else's pain taints the pleasure.
That kind of pleasure in that kind of complex becomes negative rather than positive.
So here then, we have another indication that all values can't be grounded merely in
subjective states.
What matters in cases like this is not just the value of one person's pleasure and another
person's pain.
What matters is the relationship between the pleasure and the pain.
Not just the subjective states themselves, but the relationship between them.
And that relationship, the fact that it's pleasure taken in pain, for example, that's
an objective matter above and beyond the subjective states themselves.
Because a major aspect of the value of this kind of complex comes from that objective
relationship rather than just the subjective parts, at least some aspects of value have
to be objectively rather than merely subjectively grounded.
Once again, there has to be an objective side to value as well.
So let me sum up.
I've tried to outline three arguments that at least some aspects of values have to be
grounded in something objective rather than merely in subjective states.
The first argument, the Grand Canyon argument, relies just on Moore's method of absolute
isolation.
Wouldn't a universe with that kind of beauty, even unperceived, be better than a universe
without it?
If so, at least some values are objective.
But as I've said, that argument doesn't convince everybody.
The second argument is the magic button argument.
If there's a reason not to press that button, it seems to be because real contact with the
real world is an inherently good thing.
But that's an aspect of fit between something subjective and something objective, between
your beliefs and reality.
And that fit is itself something objective.
So again, there's some aspect of value grounded in more than subjectivity.
The third argument is the consideration of someone taking pleasure in someone else's
pain, drawing on Moore's reflections regarding organic complexes.
A situation in which someone takes pleasure in someone else's pain seems to take on a
value, a negative value, that goes beyond merely adding up the pleasure and subtracting
the pain.
In this example, it's the fact that this is pleasure in someone else's pain that's
crucial to our evaluation.
That relationship is crucial to our evaluation, but that relationship is an objective matter
beyond just the subjective states involved.
If that objective relationship between subjective states is important to value, we have then
a third indication that there's an objective side to value.
In this lecture, I've drawn a lot on G. E. Moore and his famous Principia Ethica.
So let me end with a few biographical notes.
G. E. Moore was a Cambridge University academic.
When he was at work on the philosophical problem, he worked with a focused intensity and a burning
insistence on clarity.
But the moment he stopped doing philosophy, he was a very retiring and shy man.
Perhaps the strangest thing about Moore is that he was crowned the prophet of Bloomsbury.
The Bloomsbury group, which was named for a suburb of London, included the famous economist
John Maynard Cain, included the writer Virginia Wolfe and her husband Leonard Wolfe.
Her sister Vanessa, who was a painter, married to the art critic Clive Bell.
Clive Bell, together with Roger Fry, was responsible for first bringing the French Impressionists
to England.
Also Duncan Grant, one of the most important British painters in the 20th century.
And the writer Lytton Strachey, famous as the author of the eminent Victorian.
Everyone in the Bloomsbury group was devoted to the arts, to writing, to painting, to writing
about painting.
They were also devoted to each other in an incredible tangle of heterosexual and homosexual
relationships.
As someone once said of Bloomsbury, all the couples were triangles.
So Strachey and Cain's were lovers.
But then Strachey and Grant became lovers.
And Strachey lost Grant to Cain's.
Bell's wife Vanessa left him for Roger Fry, who in turn loses her to Grant and so forth.
But through all that shifting passion, they seem to have remained friends.
It was this group that took up Moore's Principia Ethica as a Bible.
They even referred to it as Moore's religion.
They idolized Moore as their prophet.
Why?
Well, the three primary values that Moore outlines in Principia Ethica are artistic
appreciation, friendship, and truth.
And of these, truth may come in third.
Artistic appreciation and friendship, those values meshed perfectly with the passions
of the Bloomsbury group.
The whole spirit of Principia Ethica, moreover, is to think things from the ground up on your
own rather than having to start by wading through Aristotle and Kant and Hegel.
The Bloomsbury group thought of themselves as breaking away from tradition.
And here again Moore's book fit right in.
So Moore himself was a quiet academic, very un-Bohemian in his habits.
He remained happily married to the same woman for decades without a hint of scandal.
It'd be hard to find a more un-Bloomsbury guy.
That's what makes it particularly ironic that Moore is remembered as the prophet of Bloomsbury.
In the next lecture we return to questions concerning the value of life and death.
Is anyone literally better off dead?
