Lecture 14 Better Off Dead
In the previous lecture, I emphasized the objective side to value.
In this lecture, I want to concentrate on a question regarding the value of life and
death.
Should someone literally be better off dead?
There is a sense of this question in which the answer is an easy one.
Can someone literally be better off dead?
In at least the obvious sense of the question, I think the answer is a simple no.
What's wrong with the idea of someone being better off dead isn't that life is always
wonderful.
What's wrong is that the idea of someone being better off dead implies a comparison
between a state of living and a state of death in which they are better off.
And the problem is that that comparison is impossible.
To be dead is not to be.
Death isn't some black room in which one sits, seeing and hearing nothing.
A black room, after all, is a room that's experienced.
What death represents is the absence of experience.
Death doesn't represent some experience of non-existence.
The experience of non-existence doesn't make any sense at all.
What death represents is not the experience of non-existence, but rather the non-existence
of experience.
One can't, therefore, compare the experience of living, an experience filled with pain,
for example, or devastated by the horrors of circumstance.
One can't compare that with the experience of not living.
There is no experience of not living, and thus no experience on that side to compare.
Let me make it clear that by death here I mean deaths.
What I'm talking about is the cessation of life, about complete personal annihilation.
Those who think there's a life after death don't really think there is such a thing
as death.
In that kind of view, one lives forever.
What I'm talking about is real death, the complete cessation of existence.
My point is that in any sense of subjective comparison, one can't be better off dead.
In death there is no subjective experience to compare, and thus nothing to be better.
For one dead, one wouldn't be, and thus one couldn't be better off.
There's an ancient argument based precisely on this reasoning that attempts to show that
there's nothing to fear in death.
Just as death is not a black room of muted sights and sounds, death can't be some horrible
experience.
To be dead is to experience nothing.
There's no experience in death to fear any more than there's any experience to fear
in dreamless sleep, or in full unconsciousness.
That's how Shakespeare speaks of death in Hamlet, to sleep per chance to dream.
If there are no dreams, if death is comparable to simple unconsciousness, there's no experience
to fear.
Here's the argument in Epicurus, dating from about 300 BC.
Become accustomed to the belief that death is nothing to us.
For all good and evil consists in sensation, but death is deprivation of sensation.
And therefore a right understanding that death is nothing to us makes the mortality of life
enjoyable, not because it adds to it an infinite span of time, but because it takes away the
craving for immortality.
For there is nothing terrible in not living, so that the man speaks idly who says that
he fears death not because it will be painful when it comes, but because it's painful
in anticipation.
For that which gives no trouble when it comes is but an empty pain in anticipation.
So death, the most terrifying of all ills, is nothing to us.
Since so long as we exist, death is not with us.
But when death comes, then we don't exist.
It does not then concern either the living or the dead.
Since for the former it is not, and the latter are no more.
About 50 BC Lucretius echoes the same sentiment in Dererum Natura.
He says, death is nothing to us, concerns us not a jot, since the nature of the mind
is proved to be mortal.
Lucretius' Dererum Natura, or on the nature of things, is an interesting work because
it's precisely an argument that the soul is mortal, that the soul dies.
Much of ancient philosophy, including Plato, makes the argument that the soul is immortal.
That view is taken up with a vengeance in medieval Christian philosophy in Augustine
and in Aquinas.
In Plato the idea is that the soul is immortal and so we need not fear death.
That's what makes Lucretius so interesting.
He argues that the soul is mortal and so we need not fear death.
Indeed, you could put these two arguments together.
The soul has to be either mortal or immortal.
If the soul is immortal, there's no death, and so there's no death to fear.
If the soul is mortal, there's no experience of death.
And so once again there's nothing to fear.
That's an intriguing argument, but of course it has its limitations.
Even if it's true that one can't rationally fear the state of being dead, it doesn't follow
that one cannot rationally fear the process of dying.
If that process can be expected to be particularly painful, for example, one can certainly fear
the pain.
But here Epicurus and Lucretius still have the last word.
That fear would be merely the fear of pain, a fear that need not have anything essentially
to do with dying.
In that case it's the pain one fears.
And one can experience a great deal of pain without dying, and it's possible to die with
no pain at all.
Lucretius also has another intriguing argument.
People sometimes regret their death, sometimes worry about their death, because they regret
all that will happen after their death in which they won't be able to participate, that
they will not be able to experience because they no longer exist.
But Lucretius says, think of all that happened before you were born, in which you couldn't
participate, because you didn't yet exist.
Now, you don't regret missing out on all of that, so why should you regret missing out
on what happens after your death?
Okay, what we fear in death can't possibly be the experience of being dead.
There is no such experience.
What is it then that we're so concerned about?
What's so bad about death?
I think there is something bad about death, and that figuring out what tells us about
a range of values in life.
That's what this lecture is really all about.
If we value experience at all, if experience has value for us, we have to see death as
something that lacks that aspect of value.
Death is the absence of experience, and thus can't have any of the values that experience
has.
If we value anything because it is a value to us, we have to think of death as lacking
that value as well.
When we're dead, there is no longer any us for things to be a value to.
So any value that something has in that it's a value to us, that's a value that vanishes
at death.
What death signals then is that certain things of value will no longer be.
These may be the things of most value to us, and if so, what death signals is that certain
things of most value to us will no longer be.
It's not that we'll sense their absence, of course.
It's not that we will lose them in any sense in which we miss them.
We have to recognize that when our life is no longer, those things of value in our life
and to our life will no longer be as well.
So with regard to one major class of value, death is the death of things of value.
There's a deep lesson here, I think, regarding two different kinds of values that we hold.
There are, first of all, things that are of value to us.
Our pleasures are clearly in this category.
It's because they are our pleasures that they are of value to us.
In an earlier lecture, a distinction was drawn between lives to envy and lives to admire.
And these kinds of values I'm talking about, things valuable to us are at least roughly
the kinds of things we envy in a life.
But there are other things that we hold to be of value in themselves.
Things that we hold to be of value simply because we think they are valuable.
These are things we hold would be of value even if they weren't of value to us.
Now, maybe the beauty of the Grand Canyon would be like this.
Maybe that's a beauty that would exist where we never to have seen it and had value where
we never had to have participated in it.
Certainly the joys of other people are like this.
Those are real joys and are valuable because of that, even if they're not our joys in particular,
even if we don't share them.
The fact that life exists in the universe is a deeply wonderful thing.
And it would remain a wonderful thing.
It would remain a thing of value even if our life in particular wasn't part of the
life that exists in the universe.
Now the important thing about these two categories of value, we've got one category of value
of things that are of value because they are of value to me, they're tied to me.
There's another set of values that are values that we think of things of value intrinsically
in themselves independently of me.
The important thing about these two categories of value here is the fact that the first set
of values, the things of value to us in particular, can't survive our own deaths.
What is a value purely because it is a value to us can't remain a value when we no longer
exist.
That's not true of the second category.
The second category of value contains things of value independently of us.
Those things and their value will remain when we no longer exist.
So how much a threat death poses to what you value will depend quite strongly on what it
is that you choose to value.
If everything you value is a part of your life, your pleasures, or your experiences,
if everything you value is part of that, you have to recognize that everything you value
will cease to exist when you do.
If everything you value, you value purely because it's a value to you, you must recognize
that it cannot maintain that value when there's no you, when you no longer exist.
If those things are all that you value, then death is the death of everything you value.
However, if there are things that you value that are radically unlike that, if there are
things that you hold to be a value to you simply because they are a value in themselves,
then there are things that you value that death cannot touch.
It is with regard to these values that one might apply that passage from 1 Corinthians
that's incorporated in the music of Handel's Messiah.
Oh death, where is thy sting?
Oh grave, where is thy victory?
How great a threat death poses for the things you value then will depend precisely on what
it is that you value.
For those for whom all value is measured as value to them, death is the ultimate threat
in terms of value.
For those who think of things as having value simply because they have value in themselves,
independently of their value for them, death will not and should not be such a great concern.
The things that are really valuable in the universe, one can say, those things will survive
my death.
From such a perspective, death can't threaten the things that are really valuable.
This is precisely the view that's held by people whose lives are dedicated to a larger
cause, a larger cause of alleviating world hunger, of fighting for freedom, of striving
for peace, or for justice.
For such people it's the larger cause that matters.
If the cause continues, their own deaths don't strike them as particularly important.
If their deaths can actually contribute to the cause, they may even take their own deaths
to be of positive value.
People who hold these kinds of values can be happy even in death.
Let us get back to the question with which we began.
One can't literally be better off dead in the sense of some subjective comparison because
there's no experience in death with which to make the comparison.
There is, however, a different sort of comparison that may lie behind these phrases.
There may be a different kind of comparison that's hiding behind the notion of being
better off dead.
This is a comparison regarding quality of life.
And this comparison does make sense.
We all know of lives we think of as rich and full, lives of wonderfully positive quality.
But are there lives the value of which falls in the negative range?
Let me put the question in another form.
We all recognize the fact that lives can vary in relative quality.
Some lives can be better than others.
You can think of a quality of life line.
Some lives will be farther up on that line than others.
Some will be better.
Some will have a better quality of life.
Now, if you were to draw a line marked out in terms of quality of life, you might draw
the line in one of two very different ways.
And I'd like to explore the question of which is the right way to draw it.
In one way, you might draw a quality of life line.
All the marks would be positive over here.
At the extreme left would be a zero, a life of no value at all, but maybe that's just
a bottom point that's never reached.
It's just asymptotically approached.
As you move to the right, lives would get better, a life of value of one, a life of better
life of value two, a life of value three.
Now, the fact that all of this is very artificial doesn't affect the central point I'm after.
There's another way you might draw a quality of life line.
It wouldn't have a zero on the extreme left.
It would have a zero in the middle.
To the right, the values would increase, a life of positive value one, a positive value
two, a positive value three.
To the left of the zero, things would go in the opposite direction.
A life of negative value one, of negative value two, of negative value three.
Okay, we've got two ways of drawing a quality of life line.
The question is, which kind of graph is appropriate in evaluating lives?
Suppose you had two people who laid out the values of lives in these two different ways.
You had one person who laid it out as a zero and all positive values, another who put the
zero in the middle who had both positive and negative values.
For those two people, there are a lot of things they're going to agree on.
They might well agree that different lives have different values, different quality of
life values.
They might agree on the same ranking for the same lives.
Yes, that life is better than this one.
Yes, that life is better than this one.
They might even agree on how much better one life is than another.
But there would still be something quite different about their value map.
For one person, all lives would be marked as having positive value.
The other person thinks there are some lives the value of which is left of the zero, lives
the value of which is genuinely negative.
In our culture, and probably in any culture, there are some items of disagreement that
are more fundamental and some items of disagreement that are less fundamental.
Less fundamental issues of controversy might be resolved by simple empirical data, if only
we had it.
For example, a great portion of the controversy over the death penalty could be resolved if
we really knew whether the death penalty deters murder.
Public opinion on the death penalty is moved significantly because DNA evidence indicates
the trial process is more fallible than we thought.
Those are what I'm speaking of as the less fundamental areas of disagreement that can
be impacted by empirical data.
But some areas of disagreement within our culture seem genuinely foundational.
Bedrock disagreements, fundamental disagreements that no empirical data could resolve.
I think that one of those fundamental areas of disagreement is the question at issue here.
Whether the quality of some lives can be genuinely negative.
Some people think that lives can lie left of zero.
And they offer a supporting testimony to the fact that we can all think of conditions
of pain and degradation that we would rather die than suffer through.
There are people say things that are genuinely worse than dying.
Other people hold that life alone, whatever its shape or quality, inevitably has a positive
value.
In such a view, the fact that it's a life gives it positive value enough to compensate
for all the pain and degradation it may carry.
Among these are people who speak of life as a gift and who introduce a full religious
view and support of their evaluation.
But that view can be maintained without the auxiliary theology.
It could be maintained as a fundamental value that human life, any human life, whatever
its quality, and just because it's a human life, is so precious that its intrinsic value
swamps the disvalue of any horrors it might contain.
Now, personally, I'm one of the first batch of people.
Can a life have a value that's genuinely negative?
The answer I'd give is yes.
But the only argument I have to give for this conviction is the one that's been broached
already.
The argument is simply that there are imaginable conditions of pain and degradation.
There's a certain indegregation to which one is doomed for the rest of one's life and for
alleviation of which there's absolutely no hope that we would rather die than live through.
It's a life in those conditions that I think has a genuinely negative value, lying to the
left of the zero mark.
But I have to recognize that there are many who hold the second position.
I see no way to resolve the fundamental disagreement between these two views.
Nevertheless, it's interesting to note that there is a wide area of agreement, despite
that.
The agreement comes on the issue of consciousness.
There are people who are permanently comatose, but nonetheless alive.
Cases from Karen Quinlan to Terry Shiveau fall in this category.
Is there anybody who thinks of even terminally unconscious life as a life with positive value?
Well, if there is, they are at least few and far between.
Almost everyone thinks that a life that has no consciousness and no prospect of future
consciousness is a life that's over in any sense that matters.
Death may not be preferable to such a life, but it's certainly no worse.
Everybody seems to agree that permanent unconsciousness then has an effective life value of zero.
But that doesn't resolve the major disagreement.
They still disagree as to whether there are forms of life to the left of zero, forms of
life to which full unconsciousness would be preferable.
What of a life in which the only consciousness is consciousness of excruciating pain, and
in which it's doomed that the life be one that can never go beyond consciousness of pain?
Is that a life with positive value simply because it's a conscious life, and despite
the fact that pain is the only content, the only possible content of its consciousness?
The abstract issue becomes real in a case like that of Dax Cowart.
In 1973, at the age of 26, Dax Cowart was a victim of a freak propane explosion.
That explosion killed his father, and it left Cowart blind, partially deaf, and with third
degree burns over 65% of his body.
His fingers were even burned off, but he didn't die.
His medical treatments involved repeated surgeries and saline baths that were so excruciating
that even morphine couldn't block the pain.
Dax Cowart could see no future prospects for his own life that would justify that torture.
He was certified to be competent by a psychiatrist, but his demands that the medical treatments
be stopped and that he be allowed to go home to die were repeatedly ignored.
Cowart thought he had a right to die, and that his right was violated.
The interesting thing in this case is that Dax Cowart survived.
He also survived later attempts at suicide.
Eventually he completed law school.
He married.
He now has a family and a successful law practice.
So it was right not to let him die, right?
That's not what Dax Cowart thinks.
That's still not what he thinks.
Oh sure, he says, I don't want to die now, but I had a right to die then, and my rights
were violated.
What I've tried to do is just to point out this fundamental disagreement.
The disagreement between whether all life is positive or whether a life can have genuinely
negative value, whether its value can lie to the left of death or unconsciousness.
And I don't pretend to have resolved that issue.
As a fundamental disagreement, it may be unresolvable.
However, there is something more I want to do here.
I want to trace a little further the implications of the view that I've confessed is my view,
the view that a life can have a negative value.
In particular, what are the consequences of that view for the rationality of suicide?
Before I had you imagine two scales for quality of life.
One was zero on the left, one was zero in the middle.
Now I want you to imagine something similar, the graph of the quality of a life over time.
The better the quality of life at a particular time, the higher the line is going to be on
this graph.
We could graph a life that was always at a very high level then as a high line across
the graph.
We could graph a life that was always at a low level, a life of abject misery as a low
line across the graph.
But of course, lives don't stay the same in quality.
Some lives get better over a certain period.
That would be a lifeline that rises as it goes across the graph.
Some lives get worse.
That would be a lifeline that falls as it goes across the graph.
There's one more convention I want you to imagine in this graph.
If there's a point below which life takes on a negative value, that'll be a second line
straight across the graph.
It'll be a baseline of an acceptable life.
A line below which life becomes not worth living.
Now exactly where that line should be drawn isn't a question I'll try to answer.
It may be impossible to say where the line is.
As long as you think there is a kind of life so horrible that it's not worth living, you
think there is such a line.
Now I want you to consider some possible lines of a life.
One line would go like this.
It would start out fairly high, but then it would dip down, down below.
Eventually it falls below the zero level.
The quality of life dips down below the point at which a life is not worth living.
Is that a point at which suicide would be justified?
If the quality of that life is guaranteed to remain below the line, perhaps sinking ever
deeper, then it might be a life that would be better overall if it were shorter.
But the mere fact that a life dips below the baseline of acceptability doesn't tell
you that.
A lot depends on what happens after that.
If it's a short dip, a temporary dip, and then life climbs back up in quality and continues
for a long time, that looks like a life at which suicide would have been a mistake at
that point.
What if a lifeline dips below the line, way below, and emerges above the line later, only
a little bit above the line, and only for short periods?
Does any reemergence justify the continuation of life through any hell?
My inclination, and it's just my inclination, is to say no.
If we take seriously the idea of negative value in a life, we must take seriously the
idea that later positive value of some small amount won't necessarily compensate for massive
amounts of the negative.
Does that mean that suicide is rational in some cases?
If these reflections are right, some lives would be better overall if they were shorter.
If the question could be approached in terms of that consideration alone, there would seem
to be cases of rational suicide.
But there are several major qualifications that have to be immediately added.
What I said was that if the question could be approached in terms of this kind of graph,
there would seem to be cases of rational suicide.
And one crucial qualification is that that if clause is never, in fact, satisfied.
That cannot be approached in terms of this consideration alone.
What's at issue in suicide is not merely that a life ends, but the act of voluntarily ending
a life.
That's different, and any such act must be evaluated from perspectives other than these
simple quality of life considerations.
In order to evaluate suicide, we also have to consider the impact of suicide on other
people.
Its prospect for misinterpretation, and the possibility of its being taken as an inappropriate
model in other cases.
There are heart-rending studies of the impact of suicides on those left behind.
And no ethical consideration of suicide can be made without serious consideration of that
kind of impact on other people.
Ethically speaking, it's probably not just your life that's at stake.
It's been estimated that each suicide impacts at least six other lives.
A second proviso is perhaps even more important.
The kind of graph I had you imagine is a graph plotted in omniscience, in total knowledge.
It's based on the crucial pretense that one can see the overall graph of the course a
life will take.
As we live our lives in time, none of us has access to that kind of graph.
It might be rational in certain cases if one knew the course of one's life would inevitably
take a particular shape.
But almost never, however, can we claim to have that kind of knowledge.
Real cases of suicide are rarely rational.
Real cases of suicide rarely even attempt to be rational.
Standard cases of suicide, particularly those among the young, are acts of despair or vengeance,
often performed under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, and often in an atmosphere
of self-pity and self-absorption.
Suicide is often practiced in front of a mirror.
That's how self-absorbed it is.
To the extent that any suicide pretends to be a rational act, it pretends to a knowledge
of one's life which one almost never has or can rationally think that one has.
For the best counter-argument against the depression that may make suicide appear rational
may be recognition of our own inevitable ignorance.
Lives can suddenly get worse.
Lives can also suddenly get better.
They can take every pattern of change and quality that can be drawn on a graph.
Some of those changes are in your control, some aren't.
You may not even be able to see which are in your control and which are not.
The only way to know with certainty what course your life will take is to live it.
In the next lecture, I want to concentrate on the value of justice, sketching the picture
of justice that emerges from some relatively recent philosophical work.
