Lecture 15 – A Picture of Justice
The previous lecture focused on questions of life and death and quality of life.
Much of what I've talked about in these lectures so far is focused on the individual
in that way, and on individual decisions and individual lives.
In this lecture, I want to change the pace by focusing on a wider image of ethics in
society.
What I want to do is to outline a picture of justice, an image of what it means for
a society to be a just society.
This picture of justice appears in the work of John Rawls in the 1970s, and it continues
to be of major importance in both ethics and political thought today.
Let me start with a bit of history because the picture that Rawls paints is part of a
much older tradition of social contract theory.
Social contract theory flourished in the 1600s and 1700s in Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau.
The question social contract theory tries to answer is the question of what justifies
the existence of political states and what a just political organization would be like.
Social contract theory is itself a reaction against what came before.
What came before was a theory of political organizations justified as a matter of natural
law.
Now, it's hard for us to hear the phrase natural law and not think of what are essentially
just generalized descriptions of the way the world works.
The law of gravity is a natural law.
The laws of electromagnetism and thermodynamics are natural laws.
Those are just general descriptions of how the universe actually works or how fundamental
principles in the universe actually work.
Further back in our intellectual history, however, the conception of law was not just
description.
It was not just descriptive.
It was a conception of laws as something normative, like the laws of legal systems are.
A law against running a red light isn't like the law of gravity.
It's not that it cannot be violated as the laws of thermodynamics cannot be violated.
It's that it shouldn't be violated.
There was a time in the Western tradition when natural laws were thought of as laws with
both a descriptive and normative force.
If the world is governed by a divine being, and if you think ethics comes from divine
command, then the divine being lays down two kinds of laws.
The physical laws, gravity for example, is one of God's laws.
And the normative or ethical laws, like be fruitful and multiply is one of God's laws
or do not covet thy neighbor's wife is one of God's laws.
In the older natural law tradition, if you wanted to know why political organizations
were as they were, why the king has all the good stuff and we don't have any, you'd look
to natural law for the answer.
What is it in God's commands that justifies that?
It was in opposition to that natural law tradition that the notion of the social contract arises.
And the basic idea is this, maybe societies are not as they are because it's a law of
nature that they be that way.
Maybe social arrangement is not natural, but conventional.
Maybe societies are what they are not because God makes them that way, but because we make
them that way.
There are traces of social contract theory as far back as the ancient Greeks.
Plato's dialogue, the Crito, is about the death of Socrates, sentenced to suicide by
the Athenian court for impiety and for corrupting the young.
Socrates has friends that can smuggle him out of jail and out of Athens.
Why doesn't he just take off?
Everybody expects him to.
Socrates' answer is that the Athenian government made his life possible.
Maybe even made his existence possible by allowing his parents to marry.
He could have left at any time.
And by staying, Socrates says, he has implicitly accepted Athenian law.
That's a kind of social contract view.
The view is much more developed, however, in the work of Thomas Hobbes.
Hobbes lived through the English Civil War, which raged from 1642 to 1648.
It was a war between the monarchists favoring a king and the parliamentarians, led by Oliver
Cromwell.
That turmoil and the conflict between political notions of representation and a centralized
monarchy, that conflict is visible throughout Hobbes' work.
Here's Hobbes' theory.
Hobbes envisages a state of nature before society, before any social contract.
The state of nature that Hobbes envisages is hideous.
Here's a quote from Hobbes, hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common
power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is called war, and such
a war as is of every man against every man.
Wherein men live without other security, then what their own strength and their own invention
shall furnish them with all.
In such a condition, there's no place for industry, because the fruit thereof is uncertain,
and consequently no culture of the earth, no navigation, nor use of the commodities
that may be imported by sea, no commodious building, no instruments of moving and removing
such things as require much force, no knowledge of the face of the earth, no account of time,
no arts, no letters, no society, and which is worst of all, continual fear and danger
of violent death, and the life of man solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.
It's reason, Hobbes says, that allows man to escape this state of nature.
The way to escape from the chaos of the state of nature is by way of a social contract.
Reason dictates, Hobbes says, quote, that a man be willing, when others are so too, to
lay down his right to all things, and be contented with so much liberty against other
man as he would allow other man against himself.
So what he's saying, that reason dictates that a man be willing to lay down his right
to all things and be contented with so much liberty against other man as he would allow
other man against himself.
So Hobbes envisages people making a social contract with each other as a way out of the
chaos of the state of nature.
They resign their individual rights to form a leviathan, a collective power, a political
state.
From that point on, the political state they have created has power over them.
In Hobbes' theory, the leviathan is the enforcement mechanism for the social contract and for
the laws made under it.
In order to be effective, in fact, Hobbes says that the sovereign, the sovereign representing
the leviathan, has to have absolute authority.
In the original title page of Hobbes' leviathan, the book leviathan, there's a picture of a
giant man with a crown on his head towering over the cities and mountains.
But his body, if you look closely, is made up of little tiny people.
They are the people who have joined in the social contract and he's the leviathan.
Hobbes thought that this kind of reasoning showed the nature of the state.
How the state arose and what gives it legitimacy.
Why should we obey the king?
Because he's the leviathan put in place through our social contract.
Locke and Rousseau are other major sources for the social contract view.
What's important for our purposes here is just this.
Hobbes and Locke and Rousseau each postulate a state of nature.
They each envisage people coming together in that state of nature to form a social contract.
In each of those sources, the nature of all government flows from that social contract.
What differs in Hobbes and Locke and Rousseau is, A, what the state of nature is thought
to have been and therefore, B, what the social contract is like and therefore, C, what form
of government is justified.
In that regard, the theories are very different.
The general idea of a social contract, however, is the same in all.
What motivates all social and political organization is self-preservation and self-advantage.
That's a common theme in all of them.
We find it rational to join together in a social contract, rational from pursuing our
own ends and it's that social contract that's the foundation of all social order.
In that classical Hobbes-Locke-Rousseau form, there are a few obvious objections to social
contract theory.
One problem is this.
Let's use the picture as it appears in Hobbes as an example.
There are no principles of obligation yet in place.
We're still in a state of nature.
So we sign the social contract and all social obligations stem from that.
That's the picture.
Now, wait a minute.
If you and I sign a business contract today, I have an obligation to fulfill it.
But that's because of social and legal rules about signing contracts that are currently
in place.
When I sign the original social contract, there's supposed to be no social or legal
rules yet in place.
So what would give that original signing any force?
If there are no legal conventions in place, it looks like signing doesn't mean anything.
Yeah, I wrote my name on a piece of paper, so what?
The problem is this.
How does my signing the social contract bind me to fulfill it?
The idea that signing a social contract would oblige you to do certain things assumes that
a social form of contract signing, some idea of social obligation when you sign something,
is already in effect.
So the idea of all social obligations as flowing from a social contract like this doesn't seem
to make any sense.
Here's a second major problem for social contract theory.
And when did this social contract happen?
If I'm bound to obey the king, or I'm bound to obey the general will of the majority,
and if that's because of a social contract, let me see it.
Where exactly is this social contract?
And when exactly did this signing occur?
It's unclear to what extent Hobbes thought he was talking about a historical event.
Rousseau admitted in a number of places that he couldn't defend any historical event.
Even if they did produce a social contract, I guarantee you that it won't have my signature
on it.
Maybe it'll have my great, great, great, great, great, great grandfather's signature
on it.
But how does his signature bind me?
How can I be bound by a social contract that I was never a party to?
Well, maybe it's just a hypothetical social contract.
Maybe Hobbes and Locke and Rousseau just made it up.
Well, I can see why I could be bound by a real contract, but nobody can produce it.
But how can I be bound by a hypothetical contract?
There's no actual contract, and a hypothetical contract would only bind you hypothetically.
What people say at this point, like Socrates said, is that there's an implicit social contract.
But that doesn't seem to work either.
Even an implicit contract must allow some way of opting out, some way of choosing not
to sign the contract.
So what if someone did not want to join the social contract?
Could they opt out?
Well, they are still going to be bound by legal travel restrictions, by taxes, by laws
against crossing state lines, by laws regarding currency exchange.
It looks like you can't opt out.
It looks, therefore, like it's nothing like a contract at all.
So perhaps in the end, this is all a metaphor for something else.
Perhaps there's no real contract.
The whole thing is just a metaphor for the coordinations we work out in social life.
Maybe it's something like a metaphor for convergence on certain strategies in game theory, which
we introduced in a previous lecture.
Indeed, Hobbes has often been cited as an anticipator of game theory in this sense.
The idea is that his state of nature instantiates something like a multiple player prisoner's
dilemma.
All of that is philosophical history.
There's a current form, however, in which social contract theory isn't just history,
in which social contract theory is very much alive.
This form avoids a number of the problems we've mentioned.
It makes no historical claims.
It carries no commitment to there being an original contract.
It doesn't even say that we implicitly sign or agree to some contract.
In contemporary form, the social contract appears merely as a thought experiment.
What it's intended to give us is a picture of what a just society would ideally be like.
This is the theory that John Rawls works out in his book, A Theory of Justice.
This book has shaped all of social and political philosophy since the 1970s, and it's had a
great influence on ethical thinking in general.
Rawls' core idea is this, that the guiding principles of a just society would be those,
and here's a quote from Rawls, that free and rational persons concerned to further their
own interests would accept in an initial position of equality as defining the fundamental terms
of their association.
Here's the central thought experiment.
Suppose that we got together in what Rawls calls the original position, and Rawls is
clear that this is just a story, this is entirely hypothetical.
Suppose we all got together before we were born to decide what kind of world we wanted
to be born into.
Some things we won't be able to do anything about, conditions of scarcity, for example,
or the existence of disease, but here we are before we're born deciding on what basic
social forms we want to put in place.
On this picture, we're to consider what kinds of principles we want to govern our society,
and everything's open for consideration, what we want the economic system to look like,
what we want the legal system to look like, how we want political representation to work,
what rules or principles we want governing marriage, and we're going to vote for these.
Rawls also hands us, in this imagined original position, Rawls also hands us an incredible
amount of information.
We are very smart and very well informed, not yet born people.
We know all the laws of a completed psychology.
We know all the laws of a completed economics, all the laws of a completed sociology.
So in this original position, we know exactly what the psychological and social and economic
consequences will be of some of these proposals that come before us and that we vote on.
But there's also a lot that we don't know in the original position.
We don't know anything about ourselves, about the people we are going to be.
Rawls says among the essential features of this situation is that no one knows his place
in society, his class position or social status, nor does anyone know his fortune in the distribution
of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength, and the like.
I shall even assume that the parties don't know their concepts of the good or their special
psychological propensity.
The principles of justice are chosen behind a veil of ignorance.
So suppose we meet in the original position under this veil of ignorance regarding our
personal situation in the world that's to come.
What kind of principles will we vote for?
Rawls' argument, just as in Hobbes and Locke and Rousseau, is the idea that we are entirely
self-interested in the original position.
We're not out to be nice.
We're just out for ourselves.
We want the system that's going to be best for us, whatever our personal circumstances
turn out to be.
Rawls says, quote, the theory of justice is a part, perhaps the most significant part,
of the theory of rational choice, end quote.
That gives another link with game theory.
So proposals are going to come up for a vote.
How about this one?
Some people are going to be slaves for life, other people are going to be masters.
Should I vote for that one?
Or not?
No, because I might end up being one of the slaves, no way.
How about this one?
Whether you're rich or poor for your entire life depends on whether your parents are rich
or poor when you were born.
Should I vote for that one?
Well, if I happen to be born of rich parents, it looks pretty good.
But remember, I'm under a veil of ignorance.
I know nothing of what my situation is going to be.
So that Rawls thinks is something we wouldn't vote for.
Eliminating options is fairly easy.
It's much more difficult to figure out what people in such a situation would take as the
guiding principles or the basic values of their society.
Rawls comes to an interesting, even if it's somewhat complicated, an interesting conclusion.
He thinks there are two basic principles of justice that would be chosen in the original
position.
The first is a principle of liberty.
Each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with
a similar liberty for others.
That's the first principle.
The second principle he thinks people would vote for is a principle of economic distribution.
But it's not a principle of pure economic equality.
It goes like this.
Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both A, reasonably
expected to be to everyone's advantage, and B, attached to positions and offices open
to all.
That's a little complicated.
So the second thing he thinks we'd vote for is social and economic inequalities are to
be arranged so that they're reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage and be attached
to positions and offices open to all.
That second part, the B part, is a commitment to equal opportunity.
Rawls emphasizes that those two basic principles, the liberty principle first and the economic
distribution principle, are prioritized principles.
The first one, the liberty one, is more important than economic distribution.
Never will we compromise the principle of equal liberty for the sake of economics.
The most interesting, but the most complicated part of Rawls' theory is the first part of
that second principle, that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they
are reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage.
What does that mean?
Rawls thinks that the form that would be agreed to in the original position is something
he calls the difference principle.
Suppose that there would be a certain distribution of goods if we had a purely equal social setup.
Unequal arrangements might change that distribution of goods, but an unequal arrangement will
be justified, Rawls thinks.
It'll be justified only if it makes everyone better off than they would be in a purely
equal arrangement.
So his theory does not say that economic equality is required for justice.
A just society can exist even with economic inequalities.
What the theory does say is that economic inequality is justified only if everyone is better off
with an unequal economic distribution than they would be with an equal one.
Social and economic inequality would be agreed on in the original position, Rawls thinks,
only if it's guaranteed to improve the condition of the least well off, the person least well
off in the whole society.
Rawls thinks that a vote in the original position would go like this.
Suppose we have two possible arrangements.
This is an example of how this is supposed to work.
Suppose we have two possible arrangements.
In one, everyone is equal and everyone gets an equal salary of $2,000 per year.
In the other one, there may be great economic inequality, but even the least well off person,
even the person at the bottom of the economic scale gets $10,000 per year.
So here we have equality, it's an equality of $2,000 per year.
Here we have inequality, but even the least well off person gets $10,000 a year.
Rawls thinks we'd go for this second arrangement.
We will swallow inequality if it turns out to be to everyone's benefit in that sense.
The idea in Rawls is not to paint a pseudo history, but to give us an ideal picture of
what a just society would be like.
What Rawls is claiming on the basis of this thought experiment is that a just society
is one that would be chosen in the original position.
Given this concept of the original position, you can look at your society and judge how
just it is.
Are there things that wouldn't have been agreed to under those conditions?
If so, says the theory, those are things that are unjust.
But justice isn't just everyone's the same, everyone's equal, because people in the original
position might have agreed to certain inequalities if the payoffs were going to be great enough
for everybody.
This is a very different kind of social contract view than the one that appears in Hobbes and
Locke and Rousseau.
Its goal is different too.
Here the goal is simply to clarify the concept of justice.
Rawls's theory presents a beautiful and a compelling picture, but that doesn't mean
there haven't been any objections to the theory.
Without settling the matter, let me mention just two kinds of objections that have been
raised.
One ground for criticism has been the assumptions that Rawls makes as to how people would act
in an original position.
Remember, they're supposed to be just self-interested and rational.
However, when he talks about what they'd accept, it's clear that Rawls thinks people
would be risk averse.
They won't go for any setup in which they might end up the losers.
And what if the chances are, say, three billion to one that you'll end up with the short end
of the stick?
Would it necessarily be irrational to go for a setup like that?
The objection is, this kind of objection is, that people might not choose in the way Rawls
thinks they would.
Another objection is an objection to the whole setup.
Robert Nozick was a colleague of Rawls at Harvard, but he was also one of his most severe
critics.
Nozick's objection is this.
Central to Rawls's picture is a conception of distributive justice.
In such a theory, certain patterns of economic distribution are just, and other patterns
of economic distribution are not.
That makes it look like you could look at any society at an instance in time, look at
how the goods are distributed, and be able to tell from that whether the society is just.
It looks like you could judge the justice of a society from a single time slice frozen
in time.
Nozick is famous for his Will Chamberlain counter example.
It goes like this.
Pick any distribution that you think is the just one.
Perhaps you think it's just that everyone has equal shares, or that people have greater
shares only if they advantage the least well off, like Rawls.
Start with any time slice distribution that you think is the just distribution.
Now says Nozick, and here's a quote, Suppose that Will Chamberlain is greatly in demand
by basketball teams being a great gate attraction.
He signs the following sort of contract with a team.
In each home game, 25 cents from the price of each ticket of admission goes to him.
The season starts, and people cheerfully attend his team's games.
They buy their tickets each time dropping a separate 25 cents of their admission price
into a special box with Chamberlain's name on it.
They're excited about seeing him play.
It's worth the total admission price to them.
Let's suppose that in one season, one million persons attend his home games, and Will Chamberlain
ends up with $250,000, a much larger sum than the average income, and larger even than
anyone else has, end quote.
Now, if economic justice were determined by a particular distribution, and you started
with that distribution, the redistribution of wealth in the Will Chamberlain example
would then be unjust.
But that doesn't seem right.
There doesn't seem anything unjust in the change in distribution in such a case.
So Nozick's point against Rawls and against any time slice theory is that what makes the
distribution just is not just how economic benefits are distributed at a particular time.
It's also important how they came to be distributed in that way.
So what Nozick is arguing is that there's a major part of justice that Rawls's picture,
however nice in other respects, leaves out.
It's not merely distribution at a time that matters with respect to justice, but history.
What we've examined in this lecture is social contract theory in both its historical and
its contemporary form, a line of thought regarding one particular kind of social value, the value
of social justice.
In the next lecture, I want to turn to reflections on value that are raised by the horrible things
that can happen in a life.
