Lecture 16 Life's Horrors
In the previous lecture I talked about something positive and abstract, an ideal of the just
society.
In this lecture I want to talk about something negative and all too concrete.
I want to talk about some of the terrible things in life.
I'll start with a mere litany of life's horrors.
One cannot look unblinkingly at life and miss seeing its hideous aspect.
From there I want to move toward a more conceptual consideration, a discussion of two very different
reactions to life's horrors.
One is a set of religious reflections on catastrophe.
Another reaction draws a distinctly anti-religious conclusion.
I think there are important things to learn from both.
This is another lecture in which I should warn you at the beginning that you may well
disagree with me.
There is nothing wrong in that.
Disagreement can be an important force for deeper thought, particularly when it's clear
that both sides are trying to deal seriously with some of life's hardest issues.
Consider the horrors that life holds, devastating horrors that are fatal and worse than fatal.
On top of that, horrors that are unpredictable, unavoidable, arbitrary, and freakish.
Think of the earthquakes that demolish homes and shred lives, the floods that drown and
destroy, the hurricanes and tornadoes that rip families and shred human accomplishment.
Worse still, consider the ravages of disease, the depths of suffering and the lives cut
short by plagues of dysentery, the fatal fevers of cholera, the millions who have died lost
and delusional from nameless infection.
These are collective horrors, wreaking massive destruction in an instant, wiping out masses
of people at a time, just as horrible for the individual.
It's ultimately at the individual level that all horror is felt are the individual visitations
of early cancer, of crippling neurological ailments, or of AIDS.
In illness, one's life can wither and shrink.
One can blot out all other human commitments and concerns.
I think pain even has the power to blot out love.
Some sufferings are worse than mere dying, longer and more destructive of all we identify
with ourselves as individuals.
Alzheimer's takes a devastating toll on individual identity, a toll not only for the immediate
victim, but for all those who love him or her.
We've given a choice between severe pain in one's final years and that creeping loss
of personal identity one might hope for pain instead.
All of these terrible things in the traditional language of theology are called natural evils.
There are other kinds of evils, the unnatural evils that may be worse.
Under the all too human atrocities of rape and plunder, slaughter, torture, and war.
Now as in the other examples, this kind of victimization is often unpredictable and freakish.
It has a sharper bite to its incomprehensibility precisely because it also involves the presence
of a voluntary victimizer.
Maybe not just voluntary, but someone who gleefully volunteers to inflict suffering.
There are other categories of horror in addition to these.
Of course, neither purely natural nor purely voluntary.
The mangling crash of airline and train wrecks.
The explosions of land mines left behind after armies have retreated.
The grinding dehumanization of economic and political oppression.
The perpetuating scourge of violence in families.
The myriad tolls of addiction.
Innocence is no protection against the horror.
Not for children, not even for animals.
There's no protection against any of the categories of horrors.
If your own life doesn't offer enough immediate examples of suffering, they're clearly not
hard to find.
You need only think of the lives of those scratching out starvation in Mali or any number
of third world nations.
Those who lay bleeding in the world's war-torn spots.
Those who are ground down by interminable poverty.
Pick a human being at random from the world's population today.
What is the probability that that human being will have a life as easy as yours?
And if anything, the historical record is steeped deeper in blood and in misery than
the present.
Human history is a history of terrible things.
Consider the trenches of World War I or the oppression of children that was accepted as
normal in the Industrial Revolution or the disease-ridden hovels that were the homes
of medieval life.
Pick a human being at random from the history of the world.
What is the probability that that human being will have a life like yours rather than one
of those?
We are constantly tempted by a picture of a normal life.
A normal life, as we picture it, would be a life of progressive development and childhood,
joys in marriage and child-rearing, reflection in retirement and old age, and a death eventually
in our sleep, death at an age close to the standard life expectancy.
We're misled into taking the biblical three-score and ten and images of the different seasons
of life as our do.
This is our picture of a normal life.
That's what life is supposed to be.
But most lives don't fit anything like that pretty picture.
And yet we're so wedded to that picture that we think that any deviation from it is somehow
unjust.
To die young, we think, would be a violation of our rights to suffer more than most people,
would somehow be unfair.
Look around and you'll see that justice has nothing to do with human suffering on these
scales.
There's no justice in a scheme of things in which some lives are long and full and others
last mere months, maybe last mere months with a consciousness only of pain.
There's no justice in a scheme of things in which some lives are randomly victimized
by crime or choked short by disease.
Something bad happens to us, not just bad, but horrible, terrible.
Why me, we ask, as if there must be some justification for the yawning differences in life's joys
and sorrows when they're judged from person to person.
But the point is precisely that there is no such justification.
The arbitrariness of suffering seems to be its final blow.
And to be even tempted by a picture of some just and normal allotment, that's to think
wrongly about the character of life's horrors.
There are two classic conclusions that are drawn from this dismal tally of pain and misery.
Those two conclusions come from different, in fact, from diametrically opposed tradition.
Indeed, each conclusion is offered as a refutation of the other side.
But both conclusions, I think, contain an element that is important.
So let me take these in turn.
The first appears in many traditions of religious belief.
But it's the observation that there are things of positive value, things that are of positive
value that can flourish only in environments of pain and death.
The point is that there are things of positive value, even as a matter of logic, can flourish
only in contexts of suffering and degradation.
One of these things that's genuinely a value is courage.
Courage can exist only in a situation to which fear applies, to which fear is also appropriate.
Without the propriety of fear, there can be no courage.
Without a situation which fear would be an appropriate response, can there be courage?
One of these things that's genuinely a value, perhaps one of the things that's most admirable
and most valuable in that sense, is human dignity in the face of adversity.
Stephen Hawking seems to me to be a great example.
A mind trapped in a diseased body able to control only a small stream of incoming and
outgoing information and at an incredibly slow pace.
When you hear a Hawking talk, when you hear recordings of Hawking talk, that isn't live.
It's much too fast to be live.
He can manage 15 words per minute at a maximum.
What Stephen Hawking has is motor neuron disease, or ALS, diagnosed when he was 21.
Another case of human dignity in the face of adversity, I think, was Christopher Reeve.
There are cases of POWs maintaining faith in the cause, maintaining hope, maintaining
humanity even under torture.
The greater the adversity indeed, the more astonishing and the more admirable the human
dignity that may accompany it.
But without a context of adversity, that thing of value, human dignity in the face of adversity,
can't exist.
Just the most precious of all human emotion is sympathy for others, active sympathy, I
mean, expressed in the details of real self-sacrifice and care for another person.
But that kind of thing demands a situation of real need in which sympathy is called for
and sacrifice is needed.
Without real need, that thing of value, sympathy, can't exist.
One form of religious tradition emphasizes the character-building possibilities of suffering.
Now, human dignity in the face of adversity is indeed something of value.
Adversity thus offers the occasion for developing and demonstrating a virtue that's not possible
without it.
Without a range of horrors, a range of human virtues wouldn't be possible.
Everything offers an occasion for the development of aspects of character that just wouldn't
be possible without it.
Now, it's true that these things of value, and others like them, couldn't exist without
the horrors that this life lays before us.
That's what I think is right about this tradition.
Yes, there are human virtues, there are things of value that could not exist except in an
environment of death and life's horrors.
These goods that couldn't exist without suffering are called greater goods in what's known as
the greater goods defense in the theological problem of evil.
They're higher-order goods, good things that couldn't exist without the suffering that
makes them possible.
But, there are also stronger claims that are often made in religious tradition, and with
regard to those stronger claims, I have to part company.
The further claim that's made in some religious traditions is not merely that there are these
things, these higher-order goods, but that their existence justifies the horrors that
they require.
The idea is that the sum total of these higher-order goods, the virtues that couldn't exist without
suffering, for example, that that sum total of good justifies the sum total of the sufferings
we've catalogued.
Despite all apparent counter-evidence, so the argument goes, our world might be one
of the best.
Indeed, it might be the best of all possible world.
Now, admittedly, that's not how it appears.
The world seems to be filled with unnecessary suffering and humiliation and rape and death.
So the argument goes, this might just be a misleading appearance.
It could be that ours is a good world, is the best possible world, is precisely the kind
of world that a loving and beneficent deity would create.
How could that be?
Because each of the horrors is absolutely necessary for a greater good that couldn't exist without
it.
Each greater good on such a theory justifies the horrors that are required to make it possible.
So the sum total of greater goods justifies the total horrific legacy of our history.
Now, I think there are higher-order goods, things that are of positive value that could
exist only in the context of suffering.
But the further idea that those justify the sufferings that make them possible, that seems
to me to be desperately wrong.
First of all, it's debatable in every case whether the greater goods are really greater.
Without suffering, there could be no sympathy in suffering.
That sympathy is clearly a value.
But is it of greater positive value than the negative toll of the suffering for which
it is sympathy?
Quite generally, I think the answer is no.
Consider a case in which someone's suffering, and we have someone whose care and concern
are motivated by sympathy for that suffering.
And suppose we put a pair of alternatives before the person who's acting out of sympathy.
In one alternative, the pain and their sympathy both exist.
In another alternative, the pain disappears, and with it, the possibility for that sympathy.
If faced with such a choice, I think, no one who was genuinely sympathetic could do anything
but opt instantly for the second one, for the elimination of the pain and with it, the
elimination of the possibility for the sympathy.
And that means that the very character of the emotion at issue is such that it can't
take itself to be of greater value than the disvalue of the suffering that is its focus.
Here's another problem with the idea.
We're one to take the value of higher order goods as justifying the horrors on which they're
built.
The justification would very often seem to be in the wrong place.
Suppose I have a crippling disability, that's something negative, but it makes your sympathetic
care for me possible.
That's something positive.
And the idea is that the positive justifies the negative.
But wait a minute.
How can the burden that is my pain be justified by the gain that's your sympathy?
How can something negative on my side be justified by something positive on yours?
The only context in which that kind of trade-off in gains and losses between two different
people might be spoken of as a justification, would be a context in which a single agent
somehow chooses one of these so as to gain the other.
In such a context, the existence of sympathy as well as pain might be a justification for
him or for his choice.
That context is appropriate precisely to a Creator God.
But note that the Creator God in that kind of scenario is somehow judged entirely in
utilitarian terms, is somehow outrageously judged entirely in utilitarian terms.
His action is judged entirely in terms of some overall balance of gain and loss, irrespective
of who benefits and who suffers the loss.
As we've seen in earlier lectures, one of the problems with utilitarianism is that it
doesn't seem capable of handling issues of justice.
And that would seem to be true here too.
Dostoevsky addresses this problem in literary form in the Brothers Karamazov.
There's a discussion about the problem of evil between the Brothers Karamazov, between
Aleosha Karamazov, who's a Christian monk, and his skeptical brother, Ivan Karamazov.
Ivan says he believes the whole story but can't accept it.
This is the quote from Dostoevsky.
I believe like a child that suffering will be healed and made up for, that all the humiliating
absurdity of human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage.
That in the world's finale, at the moment of eternal harmony, something so precious
will come to pass that it will suffice for all hearts, for the comforting of all resentments,
for the atonement of all the crimes of humanity, all the blood they've shed.
It will make it not only possible to forgive, but to justify all that has happened with
men.
But though that may come to pass, I don't accept it.
I won't accept it."
And in explaining why he cannot accept it, Ivan tells a story.
Ivan presents this as actually having happened.
The story is that of the aristocratic owner of a great estate, who's living in luxury
and ruling over 2,000 serfs who labor for it.
He's the retired general, convinced that he has earned absolute power over the lives
of his subjects.
He has a kennel of hundreds of dogs and nearly a hundred dog boys, all in uniform.
One day a serf boy, a little child of eight, throws a stone in play and hurts the paw of
the general's favorite dog.
Why is my favorite dog lame?
The general is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog's paw.
Take him, the general says.
Here are Dostoevsky's words.
He was taken, taken from his mother and kept shut up all night.
Early that morning the general comes out on horseback with the hounds, his dependents,
dog boys and huntsmen, all mounted around him in full hunting parade.
The servants are summoned for their edification and in front of them all stands the mother
of the child.
The child is brought from the lockup.
It's a gloomy, cold, foggy autumn day, a capital day for hunting.
The general orders the child to be undressed.
The child is stripped naked.
He shivers, numb with terror, not daring to cry.
Make him run, commands the general.
Run, run, shout the dog boys.
At him, yells the general, and he sets the whole pack of hounds on the child.
The hounds catch him and tear him to pieces before his mother's eyes.
A bit later in the passage Ivan says, I want to see with my own eyes the deer lie down
with the lion and the victim rise up and embraces murderer.
I want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it's all been for.
All the religions of the world are built on this longing, and I'm a believer.
But then there are the children.
I renounce the higher harmony altogether.
It is not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its
little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse, with its unexpeated tears to dear kind God.
It's not worth it.
The idea here is the same.
The claim is that this might be the best of all possible worlds because it's only with
the child's suffering that there can be greater goods.
But that sounds a lot like the suffering of the child in the Ursula Le Guin story that
we discussed in an earlier lecture, the ones who walk away from omelos.
In that story, the civilization of omelos can thrive only on the basis of a single child's
suffering, but that does not justify the suffering.
So Stoyevsky's point is similar, that neither the goal of harmony nor the possibility of
greater goods justifies the suffering of that one tortured child.
I see a final problem in the idea that the sum total of higher order goods justifies
the sum total of horrors.
That seems to me beyond rational belief.
It's not true to begin with that every misery occasions a higher order good when you'd only
think of the incredible volumes of suffering that go unknown, unbalanced by any higher
order dignity or sympathy or care, when you'd only think of the horrors that destroy character
rather than building it, that shred relationships rather than solidifying, that inspire further
cruelty rather than inspiring care.
Just as there are higher order goods, and I think there are, just as there are higher
order goods, there are also higher order evils, malicious satisfactions in the face of suffering,
and exploitation made possible by weakness and pain, and further depths of degradation
that are made possible by oppression.
These things too wouldn't be possible without lower order horrors, and I see no reason to
think that there are any fewer of these, these higher order evils, than there are of higher
order virtue.
One tradition then is that the horrors we face make higher order goods possible.
I think that's right, but I don't buy is the further claim that every horror brings
a higher order good, that it's therefore justified, and that the existence of these
higher order goods justifies the full totality of life's horrors.
Those further claims, I think, won't wash.
Let me turn to the second tradition regarding life's horrors that I think also has some
truth to offer.
This tradition is an anti-religious tradition.
The central claim is that the catalogue of arbitrary and freakish horrors shows precisely
that ours is not a universe created and controlled by some omniscient, omnipotent, and beneficent
being.
A universe created and controlled by an omniscient, omnipotent, and perfectly beneficent being
could be expected to be the best that such a being could produce, a universe in which
value was maximized in all cases.
Our evidence is overwhelming that our universe is something very different, a universe in
which horrors often hold the upper hand, in which victimization strikes randomly, in which
evil builds on good as often as good builds on evil.
What stronger evidence could anyone want that ours is something other than the best of all
possible world?
This is the traditional problem of evil.
It's a problem, of course, only for theism, for a belief in the existence of a God.
It's a problem or over only for a particular kind of theism.
The belief in an omnipotent, omniscient, and all-perfect being who guides all things to
the good.
And for that, it's more than a problem.
It's a straightforward argument that no such God can exist.
Here, one of the most elegant statements comes from Hume, quoting Hume, is he willing
to prevent evil but not able, then he's impotent.
Is he able but not willing, then he's malevolent.
Is he both able and willing, whence then is evil?
Nothing can shake the solidity of this reasoning so short, so clear, so decisive, end quote.
That comes from the dialogues concerning natural religion, which Hume left to be published
after his death in 1776, so that he wouldn't be subjected to the storm of controversy he
knew it would cause.
Now, there's a great deal of sophisticated work in the philosophy of religion on the
problem of evil, and without claiming to represent all of its twists and turns of argument, let
me say this.
I think that evil remains an insurmountable problem for the belief that our universe is
somehow governed by an omnipotent, omniscient, and beneficent creator.
I think the horrors of this life shows us that that is not and cannot be the role of
value in the universe.
But I also think that's just as well.
The picture of an omnipotent and beneficent ruler of the universe is often assumed to
support our notions of value.
But there are many ways in which that picture is a threat to our notions of value.
We saw something similar in an earlier lecture, there the problem was that an action motivated
by desire for heaven, or fear of hell, wouldn't qualify as a genuinely ethical action.
The picture of an omnipotent and beneficent ruler making everything happen for the good,
I think that would be a threat here too.
A ruler who guided everything to the good, first of all, would have to manipulate our
choices toward the good.
That alone threatens the notion that values are something we act upon in free choice.
Moreover, a good that is ultimately inevitable is one that one need not strive for.
If God is going to make everything come out right, no matter what I do, it doesn't matter
what I do.
Why try for a cure for cancer?
If that's part of God's plan, it'll be there.
If it's not, I'd be trying to work against God.
I'd be trying to make something worse by producing such a cure.
If something's inevitable, striving for it is of no value.
In the end, it's only because everything is not guaranteed to come out right.
I think that value has the value it has.
To picture the universe is guided toward inevitable goodness by an omnipotent, omniscient and all-perfect
being is thus not to give it value from on high, but a way to rob it of value from below.
That picture is in obvious conflict with the intransigent reality of freakish horror
that the universe forces upon us at every turn, but it also seems to be inconsistent
with the notion of real value that guides us and inspires us to action toward good in
the face of the horrors that surround us.
The picture I've painted is not the only form that religious belief can take, but it is
a standard picture.
The warning is not only that there seems to be clear evidence against that kind of picture,
but that it's a picture that conflicts with some of our more fundamental values.
In summary then, both traditions that reflect on the horrors of this life have something
of value to offer us.
From the religious tradition comes the observation that there are indeed things of value that
are possible only in the context of the horrors of the world.
And that observation itself is a valuable one.
It is in precisely a universe such as ours, with horrors such as ours, that we can cultivate
dignity and courage in the face of adversity and active sympathy and care toward horrors
other victims.
From the anti-religious tradition, on the other hand, comes the compelling argument
regarding the real character of value in our universe, that ours can't be a universe geared
inevitably toward the triumph of good by some omnipotent, omniscient, and beneficent Creator
God.
The evidence against such a view is that the horrors that surround us are too deep, too
extensive, and too random for that picture to be true.
But even that apparently pessimistic observation has its consolations, for it's only in a universe
that's not guaranteed to result in the triumph of positive value, that value can have the
value that it does.
A universe with no horrors, or with horrors guided always to produce the best in the end,
wouldn't be a universe in which our free actions would have the value they do.
Our best efforts are to quench and compensate the horrors, to cure disease, or to prevent
disaster, or to care for those in need.
That's what gives genuine value to our attempts to make things better.
The next lecture focuses on moral thinking regarding our own moral thinking, and in particular
the importance of looking at the history of one's moral views in trying to assess them.
