Lecture 17 A Genealogy of My Morals
The previous lecture focused on conceptual reflections concerning life's horrors.
In this lecture, I want to focus on the importance of historical reflections for our moral thinking.
I take the title for this lecture, The Genealogy of My Morals, from Friedrich Nietzsche's famous book,
The Genealogy of Morals.
I think there's something central and important in Nietzsche's strategy and network,
something central and important for one's own thinking about one's own thinking,
and something that's developed almost nowhere else in the philosophical history of ethics.
Nietzsche himself was an amazing character.
He was born in 1844.
He studied philology, historical linguistics, at Bonn and Leipzig.
His dissertation was on the Greek poet Theognos.
He was appointed to the chair in classical philology at Basel at the unheard of age of only 24.
But after only 10 years, Nietzsche retired for health reasons.
He suffered throughout his life from intolerable migraine headaches and racking gastric pains.
For the rest of his life, he moved from boarding house to boarding house in France, Italy and Switzerland,
scribbling out his books despite racking illness and despite increasingly bad eyesight.
Nietzsche was fully insane by 1889.
He collapsed in a street in Turin while embracing a horse that had been flogged by a coachman.
For the next 11 years, he remained in a state of mental and physical paralysis.
Throughout that period, his fame grew, but his sister Elizabeth controlled his works.
Sometimes she would stick bits and pieces together to be published as if they were complete works by Nietzsche.
Nietzsche probably died from the ravages of syphilis, but there's debate about that too.
There's no debate that Nietzsche's influence has been extensive.
He is standardly grouped with the Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoevsky
and the Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard as a precursor to existentialism,
which comes to fruition in the philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre.
Nietzsche is regarded as one of the great stylists of the German language.
He's been seen as an influence on psychoanalysis,
and generations have found his work an inspiration and a guide
in the search for a genuinely individual and authentic approach to one's own values.
I wanted to start by saying some nice things about Nietzsche
because I'm about to say some extremely negative things about him.
In this lecture, I'll borrow a philosophical strategy from Nietzsche's genealogy of morals,
a strategy that I think is important for one's own evaluation of one's own moral views.
But that's about the only thing I'm going to take.
There's another aspect of Nietzsche's influence that can't be ignored.
Nietzsche's vocabulary and his sensibilities were incorporated directly into the core concepts of the Nazis.
Nietzsche was read and re-read by Adolf Hitler,
and his phrases reverberate through Hitler's Mein Kampf.
Under the Nazis, Nietzsche was lionized as one of the master thinkers of the Aryan race.
In reading the genealogy of morals, I think it becomes clear
not only that Nietzsche was a despicable racist, but also that he wasn't a very good philosopher.
Here in Nietzsche's words is the core thesis of the work.
The judgment good did not originate with those to whom goodness was shown.
Rather, it was the good themselves, that is to say the noble, powerful, high stationed and high minded
who felt and established themselves and their actions as good, that is, of the first rank.
In contradistinction to all the low, low-minded, common and plebeian,
it was out of this pathosive distance that they first seized the right to create values and to coin names for values.
That's the core thesis. Here's where Nietzsche takes that claim. Another quote from Nietzsche.
All that has been done on earth against the noble, the powerful, the masters, the rulers
fades into nothing compared with what the Jews have done against them.
The Jews, who in opposing their enemies and conquerors were ultimately satisfied with nothing less
than a radical revaluation of their enemy's values.
That is to say an act of the most spiritual revenge.
It was the Jews who, with awe-inspiring consistency, dared to invert the aristocratic value equation
good equals noble equals powerful equals beautiful equals happy equals beloved of God
and to hang on to this inversion with their teeth, the teeth of the most abysmal hatred,
saying, the wretched alone are the good, the poor, impotent, lowly alone are the good,
the suffering, deprived, sick, ugly, alone are pious, alone are blessed by God, blessedness is for them alone,
and you, the powerful and noble, are on the contrary the evil, the cruel, the lustful, the insatiable,
the godless to all eternity, and you shall be in all eternity the unblessed, accursed and damned.
With the Jews, there begins the slave revolt and morality, the revolt which has a history of 2,000 years behind it
and which we no longer see because it has been victorious, end quote.
There's a small industry in trying to explain away Nietzsche's racism.
Nobody even tries to explain away his sexism and to explain away his historical links to the horrors of Nazism
and eventually to the death camps.
His sister is often a convenient scapegoat.
The idea is that those are the parts that Elizabeth put in.
Personally, I don't think that'll do.
The book is steeped in anti-Semitic stereotypes and those stereotypes are essential to the work
used to weave the pernicious fantasy of a Jewish conceptual switch
that undercuts the triumph of the great blonde beast, the Aryan ubermensch.
Now Nietzsche certainly didn't see the Third Reich coming and perhaps he couldn't have.
But it can't be denied that the themes of his work are precisely those that echo through Nazism.
A lot of Nietzsche looks like pure propaganda where philosophical argument or empirical evidence is needed.
Nietzsche tends to rely on rhetorical flourish alone.
OK, the core claim of the genealogy of morals is one that I'm going to argue is pseudo-scientific
and that even the central linguistic claim is false.
The only evidence offered for this story of a Jewish inversion of values is a claim about the derivation of our ethical terms.
The claim is that positive ethical terms like good derive from terms applied to themselves by a ruling aristocracy,
while negative ethical terms like bad come from terms used to refer to the common people.
Here's Nietzsche's evidence, quote,
What was the real etymological significance of the designations for good coined in the various languages?
I found they all led back to the same conceptual transformation,
that everywhere, noble, aristocratic in the social sense, is the basic concept from which good,
in the sense of with aristocratic soul, noble, with a soul of high order, with a privileged soul, necessarily developed.
A development which always runs parallel with that other in which common, plebeian, low are finally transformed into the concept bad.
The most convincing example of the latter is the German word Schlecht for bad itself,
which is identical with schlicht, plain, or simple, and originally designated the plain, the common man, end quote.
Oh, no, with regard to a moral genealogy, Nietzsche says, this seems to me a fundamental insight.
So Nietzsche claims the designations for good in all languages all lead back to the same transformation,
that everywhere these terms stem from a class distinction.
So Nietzsche's claim is a universal generalization, a claim about all positive ethical terms in all ethical languages.
What kind of evidence does he offer?
Mere bits and pieces, here the single case of the German Schlecht.
The words noble and fair are offered as companions, but of course even fair demands that we somehow think of the nobles as Aryan blondes.
So how plausible is the etymological claim that all terms of ethical praise and condemnation trace everywhere to categories of social class?
I decided to take a look.
If it works for every language, everywhere, it ought to work for English.
So pretty much at random, I drew 62 ethical and ethically related terms from a standard thesaurus.
I won't list them all for you, but here's the beginning of my random list so that you know about the kind of words we're talking about.
The beginning of the list goes admirable, appropriate, bad, beneficial, benevolent, benign, blameworthy, blasphemous, charitable, correct, corrupt, cruel.
You see both negative and positive ethical words.
Here's the end of the list.
Sinister, traitorous, trustworthy, valid, villainous, vindictive, virtuous, wicked, worthy, wrong.
We can trace the etymologies of these words through the Oxford English Dictionary.
That amazing and compendious history of the English language that traces individual words to first and early uses and senses recorded in print.
Now, we of course have to distinguish different senses of these words, but the Oxford English Dictionary does that work for us too.
Of these 62 words, there are a total of 447 senses.
So what percentage of the senses of these words through that kind of resource can be traced to terms for noble aristocracy or the plebeian classes?
Nietzsche's claim, remember, is the designations for good all lead back to the same transformation, that everywhere these terms stem from a class-bound distinction.
So how many of these senses can be traceable to links with the nobility, say?
Now, 100% might be too much to demand, but perhaps 50% would be acceptable evidence.
Of the 447 senses of these 62 words, of those 447 senses, there are only 18 senses that can be read as having some plausible connection with social hierarchy.
So one sense of the word benevolent, for example, traces from a contribution made to support the poor.
Several senses of the word kind praise to a notion of kin, which might be identified with an ancestral line.
One sense of the word generous is of noble lineage.
There are perhaps another six senses that may have some more marginal connection with social hierarchy.
There's a sense of appropriate, for example, which designates land given to a religious community.
There's a sense of the word worthy, which designates any famous or renowned person, including nobles, but also including prominent religious scholars.
Now, in this rough measure, even if we include all the marginal cases as positive hits, the result is that only 24 senses out of 447, or about not 100%, not 50%, about 5%,
have any arguable connection with references to social hierarchy.
And the 5% of senses that can be stretched to fit Nietzsche's thesis tend not to include the major entries for central terms.
So neither the term ethical nor the term moral fit the thesis in any of their senses.
Neither bad nor wrong fit the thesis.
The single best candidate for that negative side of Nietzsche's thesis may be the term villainous, one sense of which is traceable to a term for members of the peasant class.
On the other hand, consider the term malignant.
That term has a genealogy directly contradictory to Nietzsche's thesis.
It's tied historically to a derogatory term for those sympathetic to the royalist cause, the aristocratic cause, in the English Civil War.
What of the term fair?
It has long been ambiguous between pleasant, ethical, and light-haired.
But it's not clear how significant that is.
The term sinister comes from left-handed.
The association of the term right with conservative causes comes from the seating positions of different groups in the 1789 French National Assembly.
The term wrong is tied to tart and sour.
The conclusion then is that even at a stretch, only 5% of the senses of terms on this list accord with Nietzsche's thesis.
95% of the senses of our ethical and evaluative terms appear always to have been ethical or evaluative terms without any etymological tie to social hierarchy.
So much for even linguistic evidence supporting some myth of a Jewish inversion of values.
Now, one of the reasons I'm hitting Nietzsche's genealogy of morals so hard is that I want to distance myself as far as possible from all that I think is wrong in that book.
I want to do that because there's something that I want to borrow.
There's something I think is right.
What I think is right is Nietzsche's general strategy, the idea that a genealogy of our morals would itself be of moral importance.
That strategy is not only right, I think, but important, and it appears almost nowhere else in the history of Western ethics.
What Nietzsche urges is that the history of our ethical concepts may offer reason to accept or reject those concepts.
Now, I think his history is pure propaganda and fatally incorrect, but were that history right, it would have a point.
The point is that a legitimate history of our ethical concepts might have more than history to teach us.
It might have some genuinely ethical lessons to teach us, ethical lessons regarding our ethical concepts themselves.
Here's our situation.
We find ourselves in adulthood with a range of ethical convictions regarding what's owed to others and what actions are right.
But we may also find ourselves with the knowledge of how we came to hold those convictions.
And this knowledge may sometimes make us question our convictions.
And I think we should.
Let me introduce a relevant case.
It's a case in which people held certain convictions, but in which the background of those convictions should have made them suspicious.
There are few ethical judgments that are clearer to us than this one.
That slavery, in particular, slavery as it was practiced in the Americas, is deeply and horribly and hideously wrong.
The important question is this.
How could anyone ever have thought otherwise?
Before and during the American Civil War, there were a range of apologetics written in behalf of slavery.
Let me outline the basic themes that appear in those works.
Occasionally in those works, one finds the claim that slaves have racial characteristics which make their enslavement proper or less onerous or even of benefit to them.
It's for their own good, is the idea.
The idea is that some people are racially constituted such that they are fruitful or useful or happy only when they're directed by others.
A second repeated theme in that literature is historical justification.
In theological form, it's the claim that slavery is sanctioned by the Bible and by the history of the Church.
Let me read you a passage published in 1864.
This is taken from a scriptural ecclesiastical and historical view of slavery written by John Henry Hopkins.
It comes from a book I have in my hand.
The slavery of the heathen races was sanctioned by the divine law in the Old Testament
and the system of Roman slavery was allowed to Christians by the apostles in the New Testament.
It was regarded as a providential arrangement of society by the Fathers, the Councils, the Theologians, and commentators in every branch of the Church for more than 18 centuries.
There is no question on which the Holy Catholic Church was more perfectly unanimous.
The modern doctrine of ultra abolitionists is an impious error, therefore, because it opposes the Bible and the Church."
There's also a secular version of that argument.
All the great civilizations of the world, including both ancient Greece and Rome, it was argued, have been founded on slavery.
So slavery, the argument runs, is necessary for civilization as we know it.
Another common theme in the pro-slavery literature of the time is that American slavery was a benefit to its slaves in comparison with the lives they would have lived in Africa.
In theological form, the claim is that the benefits of Christian conversion far outweigh the disadvantages of slavery.
The expectation is sometimes expressed that those converted to Christianity in slavery will return to Africa to Christianize that continent as well.
Here the quote is,
The ultimate result will be the preparation in due time of a vast host of missionary laborers, able by their physical peculiarities to enjoy the climate of Africa which few of the white race can endure.
That comes from an appeal addressed to Christians throughout the world, signed by 95 Protestant ministers in Richmond, Virginia in 1863.
Anecdotal evidence was offered in the attempt to show that the lot of the American slave was in fact a beneficial one in comparison with liberty.
Ex-slaves were quoted as regretting having left their masters and the comforts of being provided for.
Here's a sample of that that even includes an attempt at statistical evidence.
Quote, The servants at the south, for the most part, received good treatment, as is evident from the census returns of 1860.
During that year, there were 3,000 servants manumitted, freed, and 803 escaped to the north, making a total loss to the slave population of 3,803.
Taking this as the average for the past decade, there would have been a loss to the slave population of 38,030.
But with these odds against them, the slave population at the south increased during the decade, ending in 1860 no less than 23.39%.
While the free blacks, after being augmented by about 38,000, increased only 12.33%.
The women, at times when their health is delicate, are not required to labor, being taken about as good care of as a member of the white family under similar circumstances.
End quote.
Now what are we to make of arguments like that?
I think it's impossible to read this material today without thinking that it's either consciously hypocritical or subconsciously self-deceptive.
The reasons given for perpetuating the deepest of injustices look like transparent rationalization.
What they are trying to rationalize is a hideously unethical institution built into the economic foundations of a corrupt culture.
To us, the idea that slavery is somehow a benefit to the enslaved is directly contradicted by experience.
The idea that slavery is appropriate for a certain batch of people also seems contradicted by experience.
So weren't these things also clearly contradicted by the experience of the people who wrote this dribble?
Appeal to biblical slavery seems a pathetic attempt to justify contemporary injustice by pointing to a bloody trail of injustice into the past.
How could they ignore the biblical passages that make clear the fear, the horror, and the humiliation of enslavement?
How could they ignore the passages on the enslavement of the Israelites in Egypt, for example?
As a whole, antebellum apologetics seem to be a fabric of pseudo-argument designed to protect established economic advantage by hiding the deepest of human injustices.
Could it be that those apologetics were actually believed?
My guess is that they were indeed believed.
My guess is that there were many who inhaled the pseudo-justifications with every breath.
I think there were many who just lived those ideas and lived them as part of an otherwise normal life.
They pursued their own struggles. They loved their families.
They strove for success. They sacrificed for honor.
And they contributed every day to the ethically hideous degradation of other human beings.
Here's where I want to draw a lesson for our own case.
Can those pre-Civil War Southerners who believed these lies be held responsible?
Can they be held responsible for holding corrupted ethical beliefs when these were imbibed from childhood,
when they were woven into the fabric of the everyday, when they were echoed as inevitable even from the pulpit?
I think here the answer is yes. They can be held responsible.
They should have known better.
And it's Nietzsche's strategy, the strategy of the genealogy of morals that shows why.
A glimpse at their own economy and their own history, I think, should have been sufficient to show them
that the tissue of ethical justifications was all too pat, all too well tailored to existing patterns
of economic exchange and personal advantage.
We didn't need Karl Marx to show us that economic advantage can corrupt belief.
A glimpse at their history and their cultural situation should have made them think twice about the popular ethical lies.
A consideration of the genealogy of their morals should have made them doubt the moral myths
that tried to hide the hideousness of slavery.
But now we come back to ourselves.
Their situation is our situation as well.
We, too, inherit a web of ethical concepts and models, and there are often reasons for us to be suspicious as well.
It's also our responsibility to consider the genealogy and the history and the economic background of our own moral views.
When the beliefs we've imbibed are all too comfortable, when they echo how good we are, or how deserving,
or at least how free from blame, that's when the warning sirens should sound.
The genealogy of my morals may show that my precious ethical beliefs rest all too comfortably with my advantage or my self-conception.
That's precisely when I should wake from dogmatic slumbers to challenge and change them.
There are two things that unquestionably occur.
One is that we shape the world in the attempt to make it as we think it ought to be.
Our moral convictions drive action and they generate change.
Those moral convictions can be passed from generation to generation.
The attempt to make things better can have a history of generations of action on conviction.
So one thing that can happen is our ideas can change the world.
The other thing that unquestionably occurs is that patterns of justification can be woven
to hide and cover the most hideous of acts.
Distracting attention from the horrors or blinding us to injustice.
And the apologetics of the antebellum south, I think, were like that.
The propaganda of Nazi Germany was like that.
So when the world matches our ethical conceptions, that can be the result of either of these two mechanisms.
The fact that the world matches our ethical conceptions may be a good sign,
a sign that we've succeeded in carving out small pockets of the good.
The fact that the world matches our ethical concepts may also be a terrible sign,
a sign that we've allowed our moral conceptions to be corrupted by a corrupt situation.
The history, anthropology, and economics of our moral conceptions are therefore far from incidental.
Critical consideration of the history, and anthropology, and economics of our moral conceptions
is crucial to living morally within those moral conceptions.
Now that's where I think Nietzsche is right.
That the genealogy of my morals can be of crucial moral significance.
If I find that basic elements of my moral concepts accord all too well with my own advantage,
I should perhaps stop trusting them.
So what elements of our moral concepts should we mistrust now on this basis?
Let me outline four suspicious candidates.
Now their historical and economic background doesn't prove that we're wrong about these things,
but they do perhaps offer grounds for suspicion, reason to reflect on them carefully.
One suspicious area I'd suggest is our treatment of animals as food.
Now that's clearly to our self-advantage.
Moreover, we go to amazing links to remain ignorant of the process.
That looks like a dead giveaway.
A second area.
We also tend to regard obligations to those who are spatially close to us as of greater
importance than obligations to others starving on the other side of the world.
That attitude is to our economic advantage, and so it too deserves the deepest suspicion.
A third suspicious area is this.
We're very quick to see our own accomplishments as merited.
We've earned what we have.
We're very quick to see others' failures as deserved.
Well, they had it coming.
And the quickness with which we make these kinds of judgments seems suspicious to me.
Here's a fourth area of suspicion, though it's vaguer.
There are many cases in which we recognize someone's right to do or to have something,
even if acting on that right produces real hardship for others.
So we recognize rights of property, for example, rights of control over one's body, and rights
of freedom of expression, even where there are ways of acting on those rights that may
produce real harm.
I think we should be very careful when we do that.
Now I don't mean that there are not real rights.
Of course there are.
But I worry about how willing we are to overlook victimization in order to protect those rights.
So let me repeat that none of these cases offer proof that we're wrong in how we handle
our moral concepts.
The point is merely that these are cases in which we should weigh very carefully the
historical and economic context of our moral views.
What that may have to tell us is that our position isn't essentially different from
that of the antebellum south, or the anti-Indian frontier, or Germany just before World War
II.
The citizens of those points in history should have known better than to accept the convenient
corruptions of moral concepts that came their way.
And perhaps we should too.
Let me finish where I began with the example of Nietzsche.
Nietzsche was right, I've tried to argue, about the ethical importance of the background
context of our morals.
But because that context is important, it's important to get the facts right.
The facts we rely on in our ethical reflections have to be genuine facts.
And that's where Nietzsche goes wrong.
A false genealogy, a pseudo-history choreographed in a fantasy of Jews undermining the great
blonde beast, for example, or a pseudo-philology of ethical terms, that's worse than useless.
Nietzsche's influence on Nazism is a clear indication that a false genealogy can be dangerous.
In the next lecture we return to the social sphere of ethics.
There the topic will be theories of punishment, with an eye to the ethics of the death penalty
in particular.
