Lecture 18 – Theories of Punishment
In a previous lecture, we talked about a specific value, the value of justice.
This lecture focuses on something even more specific, on ethical questions regarding punishment.
I want to talk about two ethical theories regarding punishment, with an eye to the ethics
of the death penalty in particular.
There are clearly legal issues at stake here, constitutional issues, for example.
Is the death penalty unconstitutional?
Those who argue that the death penalty is unconstitutional cite the Eighth Amendment,
which happens to be the shortest.
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual
punishments inflicted.
Some opponents of the death penalty argue that it is inherently cruel, and perhaps unusual,
in its selective application to different groups, so the argument goes it's unconstitutional.
Those who argue that the death penalty is constitutional point out that the Constitution
itself invokes the notion of the death penalty.
In the Fifth Amendment, for example, it speaks of capital crimes, crimes punishable by death.
It insists that no one shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process
of law.
Well, the implication is that you could be deprived of life with due process of law.
What I want to emphasize over the next half hour or so are ethical issues rather than
just the legal issues.
And the ethical issues, in a sense, are deeper.
Ethics and the law are not the same.
Law is a social institution.
It's codified in statutes.
It's enforced by social representatives, interpreted by judges, adjudicated in courtrooms.
But a society makes the laws it does because of the ethical values it holds.
The legal system of the society is not the same thing as its morality, but it invariably
reflects the ethical and moral views of that society.
There's always this sense in which ethics is deeper than the law.
As members of society, we regard the law as subject to ethical review.
It's possible for laws to be bad laws, bad for ethical reasons.
And when that happens, we have an ethical reason to change the law.
What this lecture is about are ethical questions regarding that aspect of the law that has
to do with punishment.
The questions are not merely legal questions.
Questions as to what the law is, or whether it is legal to treat people in the way that
we do.
The questions are ethical ones.
What's the ethical justification for treating people in the way we do?
What we're doing to people, after all, are things like this.
We're taking away their resources.
We call those fines.
We're limiting their movement and restricting their liberty.
We use electronic monitoring bracelets and the intrusive supervision of parole.
We are depriving them of their freedom.
We're putting them in cages.
We're closing down options in their lives.
We call that imprisonment.
And sometimes, of course, we even kill them.
We call that capital punishment.
Now, doing these kinds of things to people clearly calls for some kind of justification.
If what we're doing is ethical, there must be an ethical justification.
What is the ethical justification for treating people in the way that we do?
It's easiest to phrase this question like this.
What's the ethical justification for punishment?
But keep in mind that what's really at issue lies behind that word.
The question is, what's the ethical justification for the deprivations of resources, the limitations
of liberty, and even the imposition of death that we do in the name of punishment?
There are two basic ethical theories of punishment.
The retributive theory and the deterrence theory.
The retributive theory is called the vengeance theory by its detractors.
Why do these kinds of things to criminals?
Because they're wicked and they deserve it.
It's that simple.
One form of retributive theory is the principle of an eye for an eye.
Give to the criminal just what he gave to somebody else.
With regard to murder, an eye for an eye would demand the death penalty.
For sexual torture, I suppose, it would demand sexual torture.
But an eye for an eye is just one form of retributivism.
What makes you a retributivist isn't how much you think people should be punished.
An eye for an eye, say, but why you think they should be punished.
You're a retributivist if you think people should be punished just because they deserve it.
A manual caught is clearly a retributivist.
If someone has committed a crime, they must be punished for it.
It's what they deserve.
How the punishment will affect them, whether it will prevent future crimes, for Kant, all
that's irrelevant.
They should be punished just because they deserve it.
There's an amazing passage in which Kant says just this.
If someone has committed a murder, Kant says he must be killed.
It's not enough that the murderer die.
It's not enough even that the murderer be left to die.
He has to be killed.
Kant says that even if the people inhabiting an island had to leave it, here's the quote,
the last murderer remaining in prison must first be executed so that everyone will duly
receive what his actions are worth and so that the blood guilt thereof will not be fixed
on the people because they failed to insist on carrying out the punishment.
For if they fail to do so, they may be regarded as accomplices in this public violation of
legal justice, end quote.
If the island that Kant envisages, if the island was sinking beneath the waves and the
prisoner was behind bars, if he was doomed to death by drowning, Kant would still insist
that we have to go back and execute him.
Jeremy Bentham, among others, have thought the retributive theory was a pure vengeance
theory.
He calls it animal bloodlust, mere revenge.
Bentham rejects it as uncivilized.
And when you think about it, the retributive theory does seem shaky.
Why punish?
Just because a crime was committed.
What if treating the person this way will have no impact on him?
Doesn't matter.
What if what we're doing will have no impact on anyone else?
Doesn't matter.
What if it will, in fact, impact society negatively?
It doesn't matter.
Retributive theory is entirely backwards looking.
The justification for the way you treat people under the term punishment is just that a crime
was committed in the past.
What justifies our action is entirely what happened before it.
Deterrence theory, the second major theory, is entirely forward looking.
What justifies this kind of treatment?
The prevention of future harm.
Now, this could be prevention of future harm by that individual.
You do these things to deter him or her from committing similar acts in the future.
However, when most people talk about deterrence, they're talking about deterring other people
from doing something similar.
The idea is to punish this criminal in order to deter others.
A simple form of the theory follows from utilitarianism.
And Jeremy Bentham was indeed an advocate of deterrence.
The thing to do is that which produces the greatest good for the greatest number.
We deprive this individual of his property or deprive this individual of his liberty
because it'll make things better for others in the future.
It is justified because it deters crime.
Bentham was an advocate both of deterrence and reform.
With an eye to reform, he drew up plans for a prison called the Panopticon.
The architecture of the Panopticon allowed for surveillance of prisoners at any time.
But in such a way that they didn't know when they were being watched.
And Bentham thought that was an optimal way of producing reform.
Let's explore the idea of deterrence a bit further.
Any deterrence justification for punishment obviously rests on a factual claim.
The factual claim that punishment does deter.
Because of that, deterrence theory is vulnerable to the facts.
If the facts show that a certain way of treating someone doesn't deter a crime, that justification
for that way of treating people falls through.
It's precisely because deterrence theory is vulnerable to the facts that the facts are
so important in this part of the debate.
Does the death penalty deter murder, for example?
I want to get to the facts about deterrence in a minute.
Before I do, there's another objection to deterrence theory that should be mentioned.
There's a strong theoretical objection to the theory, even if we find that punishment
does deter future crime.
One way of looking at it is this.
Deterrence theory follows quite directly from utilitarianism.
But we've seen problems for utilitarianism before, problems in particular with justice.
And those problems reappear here as theoretical problems for the deterrence theory.
The core problem for utilitarianism was this.
What if we could produce the greatest good for the greatest number?
We had to torture one particular individual in order to do that.
The child and the sellers of omelas, for example, that we talked about in an earlier lecture.
The fact that utilitarianism says we should torture one individual if it will produce
enough benefit for others.
And the fact that all our ethical intuitions revolt at that idea, that's a major argument
against utilitarianism.
And something like the same point will apply against deterrence theory.
Deterrence theory says we're justified in treating people in these ways, limiting their
liberty, for example, because it will prevent future crime.
But there might be lots of things that would prevent future crime.
In order to deter future rape and theft, we could just spread the rumor that someone's
a rapist and thief and torture him to death on public television.
It doesn't matter that he didn't do it, we're preventing future crime.
Or in each case in which a strong majority of the population believes somebody is a thief,
we could skip the trial and just hang him.
That'll deter crime.
Those actions might well prevent future crime, but that doesn't make them justifiable.
Therefore, the fact that putting people in cages would deter future crime can't be the
whole story as to what makes it justifiable.
That's not enough to justify it.
The point is this.
Deterrence theory says that what justifies us in depriving people of their liberty or
taking away their resources is that these actions prevent future crime.
But not just anything that prevents future crime would be justified.
So it can't be just the prevention of future crime that justifies these actions either.
This can't be the whole justification for punishment.
Okay, let's go back to the factual question.
Does punishment actually deter crime?
This is a general question, but let me start with a specific case.
The case of murder and the death penalty.
Does the death penalty deter murder?
Let me describe the ideal empirical test, an experiment designed to settle the matter
once and for all.
Death penalty, in doing that kind of test, what we would want would be two populations
identical except for the death penalty.
One group has the death penalty for murder, the other does not.
In all other respects, they're identical.
Since they're identical in the other respects, only the death penalty, the only difference
between them, could account for any difference in murder rates.
So we take two identical groups except for the presence or absence of the death penalty.
We watch them over the course of 20 years.
If the group without the death penalty has a higher murder rate, we know that the death
penalty deters.
We've set things up so that it's the only difference between the two groups, and that's
the only thing that can account for a lower murder rate on one side.
That's the perfect experiment.
For various reasons, that perfect experiment is one that we cannot set up.
In order to perform such an experiment, we'd have to do something like this.
Take the citizens of a major state.
We suddenly declare that if you're convicted of murder and your birthday is on an even
number day, you're subject to the death penalty.
If you're convicted of murder and your birthday is on an odd number day, you are subject
at most to life in prison.
We then wait to see if one group commits more murders.
That would fit the ideal experiment, but it would clearly be an unjust setup.
That experiment would tell us what we want to know, but we couldn't ethically perform
any such experiment.
So we can't get the data that that ideal experiment would give us, but we do have a history of
tests in which people try to approximate this perfect model.
We can compare murder rates in states that do have the death penalty, for example, with
murder rates in states that don't have the death penalty.
Of course, any two states differ in lots of ways.
There are no two states where the only difference between them is that one has a death penalty
and one doesn't.
The classic attempt to show a deterrence effect for the death penalty is the work of the economist
Isaac Ehrlich.
Ehrlich knew that it was impossible to manipulate variables, as in the perfect experiment we
outlined.
He was comparing murder rates between different states over time, and he knew that he had
to worry about confounding variables.
He used regression analysis, which is a sophisticated statistical way of trying to weed out the
influence of those other variables.
Regression analysis allows you to use data drawn from situations that are not identical
instead of looking for states where all other variables happen to be the same, or times
where all other variables happen to be the same.
You use data even where the other things are not the same.
You figure out all the potential complicating factors, or try to figure out all the potential
complicating factors.
You control for them statistically by regression analysis, and any effect that remains is one
that only the existence of the death penalty, say, is left to explain.
Let me give you an example of how this might be done.
One of the things that seems to affect the number of murders in a particular population
is the proportion of young men between 17 and 24.
The higher the proportion of that age group in that population, the higher the murder
rate per capita.
So suppose you have two states with two different murder rates, but also with different proportions
of men between 17 and 24.
You want to weed that factor out.
What you figure out is how much of the difference in murder rates can be accounted for just
by differences in that demographic.
What regression analysis allows you to do is to weed out the influence of many such factors
at the same time.
If you have a higher murder rate in states without the death penalty, even when you've
taken all those other factors into account, then you have evidence that the death penalty
deters murder.
That's the scheme.
In 1975, Isaac Ehrlich used this method to control for a number of other variables, and
he came up with positive evidence for a deterrent effect of the death penalty.
Using data on execution rates and murder rates from 1933 to 1969, he concluded that, quote,
an additional execution per year may have resulted in seven or eight fewer murders.
I present Ehrlich's work because it's one of the classic studies that did show a positive
effect for deterrence, but it's been subjected to some fairly intensive criticism.
Some of the criticisms are technical.
The results were sensitive to a logarithmic as opposed to a linear use of regression techniques,
for example.
The most telling criticism is this.
The time period Ehrlich studied was from 1933 to 1969.
If you do precisely the same study on just the years between 1933 and 1960, it shows
no deterrent effect.
That means that the period from 1960 to 1969 was crucial for Ehrlich's results.
Is there anything special in that period?
If you look at a chart of the relation between executions to homicides between 1960 and 69,
you can see where the Ehrlich effect is coming from.
The chart between 1960 and 1969 looks like this.
The number of executions per year goes down, down, down, down, down.
The murder rate, on the other hand, goes up, up, up, up, up.
That sure makes it look like there's a deterrent effect in the 1960s, and it's the relation
between those numbers, the declining executions, the increase in murder rate, it's the relation
between those numbers in that time period that's crucial to Ehrlich's conclusion.
But one of the factors that Ehrlich's study does not control for is a general increase
in crime in that period between 1960 and 69.
We said that the murder rates between 1960 and 1969 go up, up, up, up, but in fact all
crime rates in the 60s went up, up, up, up.
The crimes for which there's never been a death penalty went up in exactly the same
way that murder rates went up.
All crime went up in all states, regardless of whether they had a death penalty or not.
So whatever's driving the murder rate, it appears to be independent of the death penalty.
Ehrlich's results on deterrents seem to depend on a coincidental relation between decreasing
executions and increasing homicide between 60 and 69, instead of what we really want,
a causal connection.
Now that's the Ehrlich's study.
If you look at all the literature on the deterrent's impact of the death penalty, what conclusion
does it support?
Taken as a whole, it does not support the conclusion that there is definitely a deterrent effect.
Taken as a whole, it also does not support the conclusion that there definitely is not
a deterrent effect.
Often the debates come down to debates over statistical methodology.
That means that if there is a deterrent effect, it's sophisticated, complicated, and hard
to detect.
If there is a deterrent effect, it's far from obvious.
Okay, let's return from that specific case to the general issue of deterrents.
We don't have clear evidence that the death penalty deters murder, but that doesn't show
that other forms of punishment don't deter other crimes.
To begin with, murder is often a crime of passion, committed by desperately confused
and unhappy people in desperate situations.
Deterrents would work by rational influence, so maybe it's not surprising that murder is
hard to deter.
Maybe murder is the kind of crime that's particularly hard to deter.
Secondly, it's clear that some punishments do deter some crime.
I think you probably know this from your own case.
You put money in the parking meter, or you avoid parking in the yellow because you don't
want a ticket.
Even as a teenager, you didn't shoplift because you didn't want to get caught.
You don't cheat on your taxes because you don't want to call from the IRS.
All of those are deterrents in action.
Here's another piece of evidence in disaster areas where it's obvious that there's no
police control you often get looting.
And one clear explanation for that is that the deterrent effect has disappeared.
It's clear that such actions will not be punished.
So does punishment deter?
In at least some cases, the answer seems to be yes, but it may depend on the category
of crime.
Remember that there's also a conceptual objection to deterrence theory.
Because it is exclusively forward-looking, deterrence theory would seem to justify all
kinds of things that would prevent future crime.
But there are cases of limitation of liberty that we wouldn't think justified even if they
did prevent future crime, so deterrence theory can't be the whole story.
So deterrence theory faces conceptual problems.
Retributive theory faces conceptual problems, too.
Since it's exclusively backward-looking, it seems to say that we should punish no matter
what the result is.
Now, simply on the basis of those conceptual problems, neither of the two major theories
of punishment seems adequate.
But there may be a way out.
There may be a way in which we can put the pieces together and get a more adequate theory.
So here's the situation in a nutshell.
Retributivism is exclusively backwards-looking, and that seems to be its problem.
Deterrence theory is entirely forward-looking, and that seems to be its problem.
Can we do better?
Can we get a better general theory?
I think we can.
Our original question was, what ethical justification is there for punishment?
Here, as in lots of other cases, I think, something goes wrong in the framing of the
original question.
Something goes wrong right at that point.
I suggest that there are two very different questions hiding underneath that question.
The first question is, what gives us a right to punish?
It's like the question, what gives us a right to vote, rather than the question, how should
we vote?
The second question is, why and when and how much should we punish?
That second question assumes we have a right.
It asks whether we should act on it.
So what I propose is that we've got two questions hiding under our original question.
We asked, what justifies punishment?
I suggest that there are really two questions.
What gives us a right to punish and when and why and how much should we punish that hide
behind that?
What I propose is the retributive theory gives us at least roughly the answer to the first
question, the question about rights, and that the deterrence theory gives us at least a
major part of the answer to the second one.
So what gives us a right to punish?
The fact that the person committed a crime, period, that's where I think the retributive
theory is right.
When should we punish?
When we have a right to punish and the future consequences are better for punishing.
Now I don't think this is absolutely the whole story, but it does get us out of the basic
theoretical problems we've seen.
The problem with retributive theory was that it's backward looking and seems to say that
we should punish regardless of future consequences.
But that problem arises only if you take retributive theory to be answering both questions.
If you treat retributive theory as an answer only to the question of what gives us a right
to punish, that problem disappears.
The difficulty with deterrence was that it is exclusively forward looking.
That seems to say that we should punish regardless of what happened in the past as long as it
has good future consequences.
But that problem arises only if we take deterrence theory to be answering both questions.
If you treat it as an answer to just the question of when we should punish, assuming
we have a right, then that problem disappears.
By dividing the questions in this way, I think something important in each theory is saved.
This approach also has the benefit of showing us why different people have favored such
radically different theories.
Their answers look different because they've been trying to answer different questions.
Where does that leave the death penalty in particular?
Do we have a right to inflict the death penalty?
I'm proposing that you have to look to retributive considerations there.
Some people would still say no, that we never have a right to kill no matter what.
I tend to think we do.
What I'm sure of is that if we have a right to kill, it's the crime itself that gives
us that right.
Without a crime, we have no such right.
But the fact that we have a right to kill doesn't yet say that we should.
Whether we should depends on the consequences of doing so.
And then I think is where deterrence theory comes in.
Is there anything more valuable that comes out of killing than comes out of life imprisonment
without parole?
If not, or until we know there is, I don't think the death penalty is justified.
There's a further complication that I have to, that I have also put aside here.
In order to get clear on the ethics, you often have to pretend you know all the details.
So the question we've addressed is basically this.
If you know that someone is guilty of murder, then do you have a right to kill them?
Much of the current debate regarding the death penalty is an epistemic debate.
It concerns that if you know clause, DNA evidence has repeatedly changed.
They've shown that people convicted of crimes were not in fact guilty of those crimes.
And has freed people on death row in the process.
Has freed people convicted, sentenced, awaiting execution on the basis of DNA evidence.
Anthony Porter was freed in February 1999 after 17 years on death row in Illinois.
And within 50 hours of being given a lethal injection.
Eventually another man confessed to the crime.
Hundreds of people have been released from prison because of DNA evidence.
And at least 12 cases.
People have walked off death row because of DNA evidence.
That makes us less sure that our trial procedures are as reliable as we thought they were in
establishing true guilt and innocence.
And if we have doubts about that, then even if we knew that in principle we have a right
to inflict the death penalty in case of murder.
We may decide that we can't be certain enough of our truth finding procedures for a punishment
as extreme and irreversible as death.
We're not done with punishment yet.
In the next lecture, I'll use another legal issue to raise a question of values.
The punishment for murder is much more severe than the punishment for attempted murder.
We treat them as if they were ethically very different.
But whether something turns out to be a successful murder or merely an unsuccessful attempt,
that can be a mere matter of chance.
