Lecture 19 – Choice and Chance
The topic of this lecture is the role of luck in ethics and morality.
The question is whether the morality of actions, whether they are ethically right or wrong,
or how right or wrong they are, is at least sometimes a mere matter of luck.
Intuitively, the concepts of ethical action and luck don't seem to go together.
At some level, it seems that ethics cannot be a mere matter of luck.
At that level, our intuitions are in accord with Immanuel Kant's.
Kant thought that luck could play no role in morality.
In one of the early lectures, we saw that for Kant the core of ethics is the good will.
Luck may play a role in how effective that good will is, whether with a good will we
really manage to bring about the effects we're trying to bring about, but luck can't
affect whether the will itself is good, and thus can't affect the real core of ethical
evaluation.
Here's a passage in which Kant talks about luck and says just that.
Quote, the good will is not good because of what it affects or accomplishes, or because
of its adequacy to achieve some proposed end.
It's good only because of its willing, i.e., it's good of itself.
Even if it should happen that by a particular unfortunate fate, or by the niggerly provision
of a stepmotherly nature, this will should be wholly lacking in power to accomplish its
purpose.
It would sparkle like a jewel in its own light as something that had its full worth in itself.
Usefulness or fruitlessness, and certainly the chance of usefulness or fruitlessness,
can neither diminish nor augment this worth.
So Kant thinks that morality can't be a matter of mere luck.
But there are cases in which it looks like the moral value of an action can depend on
mere luck.
That would make ethics a much more chancey affair than Kant thinks it is.
The philosophical aim of this lecture is to explore some of these cases.
Did they show that even morality is open to chance?
Some contemporary philosophers, Bernard Williams and Thomas Nagel, among others, have thought
that was precisely what they showed.
I'm going to argue that these cases show something else.
I think that our Kantian intuitions are basically right.
The cases are interesting, but I think they don't ultimately show that morality is a
matter of chance.
I think they do show something very interesting about the moral codes that we've been taught.
Here as in the previous lecture, I'll be talking about both ethics and the law.
So let me start with an aspect of the law that seems open to ethical dispute.
The law standardly draws a distinction between two different crimes, the crime of murder
on the one hand and the crime of attempted murder on the other.
The law draws a similar distinction in other crimes between the crimes of robbery on the
one hand and the crime of attempted robbery between assault and attempted assault, between
rape and attempted rape.
These crimes appear in the statute books as different crimes that are given very different
punishments.
Murder, robbery, and assault almost always carry a heavier punishment than attempted
murder, attempted robbery, and attempted assault.
Many states, for example, carry a death penalty for murder, but no state carries a death penalty
for attempted murder.
How can it be ethical to treat these cases so differently?
It's the ethical justification for such a disparity in our treatment of successful
and attempted crime.
After all, what is attempted in a case of attempted murder is murder, is full murder.
What the perpetrator was trying to pull off, that would have been as bloody, as final,
as violent as in the case of murder in the first degree.
The difference is merely that the attempt proves unsuccessful.
Now, an attempted murder may be unsuccessful for any of a variety of reasons.
Your attempted murder may have been unsuccessful because of something to do with you.
Your hand shook at the last moment, perhaps, or you forgot that you'd run out of bullets.
But some of the reasons why your attempted murder was unsuccessful may have had nothing
to do with you.
Maybe the man at the gun store sold you blanks by mistake.
Maybe no one noticed the banana peel under the counter.
Your intended victim slipped on the banana peel at the last minute.
The bullet you intended to kill him ended up missing his head by inches.
Or here's an example.
This next example is Nagels.
Maybe a bird flew between you and your victim.
Maybe the bird took the bullet instead of him.
It's easy to construct pairs of cases like this in which an attempted murder seems to
carry as much guilt as a successful one.
But on conviction, the murderer may be sentenced to death and killed by lethal injection.
On conviction, the attempted murderer can expect to serve a few years in prison at most.
So one man is executed, and another is not.
On the basis of a difference that may have had nothing to do with them, the difference
may have had nothing to do with bloody intent.
That was the same in the two cases, planning, greed, hatred, or violent attacks.
Those may all have been the same in the two cases.
The difference may have been whether there was a banana peel under the counter, or whether
a bird happened to fly between you and your intended victim.
In other words, the difference may have been a mere matter of luck.
Now, if you share the Kantian intuitions that I do, this should seem radically unfair.
Two people can be treated in radically different ways under the law, not because of ethical
differences in their choices, but just because of this kind of issue of chance.
The case of real murders is often even murkier than I have portrayed it so far, and that's
because there's a fog that often hovers around questions of intent.
Definitions of murder, as well as distinctions between first and second-degree murder, those
differ from state to state.
But it is standard for definitions of murder to include a clause specifying intent to kill.
Intent to cause physical harm, or intent to cause injury, that's not enough.
That doesn't characterize murder.
That characterizes not murder, but a lesser crime, the crime of manslaughter.
So the difference between murder and manslaughter turns on this.
Whether the intent was to harm, that gives you manslaughter.
Whether the intent was to kill, that's what's required for murder.
So consider a case.
The case of a drunk in a bar, in a desperate moment, in a desperate life.
He focuses his anger on the man next to him at the bar.
They squabble, the argument escalates, the climax is a drunken brawl.
The first man screams, I'll kill you.
He shoves the other man with all his strength.
The second man falls, cracking his head on the brass rail as he hits the floor.
Suppose he dies.
Now whether that qualifies as murder, or whether it qualifies as manslaughter, depends on whether
the first man intended to kill the second man, or merely intended to harm him.
So what did he intend?
In the story as I told him, he shouts, I'll kill you.
But that doesn't settle a question.
That's something that we often shout in anger, even when we don't have anything like that
kind of intention.
I don't think that we can look inside the perpetrator's skull to settle a question either.
To see whether the intent to kill Switch was on, or merely the intent to harm Switch was
flicked on at the time.
This is not merely a matter of what's called privileged epistemic access.
Privileged epistemic access is a term used for those cases in which it's harder for me
to know what a person is thinking than it is for him.
I think there is such a thing as privileged epistemic access, but that's not all that's
happening in cases like this.
In cases like the drunken brawl, it's often the case not only that we can't look inside
his skull to see whether the intent to kill Switch was on, or merely the intent to harm
Switch, he can't look inside his skull to tell whether the intent to kill or the intent
to harm Switch was activated at the time.
What the drunk felt was a great surge of anger.
The anger released itself in his scream, I'll kill you, and it released itself in the fact
that he put all his strength behind the shove.
I think often a surge of anger was all that he felt.
So he may be no more able than we are to look inside and see whether that surge of anger
was due to an intent to kill or an intent to harm Switch activated deep in his skull.
In other words, I don't think, in many cases, I don't think the perpetrator has any better
way to find out whether his intent was to kill or harm than we do.
The truth of the matter, in many cases, perhaps even in most cases, is that there aren't two
little switches inside our heads.
It's not just that they're there, but very difficult to see in all that gray matter.
They're not there at all.
The guy in the bar may have been motivated by anger alone.
He may have had no more focused intent than that.
But the law forces us to distinguish between murder and manslaughter.
The legal distinction between two very different crimes with very different penalties rests
on whether the intent was to kill or the intent was merely to harm.
And that distinction, the distinction that the law demands, seems to rest on the myth
of clear intent, the myth that there had to be one kind of intent or another, seems to
rest on the myth of these internal switches.
For the moment, let's focus on the rare cases in which intent is clear.
For the moment, that difficulty is there.
We'll come back to it, but put it aside for a moment.
Even in cases where intent is clear, we can imagine pairs of cases like this.
In one case, there's a clear intent to kill, and the perpetrator succeeds.
He's committed murder.
In the other case, there is also a clear intent to kill, but through the nearest of happenstance,
the perpetrator fails.
We only prosecute him on the lesser charge of attempted homicide.
And the question is, isn't there something wrong about that disparity in treatment?
Thomas Nagel argues that this kind of disparity of treatment appears not only in the law,
but in our ethical evaluations, our ethical evaluations as well.
And Nagel, like Bernard Williams before him, gives it a term.
He calls it moral luck.
Consider the truck driver who accidentally runs over a child.
Nagel says, this is a quote from Nagel, the driver, if he is entirely without fault, will
feel terrible about his role in the event, but he will not have to reproach himself.
However, if the driver was guilty of even a minor degree of negligence, failing to have
his brakes checked recently, for example, then if that negligence contributes to the
death of the child, he will not merely feel terrible, he will blame himself for the death.
What makes this an example of moral luck, Nagel says, is that he would have to blame
himself only slightly for the negligence itself, if no situation arose which required him to
brake suddenly and violently to avoid hitting a child.
Yet the negligence is the same in both cases, and the driver has no control over whether
a child will run into his path, end quote.
So the negligence is the same in the two cases, the negligence of not having his brakes checked
recently.
But in one case, it's just a minor matter of negligence, no big deal.
In another case, the truck driver blames himself for the death of a child.
That's a big moral difference.
But says Nagel, it was chance that the child darted into the road, so we've got a big
moral difference that looks like it turns on a matter of luck.
Nagel also gives another example.
If one negligently leaves the bath running with the baby in it, one will realize as one
bounds up the stairs toward the bathroom, that if the baby has drowned, one has done
something awful, whereas if it has not, one has merely been careless.
It's the same kind of case, a big moral difference, but it seems to hinge on a matter of luck.
Nagel's view is that these cases show an unresolved and irresolvable conflict in our
ethical values, deep in our ethical values.
He thinks these cases show that our moral values are inherently and fundamentally self-contradictory.
In the abstract, Nagel says, we favor the Kantian view, that the moral status of an
action can only depend on choice.
It can't be at the mercy of fickle chance.
Hence, our tendency to think that something is deeply wrong with a legal code that assigns
radically different punishments for murder and attempted murder, even in cases where
it's mere luck that makes the difference.
The one part of our moral views, Nagel says, is this Kantian intuition.
That's in the abstract.
In the immediate and the concrete, Nagel says, we inevitably return to very different judgments.
We hold the truck driver and the baby-bather guilty of culpable negligence only in the
case when the child actually dies.
So in the immediate and the concrete, we find ourselves returning to ethical judgments
that can only be right if the moral status of what we do depends in part on happenstance
for which we bear no responsibility at all.
Such intuitive judgments, Nagel says, go against the Kantian claims.
Nagel says, Kant's conclusion remains intuitively unacceptable.
We may be persuaded that these moral judgments are irrational, but they reappear involuntarily
as soon as the argument's over, end quote.
Now, I think these cases are fascinating.
The case of the disparity in treatment of murder and attempted murder, the case of the
truck driver, the case of the baby-bather.
But I want to suggest a different analysis.
Nagel's focus on the tension in our legal and moral handling of this kind of case is
important, but I think he's ultimately wrong to consign it so quickly to an inherent and
fundamental self-contradiction deep in our moral beliefs.
I think there's a different lesson here, a lesson about levels in our legal and moral
thinking.
Nagel's treatment, I think, leaves out a major part of the picture.
Let me start with the legal case in order to illustrate the point and then apply it
to the case of our moral thinking.
The law puts attempted murder in a different legal category from successful murder, and
we started by questioning that aspect of the law.
But there may actually be some very good reasons for treating these cases differently.
One reason turns on that foggy issue of intent.
A murder may have proved unsuccessful because of mere happenstance, the banana peel under
the counter or the bird flying between you and your intended victim.
But a murder may also have proved unsuccessful because of a lack of a properly-stealed intent.
At the last minute, your hand shook and your fingers slipped on the trigger, perhaps.
At the last minute, you looked away.
At the last minute, your anger was tempered with a trace of pity and regret.
In those kinds of cases, we would have relenting intent rather than mere circumstantial happenstance.
Now, because full intent is a necessary condition for full evil, those kinds of cases are ones
in which we perhaps should assign a lesser penalty.
Now, if we were confident that we could always distinguish those kinds of cases, if we were
confident that we could always distinguish between pure happenstance and this kind of
relenting last-minute, second-thought intent, if we were sure we could distinguish between
those in all cases, things would be different.
If we could always distinguish the banana peel cases from the shaking hand, we could
see that the first cases, the banana peel cases, offer no excuse and no justification
for lesser punishment, whereas these kind of relenting intent cases do.
But we're not, in fact, that confident, and we can never expect to be that confident.
Here, the often foggy status of intent does become part of the picture.
Perhaps what we do in the case of attempted murder is we give the perpetrator the benefit
of the doubt.
The murder didn't come off.
Maybe his intention was not as evil as that of a successful murderer, so maybe he doesn't
deserve as stiff a punishment.
If that's so, there may then be a real justification for the legal distinction between murder and
attempted murder.
Let me take this a little further.
Let's talk about legal systems in general.
Legal systems are cumbersome and costly things.
We try to sketch rules that apply to a broad range of cases, and we try to construct a
legal machinery that's somehow cost-effective in terms of the social goals we're trying
to promote.
Within that framework, the fact that something is morally wrong or even harmful may not be
a sufficient justification for its legal control.
In some cases, the legal machinery that's needed to weed out the thing that's morally
wrong or the social machinery that's needed to weed to prevent the relevant harm, in some
cases that social machinery will itself carry a greater social weight, a greater social cost
than the issue deserves.
Legal moralism, legal moralism is the view that the mere immorality of an action is enough
to justify its legal control.
The view holds that the fact that something is morally wrong, that's enough to justify
making it illegal.
Well, when you look at legal systems like this, the fact that legal systems are cumbersome
and costly things is one reason why that view can never be correct, why legal moralism
can never be correct, why mere immorality alone can't justify legal control, because
all legal control comes itself with social costs.
I'm talking about costs in terms of the dollars that are required for enforcement and for
prosecution and punishment, but I'm not just talking about the dollars.
I'm also talking about the costs of social resources that are devoted to one area that
might better be spent in another.
If you have a legal machinery intended to weed out a particular moral wrong or a particular
aspect of harm, that legal machinery is going to be using social resources that might be
used somewhere else instead.
And there's always an error cost as well.
No social machinery operates flawlessly.
All social machinery brings with it the possibility of misapplication, the possibility of legal
strictures that are applied wrongly or that are applied in the wrong place to the wrong
people that are applied in the wrong cases.
With a large enough field for application, that possibility is bound to be very real.
That means that the social machinery designed to prevent harm will then itself be a source
of harm.
Let me give you a silly example that nonetheless makes the point.
Here's something that's both morally wrong and harmful to the community at large.
The failure to return one's library books on time.
And here's a way to prevent that wrong and to prevent that harm.
We could legalize a gang of library thugs drawn from the ranks of overzealous correction
officers, maybe, who are sent out to assault people who don't get those books back on time.
I'm quite sure that mechanism would work.
The incidents of overdue library books would plummet.
But it's also clear that this is a social mechanism that can't be justified by that
wrong, by that harm, by the wrong and harm it would prevent.
The library thugs are also bound to make a mistake sometime.
The social cost is unjustified by the social good that it's meant to produce.
Now it's pretty easy to figure out whether you've returned your library books or not.
In other cases, things aren't so easy to figure out.
And where things are less easy to figure out, the possibility for error will be significantly
greater, and that's the possibility for the error costs of the social machinery calculated
in there.
So distinguishing attempted murders that remain mere attempts because of a shaky intention.
From attempted murders that remain mere attempts because of mere happenstance, the banana under
the counter, that may be an area in which error is all too easy.
The distinction to be drawn in cases of intent then, even if it is ethically important, may
be unclear and ambiguous.
We can't then expect any social mechanism to draw that line accurately, to draw it without
error.
The idea then is that there may be more justification than it first appears for the differences in
how we treat the crime of murder and the crime of attempted murder under the law.
But I want to talk about ethics as well as law, so let me bring the point back to ethics
and morality.
What of the cases involving not legal responsibility, but ethical blame?
What of the truck driver, negligent in his brake checks, who bears a horrible responsibility
of a child dies as a result, but who's merely negligent if no one's hurt?
What of the parent, negligent in abandoning the baby in the bath, who's done something
morally terrible only when they are so unlucky that the child dies?
Here, just like in the legal situation, I think the situation is more complicated than
Nagel makes out.
One of our intuitions is that both the truck driver and the parent have done something
wrong and have done something wrong whether or not a child dies.
I think that intuition is right.
Indeed, one of our intuitions is that what they've done is equally wrong whether or not
a child dies, and I think that intuition too is right.
In this regard, our intuitions are at least roughly Kantian, and to that degree Kant is
at least roughly right.
What the legal cases make clear is that the law may be what it is for reasons involving
the social machinery of the law itself.
It has levels because there are levels of evaluating the social machinery applied to
cases.
I think we can also expect this to be true of morality as we have absorbed it from our
parents as we pass it on to our children because morality has a sort of social machinery too.
The most explicit way to pass on moral values is in the form of announced principles, but
some moral principles may be too difficult to frame in ways that can be passed on effectively.
Some moral distinctions may be too fine to expect people to be able to apply them without
moral error.
For that reason, we can expect the moral principles that we are actually able to put into words
to be a socially tailored set of moral principles.
Consider the moral principles and the rules of thumb that we were taught, and that we
in turn teach our children.
Just a procedure of passing on those principles from generation to generation, just that form
of passing procedure is a form of social institution.
In order for that transmission to be socially effective, the principles have to be generally
effective, but they also have to be easily transferred and applied.
They have to be things that are easy to teach and apply, and perhaps some of our principles
are like that.
Perhaps some of the principles we hold are generally effective, are easily transferred,
but are really not quite right.
It may be, in other words, that our moral judgments regarding cases of negligence exhibit
the same kind of wider social considerations that our legal judgments do.
It may be that cases of negligence are of the same ethical wrongness where a child dies
and where a child does not, but that we condemn one case in stronger terms than another because
of reasons having to do less with inherent wrongness than with the social effectiveness
of certain patterns of moral condemnation.
Some moral distinctions may be difficult to identify and practice.
In that case, we can expect principles of moral condemnation to be shaped by social forces
in the same way that legal principles are.
That idea goes a long way, I think, to explain the tension that Nagel and others have noticed.
On this approach, the tension in intuitions that Nagel notes doesn't show that our moral
values are inherently self-contradictory on a fundamental level.
What it may reveal instead are some of the predictable levels of social complexity in
morality and its application and its transfer from generation to generation.
The idea is that the law is as it is because of levels of social complexity and something
similar may be true of our moral views.
This analysis does leave us with a conceptual difficulty, however.
In the view I've tried to sketch, some of our moral intuitions are deeper than others.
Some are closer to the moral truth of particular situations, while others are of a form that
while not quite right, makes moral rules that are more socially manageable.
So some of our intuitions are deep ones, that the negligent parent is equally negligent
whether or not the child dies on my analysis.
Some of our intuitions are socially managed intuitions, that it's negligence that results
in death that's particularly bad.
But both of these come to us as intuitions.
The difficulty that remains is to understand the structure of our own morality well enough
to be able to tell the deep truths from the not quite true surface principles.
In the next lecture I want to pursue issues of chance and ethical choice still further
into the difficult problem of free will and determinism.
