Lecture 21 Images of Immortality
In previous lectures, I've talked about the value of human life and about questions of
life and death.
The question I want to raise in this lecture is this.
Would you like to be immortal?
Immortality is, of course, the ultimate reward in the Christian tradition.
It's immortality that rewards the faithful, he who believes in me shall never die.
Who wouldn't want to be immortal?
But immortality is also an aspect of the ultimate punishment in much of the Christian tradition.
Those who are suffering the torments of hell are all too immortal.
Immortals is immortal suffering through all eternity.
Relegated to such a hell, even he who does not believe in him shall never die.
That's the problem.
This alone should give us pause.
Immortality is not necessarily a good thing, even in that religious tradition that's most
explicitly committed to a promise of immortality.
When one is offered immortality, one's well advised to read the fine print on the conditions
imposed.
What would eternal life in heaven be like?
Singing praises to God among the angels forever and ever?
That's a standard caricature at any rate.
I don't know about you, but it seems to me that singing hymns could become tiresome pretty
quickly, at least after the first hundred years, say.
So what would a less caricature heaven be like?
As standardly conceived, what we're talking about is an eternity of ecstatic bliss.
I'm not sure that even makes sense.
The very nature of ecstasy seems to prohibit the notion of permanent ecstasy.
I know what ecstasy is like, I think, but how could that feeling go on forever?
If it's something like sexual orgasm, the idea of that lasting forever sounds downright
and painful.
There's also another difficulty with the idea of heaven as a state of eternal bliss.
Bliss is a subjective psychological state.
An eternity that consisted simply of continuance of a subjective state would seem of dubious
value to anything else or to anyone else.
It wouldn't seem to be of any value to anyone whose bliss it wasn't.
Where you are in your state of heavenly bliss, nothing changes, you never change, you face
no obstacles or difficulties, just eternal bliss.
What that leaves out are things like these, curiosity, exploration, experimentation, discovery,
growth, learning, and accomplishment.
Not those, for me at least, life would be unsatisfactory, however short or long.
Each of these things involves essentially a notion of personal change, and many involve
a notion of limits that are tested or overcome.
A life lived permanently in any single state, ecstasy included, would have none of the virtues
tied to personal change.
A life in which all limits were instantly removed would lose some quite basic and fundamental
joys.
Now that doesn't yet show that no form of immortality would be desirable, but it does
make one start to question the genuine desirability of a heavenly existence as it's often portrayed.
The philosopher Bernard Williams discusses the potential tedium of immortality in terms
of the macropolis case.
This is taken from a play by Carol Chapek, the Czech playwright who also coined the
term robot in one of his plays.
The macropolis case is not a case of heavenly or hellish immortality, it's a case of
earthbound immortality, living forever, much as you are now.
Here is Williams' description.
The play tells of a woman called Alina Macropolis, alias Emilia Marti, alias Elian McGregor,
alias a number of other things with the initials E.M.
Her father tries out an elixir of life on her.
As a quote from Williams again, at the time of the action she's aged 342, her unending
life has come to a state of boredom, indifference, and coldness.
Everything is joyless.
In the end, it's the same, she says, singing and silence.
She refuses to take the elixir again, she dies, and the formula is deliberately destroyed
by a young woman among the protests of older men.
Williams is clearly sympathetic to the setup.
If you're going to live forever here on this earth, what age are you going to be?
Alina Macropolis, alias Emilia Marti, alias Elian McGregor was 342 because she first took
the elixir at the age of 42, and it lived for 300 years since.
Williams thinks 42 is a pretty good choice, not a bad age at which to take the elixir.
But to be that age forever, Williams argues, would breed inevitable boredom.
The problem for Alina Macropolis wasn't that 42 wasn't a good age, Williams says.
Quote, her problem lay in having been at it for too long.
Her trouble was, it seems, boredom.
A boredom connected with the fact that everything that could happen and make sense to one particular
human being of 42 had already happened to her.
End quote.
Immortal beings continuing on this earth also appear in vampire stories.
Anne Rice's interview with the vampire and the series of books that flowed from it are
remarkable in this regard.
They're not merely horror stories in which the vampire is a monster that jumps out and
bites you.
They're remarkable for the fact that they are centered on the psychology of the monster,
of the vampire.
Indeed Mary Shelley's original Frankenstein was like that, too.
A good portion of Frankenstein is told from the monster's perspective, in the monster's
voice.
You'd never guess that from the Boris Karloff movies.
There the monster is something creepy that jumps out at you.
Indeed in the Boris Karloff movies, the monster cannot speak.
Now there are a number of themes that come back again and again in Anne Rice's novels.
One is a conflict between passion and ethics.
Rice's vampires feed with passion, but again and again they're forced to reflect on the
ethical impossibility of their situation.
A situation in which they are so constituted by nature that their life demands the death
of others, of many others.
A second theme that appears repeatedly is the theme of vampires as derivative creatures.
They live off humans physically, but Rice is interesting in painting them as largely
derivative in cultural and intellectual ways as well.
There's not a separate vampire culture thriving independently with its own new ideas.
You know, Rice's vampires wear human fashions.
They read human books.
They seek solace in human art forms.
Her vampires remain culturally as well as physically dependent on humans.
The theme most important for our purposes perhaps is the inevitable madness incumbent on living
for centuries among creatures whose existences are patterned by a much shorter life.
Because vampires have a radically different lifespan, the significance of human events
and the significance of history ultimately appears petty and transient to them.
Disease and wars and new ideas and fashions pass all so quickly in a vampire's life.
And the result is a mismatch in time.
Vampires end up out of sync with the worlds in which they live.
It's like being out of scale in terms of time in the same way that a giant would be spatially
out of scale.
Houses that are too little for you lose their significance.
And an immortal life among the mortals threatens to do the same thing in terms of time.
Here's a passage from an interview with the vampire in which Anne Rice's reflections
come very close to those of Bernard Williams in the Macropolis case.
Quote, in becoming immortal, vampires want all the forms of their life to be fixed as
they are and incorruptible.
Carriages made in the same dependable fashion.
Clothing of the cut which suited their prime.
When attired and speaking in the manner they've always understood and valued.
When in fact, all things change except the vampire himself.
Soon with an inflexible mind and often even with the most flexible mind, this immortality
becomes a penitential sentence in a madhouse of figures and forms that are hopelessly unintelligible
and without value.
One evening a vampire rises and realizes what he's feared perhaps for decades.
That he simply wants no more of life at any cost.
That whatever style or fashion or shape of existence made immortality attractive to him
has been swept off the face of the earth.
For Bernard Williams then, immortality threatens to end in boredom.
For Anne Rice, for much the same reasons, immortality threatens madness and a loss of
all value.
Another aspect of the fine print of immortality that's well worth attending to is what prospects
for interaction such an immortality allows.
In Charles Dickens' story, A Christmas Carol, Marley's ghost and his peers lead a hellish
existence in part because they've lost the power to interact with mortals.
This is Dickens' description.
The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in restless haste and
moaning as they went.
Every one of them wore chains like Marley's ghosts.
Ghosts, some few, they might be guilty governments, were linked together.
None were free.
Many had been personally known to scrooge in their lives.
He'd been quite familiar with one old ghost in a white waistcoat with a monstrous iron
safe attached to its ankle, who cried piteously at being unable to assist a wretched woman
with an infant whom it saw below upon a doorstep.
The misery with them all was clearly that they sought to interfere for good in human
matters and had lost the power forever.
Somewhere in William James there is a discussion of the undesirability of being a ghost unable
to participate in human life.
The ongoing human pageant would soon cease to be of any interest James proposes for a
being who was unable to interact with others.
In such a position one could only be a spectator, and the role of mere spectator would soon
pale.
James portrays ghosts in such a situation as fading away from lack of interest.
There's a similar portrayal of life after death in Peter S. Beagle's A Fine and Private
Place.
In Beagle's novel, for at least a period, the dead can communicate with each other and
with a few mad mortals.
Their voices sound like the tinkling of wind chimes in the heads of anyone who can hear
them.
Beagle's ghosts no longer have a physical body, their derivative in a deeper sense even
than Anne Rice's vampires.
What they are is derivative of what they once were.
Beagle's ghosts are precisely the non-physical remains of once physical beings.
In order to maintain a sense of their identity, they have to continue to conjure up images
of what it once was like to have been physical.
So Beagle's ghosts float down gravel paths, struggling desperately to remember what it
was once like to move with weight, to feel muscular tension in one's legs, and the crunch
of gravel beneath one's feet.
They try to remember what it had felt like to clench their jaws and hear their teeth
grind together.
Eventually, the task of trying to remember becomes more and more difficult.
Eventually, Beagle's ghosts find remembered contact with the physical simply too difficult
to maintain.
They fade away like a lost memory and they can be heard no more.
The outcome for Beagle's ghosts and for those of William James is then ultimately the same
when it inevitably loses psychological contact with a world one cannot share.
All of that suffices to establish a very simple point, that immortality per se is not necessarily
desirable.
It depends on the condition.
Neither the caricature conditions for a Christian heaven nor the extenuated contact of a range
of literary ghosts seems acceptable.
But suppose you could set your own conditions.
Are there other conditions under which you would want to live forever?
Here I'm going to get even more personal.
I'm going to talk about conditions I personally would set for any immortality that I'd find
acceptable.
Now, I don't mean to suggest that your conditions would be precisely the same.
In fact, I think of this as an intellectual exercise, reflecting on what you would insist
on in an eternal existence can also show you important things about what you really value
in your limited mortal life.
So are there conditions under which I'd want to live forever?
I think there are.
Surprisingly, they're sort of boring.
Speaking for my own case at least, the conditions under which I'd accept immortality are surprisingly
similar to the everyday conditions characteristic of my life now.
One condition I'd put on immortality is this, that it must continue the joys of exploration
and artistic expression, the joys of finding and making and doing.
For me, it has to contain challenges and projects.
All of that indicates, as Williams' reflections on the Macropolis case indicate, that it can't
be static.
So any acceptable eternity, for me at least, must be one in which one can continue to try
new things, to question and wonder and grow, to probe and poke, and to occasionally fail.
That also indicates that the only immortality I'd find acceptable would be an immortality
in which I continued as a limited being, a being with limits as to what I know, to what
I've attempted, to what I managed to achieve.
I'd also insist, I think, following the reflections in William James on at least some small number
of kindred spirits with which to share such an eternity.
I'm not a man of many acquaintances here and one loved companion would probably be sufficient.
That companionship would make immortality far more attractive.
It also seems possible to me that an isolated existence, an isolated existence for eternity,
might be tolerable were it satisfactory enough in other ways, were it to allow for this endless
pursuit of curiosity, for example.
Now most of us, I'm confident, can picture an immortality we'd accept.
For most of us, I'm confident, it would have to continue those things we hold to be of
most value in our mortal lives.
Let me also talk about values and the forever that is an inevitable part of reflections
on immortality.
Eternity is not acceptable regardless of conditions and permanence, existence forever, isn't the
only virtue.
We build a monument, a Parthenon, for example, or a Taj Mahal and we hope it'll stand forever.
We also hope to achieve something in the world of ideas that will last.
But there are also things that we hold to be of value that are far from permanent.
A lover's smile, the feeling of freshness on a cold winter's morning, a flash of light
across our vision that we recognize as a butterfly's wings.
Were any of these things frozen in permanence, they'd be monstrous.
You mean her face looks like that forever?
The essential impermanence of these things is part of what these things are.
That's part of their value as well.
There are things that are of value even if they are essentially ephemeral.
Even if to be that kind of thing is to be, but for an instant.
There are things of value that wouldn't be of the same value if they were not impermanent
in this way.
Williams touches on this issue too.
He says, quote, there's no desirable or significant property which life would have more of or
have more unqualifiedly if we lasted forever.
In some part we can apply to life Aristotle's marvelous remark about Plato's form of the
good, nor will it be any the more good for being eternal.
That which lasts long is no whiter than that which perishes in a day, end quote.
One cannot wish for all things of value to last forever.
Some things, were they to last forever, wouldn't have the value that they do.
There are also things that have the value they do because of their relative position
in time.
A baby's first cry, the lover's first kiss, have part of their value because they are
first instances.
A parent's last farewell may have part of its value for the same kind of reason.
Time this plays a range of different roles among those things that are of value.
The lesson I think is that we must value what we value in an appropriate way.
Some things we value by trying to make them permanent, or by trying to extend them in
time, or by trying to repeat them.
Those are values that might be taken into eternity.
But there are other things that we have to value for the evanescent and ephemeral and
unrepeatable things that they are.
Those are values we can participate in as much now as if we were immortal.
There may also be values in which we can participate only because we are mortal.
There may be things that are of the significance to us that they are precisely because we know
we will not live forever.
The value we place on our own children, or on the young in general, may be like this.
The value that we hope our life might have beyond its extent is like this.
The value of a love late in life, or knowing that we will be remembered, or that we have
achieved something with a finite existence that might extend beyond the limits of that
existence.
Those are all like this.
Mortality allows at least some things to be a value that wouldn't be valuable without
it.
If this is true, then there are things of value that only immortality can offer us.
There are gains that immortality would offer, at least an immortality in which we were able
to set the condition, but there would also be things of value that we would lose by being
immortal.
Now, it would be too much to claim, I think, that value somehow is maximized overall by
being mortal.
Immortality of at least some form still has its appeal, but we must recognize that it
would also have its costs.
What about immortality and the meaning of life?
There are some who think that an afterlife is necessary in order to give this life its
sense, and at least one Christian tradition, the entire significance of this life, is as
a portal to the next.
This life is a mere trial, perhaps, or a test, a qualifying exam for an eternal existence
in heaven.
If there is no heaven, some will ask, and if there is no immortality, what's the meaning
of it all?
It's this tradition, I believe, to which Wittgenstein is responding critically in a
passage in the Tractatus Logica Philosophicus.
Wittgenstein numbered his passages in the Tractatus, and this is passage 6.4312.
Quote,
Not only is there no guarantee of the temporal immortality of the human soul, that is to
say of its eternal survival after death, but in any case, this assumption completely fails
to accomplish the purpose for which it's always been intended, or is some riddle solved
by my surviving forever?
Is not this eternal life itself as much of a riddle as our present life?
Wittgenstein's point is that to maintain that this life gets its meaning or significance
only because it's a doorway to the next, seems to leave unanswered a parallel question
about the other side of the doorway.
What is it that gives that life its significance?
From what we've said about values and permanence, the mere eternity of an afterlife, the fact
that it would be a life everlasting, can't be the only thing that gives it significance.
Something meaningless could perfectly well last forever, and be equally meaningless.
Other things might give significance to such an afterlife.
They would be things like love, and joy, and intimate contact with God, say.
But if those can give significance to an afterlife, they can surely give significance to immortal
and finite life as well.
There are other things that give value to our immortal existence here, which are much
more difficult to picture in a standard heaven.
That standard heaven is one in which no one has unfulfilled needs or unsatisfied desires.
All needs are fulfilled, but one of the things we hold to be of highest value is self-sacrifice,
a voluntary doing without so that others may benefit.
If all needs are already fulfilled in heaven, how could the supreme value of self-sacrifice
exist there?
Just as some of the things we value are essentially non-eternal, some of the things we value could
exist only in a context in which all needs are not fulfilled.
An eternity without need would necessarily be without many of the things that are most
precious to us.
Personally, I see no reason to believe that immortality does wait for us on the other
side of death.
But whether it does or not, philosophical reflection on immortality may have a great
deal to tell us about what we ultimately value.
It may have a great deal to tell us regarding what we hold of highest value even in a life
that is doomed to be mortal.
In a range of work, Derek Parfit has argued that philosophical reflection has another
lesson to teach us, a lesson regarding a deep conceptual mistake buried in our standard
hopes for immortality.
What we standardly hope for in immortality, or would say we hope for, is our personal
continuance.
I'm a particular person.
What I want is for that person to continue to exist.
Parfit offers some reflections that he thinks shows us that that's not what we ultimately
care about.
Parfit uses a range of thought experiments regarding teleporters, machines which record
our bodies, atom by atom, molecule by molecule, and then send that information across space
where a duplicate of us is reconstituted, sort of like a fax machine for people.
In imagining standard cases of teleportation, there are two things that we seem to hold
to be true.
First, that the person who's reconstituted at the other end, that that person is me.
And second, that there are certain relations of psychological continuity between the person
on the other end and me.
My memories continue in him, for example.
What psychological continuity means is that the person stepping from the box at the other
end has certain memories because of things I did, and has certain skills because of skills
I developed, say.
Now in the simple cases we imagine, these things go together.
The guy at the other end of the teleporter is me.
The guy at the other end of the teleporter also has my memories.
But Parfit has us imagine other cases in which our concepts seem to come apart.
Consider for example a case in which the information recorded at the beginning of the teleportation
is used to assemble not one, but two individuals at the other end.
From that point, those two individuals go on to live their individual lives.
In such a case we clearly have two different people at the other end, constructed from
the information that was me.
But if the two individuals at the other end are not the same person, then both of them
can't be the same person I am.
If they were both the same person as me, they'd be the same person as each other.
So we have two different people at the other end.
So they cannot both be me.
But any reason to say that this one was me could be countered by an equally strong reason
to say that the other one was me.
We thus seem forced in such a case to say that neither person on the other end is strictly
me.
Now in a thought experiment like that, links of personal identity are broken.
Neither of those people is strictly me.
Their relations of psychological continuity remain.
They both have the same mental past.
And thus my psychological life continues in both of them.
If what we really cared about was personal survival, Parfit says, survival of this very
person that is me, then a two-tail teleportation case like that would strike us with horror.
Or in that kind of case, the person that's me would cease to exist.
It can't be claimed that either of the people at the other end is literally me.
But there doesn't seem any reason to react with horror here that wouldn't be an equal
reason to react in horror at the idea of a normal teleportation in which we get just
one individual at the other end.
Parfit's conclusion is that what we really care about is not continuance of our personal
identities, but continuance of the bonds of psychological continuity.
Parfit says, quote, personal identity is not what matters.
It's merely true that in most cases personal identity coincides with what matters, end quote.
What matters, so the argument goes, isn't strictly whether the person that's me continues
to exist, but whether the kinds of psychological ties that exist between my memories and plans
and skills will continue to bind future memories and plans and skills.
And those kinds of things, of course, can bind me to other people as well.
Not everyone's convinced.
I offer Parfit's argument merely as a final example of how reflection on possibilities
for immortality may tell us about things that we value in this life.
A recognition of what we truly value moreover can make a real change in how we feel about
our lives.
Parfit says that this argument made a change like that in his life.
He says, quote, I find it liberating and consoling.
When I believe that what mattered was continuance of personal identity, I seemed imprisoned
in myself.
My life seemed like a glass tunnel through which I was moving faster every year, at the
end of which there was darkness.
When I changed my view, the walls of my glass tunnel disappeared.
I now live in the open air, he says.
There is still a difference between my life and the lives of other people, but the difference
is less.
Other people are closer.
I'm less concerned about the rest of my own life and more concerned about the lives of
others.
My death seems to me less bad, end quote.
In the next lecture, we return to a question about value in general.
We often think of morality in terms of rules.
But can all morality be formulated in rules?
