Can engaging in simple musical activities help patients with neurological disorders?
As we've learned in this course, music has strong connections to multiple brain systems,
including systems involved in language, motor control, and social cognition.
In this lecture, I want to describe a few different lines of research, which suggest
that musical training can enhance communication and movement in patients with a variety of
neurological disorders.
The first is aphasia.
Aphasia is a language disorder caused by damage to the brain.
We'll focus on aphasia due to stroke.
Strokes that lead to lasting aphasia are devastating to human communication.
Large strokes in the left frontal temporal regions of the brain can lead to persistent
non-fluent aphasia, in which individuals struggle to produce words long after their
stroke, even though their language comprehension may be quite good.
In the U.S., it's estimated that strokes result in more than 50,000 new cases of lasting
non-fluent aphasia each year.
Standard speech therapy is helpful for many people, but people vary widely in how much
they benefit from this therapy.
Many are left far from full recovery.
There is growing interest in exploring how recovery can be enhanced by combining speech
therapy with other interventions.
These include treatments that facilitate neural plasticity in non-damaged left hemisphere
brain regions.
For example, there is research on using electrical stimulation of the brain to help preserved
brain regions near damaged regions take over some of the functions of those damaged areas.
As these newer methods are being explored, there is an older music-based therapy that's
also attracting attention.
This is melodic intonation therapy, or MIT.
MIT was invented in the early 1970s at the Boston VA Hospital by Albert, Sparks, and
Helm.
It was inspired by an old and striking clinical observation.
Non-fluentophysics can have great difficulty getting just a few words out, but can sometimes
sing familiar songs with great fluency.
Art and colleagues hypothesized that this was due to intact right hemisphere circuits
for song, and sought to use these circuits to aid speech recovery.
Melodic intonation therapy trains the production of short phrases, such as, I love you, using
song-like pitch and rhythm patterns.
It's song-like because there are only two pitches.
Each syllable is intoned with a fixed high or low pitch, and is produced with a slow
and steady rhythm, for example, one syllable per second.
The therapist models a phrase, and the patient sings it back while also tapping the phrase's
rhythm with one tap per syllable.
Phrase length is gradually increased over the course of therapy.
The goal of the therapy is to have the patient be able to produce self-initiated, untrained
speech to increase their verbal fluency.
Albert and colleagues published their first paper on MIT in 1973, more than 40 years ago.
But the efficacy of this therapy, and its underlying neural basis, have only recently
begun to be investigated in randomized controlled trials.
Gottfried Schlaug and colleagues are comparing MIT to a control therapy called speech repetition
therapy, which is matched to MIT in all respects, except that phrases are spoken, not sung,
and tapping isn't used.
This research is happening right now in 2015.
No results aren't in yet, but Schlaug and colleagues have reported some encouraging preliminary
findings.
In 2008, they published a paper that examined two severely non-fluent people with broke
esophageal, who had large left hemisphere lesions.
When these two individuals started the experiment, they were both already more than a year post-stroke,
and had already undergone traditional speech therapy.
According to conventional wisdom, by a year after stroke, people have recovered the most
function they will ever recover.
But conventional wisdom can be wrong.
One patient was given 40 sessions of MIT, and the other 40 sessions of speech repetition
therapy.
Language assessments were conducted before and after therapy by an independent observer,
based on interviews, and on having the patients describe complex pictures.
Both patients improved with therapy.
This shows improvement is possible, even when non-fluentophysics are a year post-stroke.
Between the two patients, the MIT patient showed larger improvements in the number of
coherent phrases produced per minute, and in the number of syllables per phrase.
By the end of the therapy, the MIT patient showed gains of over 200 percent compared
to pre-MIT performance.
Now it's important to point out that MIT didn't cure this patient's aphasia.
At the end of the therapy, the patient still had serious language problems.
But when you're struggling to communicate, a noticeable improvement in your abilities
can mean a lot.
Would these results replicate?
In a second paper in 2009, Schlagan colleagues examined six non-fluentophysics, with who
participated in MIT.
Again, all patients were more than a year post-stroke.
In this second study, each patient's language assessment was done several times before therapy,
in order to measure ordinary day-to-day variation, as well as twice after therapy.
All six patients showed a significant language improvement following MIT, again showing gains
of more than 200 percent in coherent phrases per minute.
MIT might not work for every non-fluentophysic patient.
Everyone's aphasia is somewhat different, reflecting the size and location of their
stroke and how that stroke interacts with their particular brain microarchitecture.
But with multiple patients showing benefits of MIT and Schlag's research, it's worth
asking, what's going on in the brain that might be underlying these effects?
It's generally thought that there are two routes to language recovery after left hemisphere
stroke.
The first is for remaining brain areas in the left hemisphere to take over some of the
functions of the damaged tissue.
This is thought to happen when lesions in the left side are relatively small.
But when lesions are large, it's thought that regions in the right hemisphere opposite
the damaged regions on the left side can sometimes compensate for the damaged regions.
The electrical stimulation approach I mentioned earlier focuses on promoting plasticity in
undamaged left hemisphere brain regions.
Long before the modern research on this electrical approach, MIT was designed with the idea of
retraining right hemisphere circuits to compensate for damaged left hemisphere brain regions.
This idea was ahead of its time.
Modern FMRI research with healthy normal individuals has shown that the production of song does
have a greater right hemisphere bias compared to the production of speech, but it also recruits
many cortical regions shared with speech production.
Hence from the perspective of modern research on neural plasticity, the idea that MIT might
recruit song networks in the brain and retrain them for speech production seems like a plausible
hypothesis.
As part of their ongoing research on melodic intonation therapy, Schlagan colleagues have
investigated this hypothesis with functional and structural neuroimaging.
In the first study I mentioned earlier, the one with just two patients, FMRI measurements
of speech production were taken before and after therapy.
During these FMRI measurements, patients spoke two syllable words or phrases.
These were words the patients could say even before the therapy.
This allowed the researchers to focus on changes in the neural control of the same words before
and after therapy.
The salient finding was that after therapy, the MIT patient activated more right hemisphere
regions while speaking than did the other patient, who had speech repetition therapy.
These regions were in the temporal cortex, premotor cortex, and posterior inferior frontal
cortex.
This was consistent with the right hemisphere retraining hypothesis behind MIT.
Turning to structural neuroimaging, the second study I discussed earlier with six patients
examined one of the important long distance connections in the brain.
This was the arcuate vesiculus.
Within each hemisphere, the arcuate vesiculus is a large white matter fiber track that connects
neurons in the temporal and frontal lobes.
It plays an important role in auditory motor integration.
In humans, it's generally more strongly developed on the left side of the brain.
The left arcuate is known to be involved in language processing.
It's the track that helps connect two important language areas, vernicke's area in the posterior
superior temporal lobe and Broca's area in the inferior frontal lobe.
In the six patients in this study, the majority of the left arcuate was damaged due to the
strokes.
The researchers used diffusion tensor imaging, or DTI, to examine the structure of the right
arcuate vesiculus before and after MIT in the six patients that they had studied.
All six patients showed a significant increase in the volume of this fiber track after therapy.
The cellular changes underlying this increase aren't known for certain.
Diffusion tensor imaging can't provide that kind of detailed information.
The changes seen could be due to increases in myelination, or axon diameter, or new axonal
sprouting, or other factors that reflect how axons in large fiber bundles are spatially
organized.
But even though we don't know what's happening at the cellular level, the data indicated
that a major right hemisphere fiber track to the brain was being structurally modified
in these patients.
A music-based therapy seemed to be changing the structure of the brain.
In a more recent 2014 paper, Juan Schlaug and colleagues again used diffusion tensor
imaging to examine structural changes in the brains of 11 non-fluent aphasic patients who
did melodic intonation therapy.
These patients were on an average two years post-stroke when they started therapy.
This time, they were compared to a control group of non-fluent aphasics who didn't get
MIT.
This study focused on white matter structure just below the cortex rather than on long
distance connections.
Local white matter structure might be related to how many axons are coming into a particular
region or going out of a region.
After 15 weeks of therapy, the patient showed significant gains in communication in terms
of how much speech they could produce in a given amount of time.
They also showed increases in local white matter structure in several regions of the
brain, including the right inferior frontal gyrus and the right superior temporal gyrus.
In the right inferior frontal gyrus, the degree of structural change in white matter
correlated with the degree of improvement in verbal fluency.
This suggests that the brain changes in this area are related to the verbal improvements
in the patients.
It's important to note that the control group did not show significant improvements in fluency
or significant changes in local white matter structure.
Thus the changes in the MIT group weren't just due to spontaneous recovery.
They seemed to be related to biological impact of music based therapy on the brain.
Now I want to turn to the impact of music on a different neurological disorder.
This is Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's is a degenerative disorder with prominent motor symptoms.
These symptoms result from the death of dopamine producing neurons in a part of the deep brain
structure called the substantia nigra, which is in the midbrain.
Prominent motor symptoms include shaking, rigidity, slowness of movement, and difficulty
with walking and gait.
Parkinson's patients often have a kind of shuffling stride.
The problem is not muscle weakness, but a problem in complex motor control.
Later stages include psychological and emotional problems.
Parkinson's mostly affects older adults.
Even though its first detailed medical description was in 1817 by James Parkinson, as of now
there is no cure.
Early in the disease, drugs that target dopamine receptors are used like L-dopa.
But these drugs gradually become ineffective and can cause side effects.
The pharmacological treatments for Parkinson's often have limited impact on gait problems,
so physical rehab programs are often used for therapy.
Usually there has been growing interest in the use of music and rhythm in gait therapy.
Over the years there have been striking clinical observations about how people with Parkinson's
can move more fluidly when they move to music.
In Oliver Saxe's book, Awakenings, and in the later film based on that book, some of
Saxe's Parkinsonian patients could walk and move much better when there was music playing.
Michael Taut did early pioneering research on this phenomenon and showed that music with
a beat can help patients with motor disorders initiate and coordinate walking movements.
Taut is one of the founders of a branch of music therapy called Neurologic Music Therapy,
a research based treatment system for patients with neurological disorders.
Taut has published basic research on how healthy people synchronize their movements to a rhythmic
beat and applied research on the impact of music with a beat on the gait of neurological
patients including patients with Parkinson's or stroke.
Much of this work is discussed in his book Rhythm, Music and the Brain, Scientific Foundations
and Clinical Applications.
Taut and his colleagues have designed a music based gait therapy called Rhythmic Auditory
Stimulation.
They have compared it to conventional physical therapy in several randomized studies.
In rhythmic auditory stimulation therapy, patients practice walking to music with a
steady beat such as folk and jazz music.
The beat is enhanced by overlaying a metronome click track on the musical beats.
The beat tempo is initially matched to the patient's own natural gait, then gradually
increased in small increments over the course of training.
In one 1997 study that focused on stroke patients, patients were randomly assigned to rhythmic
auditory stimulation therapy or conventional physical therapy as a treatment for abnormal
gait.
Both groups participated in six weeks of gait therapy.
Pre and post therapy gait measurements were conducted on a flat walkway without music
using a computerized foot sensor system.
The researchers found that gait velocity and stride length improved in both groups but
the rhythmic auditory stimulation group showed significantly greater improvement in both
measures.
They showed about twice the improvement of the traditional physical therapy group.
This advantage was replicated in a 2007 randomized study of stroke patients with larger sample
sizes.
In 1996 and 1997, a thousand colleagues published some of the earliest research comparing rhythmic
auditory stimulation to conventional physical therapy in Parkinson's patients.
These studies focused on patients with moderate gait deficits.
Like the stroke studies, these studies showed that the rhythm-based therapy led to greater
improvements in gait.
By measuring the details of how Parkinson's patients timed their movements with respect
to the music, these studies pointed to entrainment of gait patterns to the musical beat as an
important feature of the rhythmic therapy.
The patients didn't just walk to the music, they often synchronized their movements to
the beat of the music.
Of course, the music probably also had positive effects on emotional arousal but the primary
driving force in the therapy seemed to be the music's ability to entrain human movement
to a beat.
We've talked in previous lectures about how the phenomenon of a musical beat involves
a strong link between perception and action.
The tendency to move in synchrony with a beat by head bobbing or clapping or dance is seen
in every human culture.
FMRI research has shown that perception of beat-based rhythms leads to co-activation
of auditory regions and motor planning regions of the brain, even in the absence of overt
movement.
It's possible that the Parkinson's patients use their auditory motor networks to perceive
a musical beat and use it to guide walking movements.
We need basic research on what's happening in the brains of Parkinson's patients when
they perceive a beat and move to it.
Is musical beat processing completely bypassing their damaged brain regions or is it somehow
normalizing the activity patterns in those regions?
Hopefully future research will provide answers to these questions.
In the meantime, it's interesting to see how public awareness has begun to grow about
the positive impact of moving to music for people with Parkinson's disease.
In New York City, the Mark Morris Dance Group started a Dance for Parkinson's program in
which patients come together to work with professional dance teachers in a non-clinical
setting.
This program has been very popular and is now spreading to different cities in the U.S.
A recent documentary film called Capturing Grace focuses on this program.
The tagline of the film is, there are no patients, there are only dancers.
That line reminds me of something I heard a member of the Mark Morris Group say about
the program.
He was speaking recently at an event about the intersection of science and dance.
He said that people in the Dance for Parkinson's program tell them that when they dance and
focus on themselves as dancers, they feel like whole human beings again, instead of just
a collection of symptoms in need of treatment.
Human music can't cure Parkinson's, but it can impact physical movement and the sense
of self in a way that few other things can.
We've been focusing on gait and movements of the lower limbs.
Now I want to shift to a line of research that looks at the impact of music on the upper
limbs in patients with motor disorders.
These are patients with strokes that affect their arm and hand on one side, leaving it
weak and uncoordinated.
This is called a one-sided upper limb paresis or partial paralysis.
In these patients, their stroke has not affected their communication.
They're not aphasic.
As humans, we're very dependent on our arms and our hands.
In the brain, the human hand gets an especially large representation in sensory motor areas
of the cortex because of the fine manual motor control involved in hand movement.
If you've ever slept in an odd position and wakened to find your arm and hand numb and
only weakly responsive to your mental commands to move, you know how distressing it would
be to have one arm and hand in a permanent state where it didn't do what you wanted
it to do.
How could music help patients with upper limb paresis?
The researchers Eckhart Altonmuller, Thomas Munter, Sabine Schneider and colleagues have
developed a novel music-based therapy for these patients.
They call it music-supported therapy and started publishing papers about it in 2007.
The idea of the therapy is to use simple forms of music-making to promote neural plasticity
in the undamaged brain tissue around the lesion to help it take over some of the functions
of the damaged areas.
Remember that in the motor system, the right side of the brain controls the left hand and
arm and vice versa, so we're talking about inducing plasticity in the side of the brain
opposite the affected hand.
The idea that a behavioral therapy could induce neural plasticity in the motor control regions
of the damaged hemisphere is not implausible.
There is another more traditional therapy that is sometimes used with patients that have
upper limb paresis.
This is constraint-induced movement therapy.
In this therapy, the unaffected limb is constrained so that the patient has to use the affected
limb.
This forces the side of the brain that controls the affected limb to do more work than it
normally would.
Constraint-induced movement therapy has been shown to lead to some motor improvements in
the affected limb.
These improvements are associated with neural plasticity in motor areas on the affected
side of the brain.
Constraint therapy may not cure the problem, but it can sometimes improve function.
Alton Mueller and colleagues wanted to know if a music-based motor therapy might end up
being more effective than traditional therapies, including constraint therapy.
They wanted to build on prior basic research in music neuroscience, including the strong
ability of musical training to drive neural plasticity and music's strong connection
to emotion and reward circuits.
They were also interested in the idea that music's ability to link the auditory and motor
system could be useful for helping the motor system recover after stroke.
These researchers designed music-supported therapy to take advantage of some of the special
features of playing music.
One is that the degree of fine motor control needed to play musical instruments is variable,
depending on what instruments you play.
For some instruments like drum pads, you don't need much fine motor control in order
to just hit them with a drumstick.
If you have a series of drum pads, you can play a structured pattern on them without
a lot of individual finger dexterity.
On the other hand, if you have a piano keyboard in front of you, playing a structured pattern
requires quite a bit of individual finger dexterity.
Music-supported therapy takes advantage of this.
A patient is trained to produce patterns on two different instruments.
An electronic drum set is used to train gross motor movements.
An electronic piano keyboard is used to train fine motor movements.
One of the clever things about this therapy is the way it takes advantage of modern electronic
instrument technology.
By using electronic drum pads, the researchers can control the sounds that come out when
you hit them.
Instead of having drum sounds come out, they link each of eight pads to a different piano
tone, forming a C major scale, C-D-E-F-G-A-B-C.
This creates a one octave piano keyboard, except each key isn't a narrow little rectangle
like it is on a piano keyboard, it's a big round pad that's about 8 inches in diameter.
The other instrument in this therapy is an electric piano keyboard, but it's modified
to make it simpler than a normal piano keyboard.
Part of it is covered so the patient can only play the eight white keys, which again form
a C major scale.
In this way, patients can be taught musical sequences that they produce, either as gross
motor movements or as fine motor movements.
The melodic pattern is the same in both cases, but the physical movements required are different.
This is a very clever idea because it can help create a mental transfer between gross
and fine motor patterns by linking them to the same auditory pattern.
The therapy is done interactively with the experimenter.
The experimenter first plays a pattern on one of the devices, and then the patient repeats
it.
The first patterns are very simple with just a single note.
They gradually get more complex, work up to sequences of several notes, and then to the
beginnings of children's songs.
In 2010, Alton Müller and colleagues published a study which directly compared music-supported
therapy to constraint-induced therapy and conventional motor therapy.
This was a large study of almost 80 stroke patients.
They found that music-supported therapy led to the largest gains in terms of standard
measures of motor function.
What is actually going on in the brain with music-supported therapy?
In 2011, Rojo Alton Müller and colleagues published a case study using this therapy.
This study combined behavioral and brain measurements to see what changed in the brain as a person
went through this therapy.
The patient was a woman who had left subcortical stroke about two years before the therapy.
She had a moderate paresis of the right arm and hand.
She had no prior musical training, which was good.
This allowed the researchers to see if this kind of therapy would work for someone who
had never played a musical instrument before.
The patient was able to do the music-supported therapy.
She had 20 sessions over the course of a month.
Both before and after therapy, she did a number of standardized tests of motor control, which
had nothing to do with music.
After therapy, she showed improvement in the ability to grasp, grip, and pinch with her
affected hand.
She was also able to tap faster with that hand and to tap more smoothly with the fingers
of that hand.
The therapy had improved general aspects of her arm and hand motor control.
This study also took brain measurements.
One of these involved a technology called transcranial magnetic stimulation, or TMS.
Circranial magnetic stimulation is a way of using magnetic fields to stimulate specific
regions of the cerebral cortex.
In this study, TMS was used to stimulate the hand area of the motor cortex on the damaged
side of the brain.
The researchers did this in order to measure the strength of the motor response in the
muscles of the hand.
The idea is that if the motor pathway between the cortex and the hand is working well, the
corticospinal tract will be more excitable, and stimulation of the cortex will lead to
a sizable motor evoked potential in the muscles of the hand.
If that region of the cortex is not working as well, the tract will be less excitable,
and the same amount of stimulation will yield a smaller motor evoked potential.
The motor evoked potential is measured using EMG on the muscles of the hand.
The researchers used TMS to measure the motor evoked potential, or MEP, before and after
the music-supported therapy.
They found that the motor evoked potential was significantly larger after therapy, almost
double in size.
The neural pathway between brain and hand on the damaged side of the brain was working
better.
This suggested some neural reorganization had taken place in the hand area of the motor
cortex.
Perhaps more neurons in that region had become involved in representing structured finger
movements because of the motor demands of the music-based therapy.
The next findings from this study were especially interesting.
The researchers used fMRI to measure motor function and auditory perception in this patient
before and after training.
Before training, they found that moving the affected hand was associated with an odd
pattern of brain activation.
There was activation on the side of the brain opposite the affected hand, which is normal,
since that's the side that controls the hand.
But there was also activation on the same side of the brain as the affected hand.
That wasn't normal.
It suggested a failure of normal cross-hemisphere inhibition.
In normal healthy people, when just one hand is used for a task, the active motor cortex
on one side of the brain inhibits the motor cortex on the other side of the brain via
connections that go through the corpus callosum.
In the patient, this inhibition wasn't working correctly before therapy.
But after therapy, fMRI showed a large reduction in motor activations on the same side of the
brain as the affected hand.
Cross-hemisphere inhibition seemed to be working better again.
I mentioned that the researchers also used fMRI to look at auditory processing.
Before and after training, they had the patients listen to tone sequences.
Before training, these were the sequences they would go on to learn.
After training, these were the sequences that they had learned.
They were the same sequences, but they had a different relationship to the motor system
before and after training.
In the before training fMRI study, listening to these sequences just activated auditory
regions of the brain.
But after training, hearing the same sequences activated both the auditory and motor regions
of the brain.
This wasn't unexpected.
In 2007, Amir Lahav and colleagues had gotten the same result with a group of healthy young
adults using fMRI.
Learning to play a sequence of notes changes the way your brain reacts to those notes when
you just hear them played.
Parts of your motor system get activated.
Alton Mueller and colleagues feel that this auditory motor coupling is part of what drives
neural plasticity in music-supported therapy.
In a 2013 paper, they did a group study of 20 chronic stroke patients with upper limb
peresis who did this therapy.
As in the single case study, they found improvements in standard movement tests after the therapy.
These movement tests had nothing to do with music.
They also saw significant increased motor-evoked potentials in the hand area of the brain as
measured by transcranial magnetic stimulation.
This was the first evidence from a group study showing that music-supported therapy could
lead to rapid neural plasticity in chronic stroke patients.
The researchers had quantified the patient's improvements on general motor tests using motion
capture methods and had quantified the change in their motor-evoked potentials using TMS.
As a result, this therapy can now be directly compared to other, more standard therapies
in terms of its behavioral and neural effects.
I want to end this lecture with one final example of how engaging and simple music making
can be beneficial for people with neurological conditions.
We focused on adults so far in this lecture, and now I want to shift the focus to children.
I'll briefly describe a new line of research that uses simple drumming to encourage speech
output in nonverbal children with autism.
Autism spectrum disorder is a developmental disorder that affects about 1 in 110 children.
One of the core deficits is in communication.
Up to a quarter of autistic children don't communicate with others verbally, and it's
been hard to find techniques to increase their speech output.
A new form of therapy called auditory motor mapping training aims to get nonverbal autistic
children to speak.
It comes from the laboratory of Gottfried Schlaug and shares some features of the melodic intonation
therapy we discussed in the first part of this lecture.
It involves intoning words and phrases while doing simple rhythmic movements.
In a 2011 paper, Juan Schlaug and colleagues did a proof-of-concept study where they had
six nonverbal autistic children get 40 sessions of this therapy over a two-month period.
In each session, a therapist sits across from the child with a pair of tuned drums that
is between them.
The drums make different pitches.
There's a high pitch and a low pitch, just as in melodic intonation therapy.
The therapist intones two syllable utterances, like mommy or more please, while also tapping
out the pitches on the drums.
Combining intonation with rhythmic tapping is also like melodic intonation therapy, except
in this condition, the tapping involves drums.
The child is gradually led from just listening to speech to producing speech through a series
of intermediate stages.
First, they just listen.
Then they're encouraged to speak and drum together with the therapist.
After that, they're encouraged to produce the speech with some support from the therapist.
After that, they're encouraged to repeat what the therapist says.
Finally, they get to the stage where they can speak and play by themselves.
It takes time and effort to work through these stages, but in the 2011 paper, the researchers
showed it could be done.
As a result of their efforts, the vocal production of all of the children in this study improved.
This even generalized to some words that were not practiced in the therapy sessions.
One thing that made these results seem especially promising is that the improvements seen at
the end of therapy were maintained at the eight-week follow-up visit.
Schlaugen colleagues are now doing a larger-scale clinical trial to directly compare auditory
motor mapping therapy to non-intonation-based speech therapy.
It would be particularly interesting to see what's changing in the brain as children
undergo this new therapy.
In this lecture, we've seen four different ways in which music-based therapy can help
people with neurological disorders.
This will be a growing research area in years to come, and will help us explore the medical
value of research on music in the brain.
