In our previous lesson, we talked about graphs of a number of different polynomial functions.
In this lesson, I'd like to spend a good bit of time talking about how we combine polynomial
functions to make new ones using operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division, and something called composition. We spent some time in one of the review lessons
for this course discussing some of these ideas, but I want to take them further in this lesson.
First, let's talk about adding polynomials. You've already seen everything you need to
know about how to add two polynomials. Basically, you just combine like terms. So let me suggest
you try this example yourself and see how you do before we come back together. Simplify
7x to the fourth plus 5x squared minus 2x plus 3 plus 8x to the fourth minus 9x cubed
plus 15x squared plus 12x plus 27. OK, let's see if I got the same answer that you did.
The key here is that we put together the like terms. So just be careful to combine the right
terms together. That's the key. I see a 7x to the fourth plus an 8x to the fourth. That
gives me 15x to the fourth. I'm going to have a negative 9x cubed because it has no term
that I want to combine with. So that's no problem. I have a 5x squared and a 15x squared.
Those can be combined to give me 20x squared. There's a negative 2x plus a 12x. Those can
be combined to give me 10x. And lastly, the constants 3 and 27 can be added together to
give me 30. So the sum in this example is 15x to the fourth minus 9x cubed plus 20x squared
plus 10x plus 30. Now, notice something really interesting here. We started with two polynomials
of degree 4 or two quartic polynomials. And the final answer turned out to be another quartic
polynomial. And here's an interesting question. Is that always going to happen? Well, let's
look at one more example of addition to see if we can pick up on the general pattern. Try
simplifying the following expression. Simplify 5x to the fourth plus 18x squared minus 10
plus 6x cubed plus 7x squared plus 8x. Again, we're combining the like terms and when we
do so, we get 5x to the fourth plus 6x cubed plus 25x squared plus 8x minus 10. Was that
the answer you got? Well, notice that in this example, I started with a polynomial of degree
4. That's a quartic polynomial and another polynomial that had degree 3, which was a
cubic polynomial. And the answer turned out to be a quartic polynomial as well. Now, can
you see the pattern? Well, here it is. If f of x is a polynomial of degree, let's say
a, and g of x is a polynomial of degree b, then f of x plus g of x is also a polynomial.
And its degree will be at most the larger of the two numbers a and b. In fact, most
often the degree of f of x plus g of x will be exactly equal to the larger of either a
or b. So for example, when we started with the two polynomials of degree 4, we ended
up with another polynomial of degree 4. And when we started with a polynomial of degree
4 and another polynomial of degree 3, the final answer had degree 4 because 4 is larger
than 3. The only time that the degree of f of x plus g of x is not going to be the larger
of the two degrees with which we started is when a equals b, and the leading coefficient
of one of those polynomials is the negative of the leading coefficient of the other. For
example, if you started with f of x equals 8x to the fourth plus 5x, and g of x equals
negative 8x to the fourth plus 7x cubed minus 2, then f of x plus g of x would be 7x cubed
plus 5x minus 2, and the degree would have actually gone down. It would have gone from
being degree 4 in the original two polynomials to a degree 3 for the sum. And that's because
the terms 8x to the fourth and negative 8x to the fourth actually canceled one another
out when we did the addition. Now, what about subtracting two polynomial functions? There's
addition and there's subtraction. Well, to combine the like terms in these subtraction
problems is identical to doing them with the addition, but you have to keep an eye on distributing
the minus sign correctly. Anytime you subtract, it's very, very important that you make sure
you distribute that minus sign. So let's be careful as we walk through a couple of
examples of subtraction just to make sure we combine the terms correctly. So why don't
you try this one yourself first? Simplify 17x to the fourth plus 5x squared minus 2x
plus 3 minus the polynomial 8x to the fourth minus 9x cubed plus 15x squared plus 12x
plus 27. Okay, we have to be careful when we distribute that minus sign that's in between
the two polynomials. So my first suggestion would be to just do the distribution as if
you had to do it first. So just take that minus sign and drive it through the second
polynomial. And when you do that distribution, you'll get 17x to the fourth plus 5x squared
minus 2x plus 3 minus 8x to the fourth plus 9x cubed minus 15x squared minus 12x minus
27. Now there's no doubt about the signs of each term now because I've taken care of everything
by doing the distribution. And now I just have to combine the like terms as if I was
doing the addition problem or addition problems that we've done a few moments ago. So here
we go. You have 17x to the fourth minus another 8x to the fourth and that's going to be 9x
to the fourth. Then there was a 9x cube by itself. There were no other x cubes. No problem.
Just keep the 9x cubed as it is. 5x squared minus 15x squared is going to give you negative
10x squared. Then you have negative 2x minus 12x which is negative 14x. And lastly the
constants 3 minus 27 is negative 24. So our final answer then is 9x to the fourth plus
9x cubed minus 10x squared minus 14x minus 24. Notice again that the degree of this result
is not any larger than the degrees of the polynomials with which we started. That's very important.
It's going to have a very similar flavor to the degrees that we found in the addition
problems and the discussion that we had a few minutes ago with those problems. Now let's
look at one more subtraction problem quickly and I'm going to suggest you try it yourself
and be careful with the distribution of that minus sign. So here's the problem. Take x
cubed plus x squared plus 1 minus the polynomial x cubed minus 5x squared plus 7x. Again this
is the same as x cubed plus x squared plus 1 minus x cubed plus 5x squared minus 7x.
And this then combines now that we've done that distribution of the minus sign to 6x
squared minus 7x plus 1 once you write it all in standard form. Is that what you got?
That's good if you did. Now notice that in the first subtraction example we started with
two polynomials at degree 4 and the final answer was another polynomial of degree 4. In this
second example we started with two cubic polynomials and ended up with a quadratic trinomial. So
the degree of the final answer after you've done a subtraction of two polynomials cannot
be any larger than the largest degree with which we started. But that degree of the answer
might be smaller again due to cancellation of the terms of highest degree. When that happens
the degree of the final answer is actually able to go down. Now the next usual operation
to discuss is multiplication. So I suggest we do a few multiplications of polynomials
now just to make sure we've got that operation down. I'm going to start with a quick example
of multiplying one polynomial by a monomial. Remember what a monomial is? It's a one term
polynomial. So let's see if you can do this as we expand or multiply out the following
product or the following two polynomials being multiplied together. Here they are. I'm going
to take 3x squared, that's the monomial, and multiply it by 6x cubed minus 4x squared
plus 7. Now how do we do this kind of problem? Well, it's really just a big distributive
property problem. It's just that it's kind of expanded because of the size of the polynomial
that I have inside those parentheses. But it's very doable once you get used to this
idea of just distributing the monomial out in front all the way through the other polynomial.
So once you do that distribution you're going to have 3x squared times the 6x cubed plus
3x squared times the negative 4x squared plus 3x squared times 7. You just have to keep
taking that 3x squared times all the other terms. And when you get that and you multiply
everything out and simplify, you're going to have 18x to the fifth minus 12x to the
fourth plus 21x squared. And that of course uses some of the laws of exponents that we've
talked about in the past. And you're done. And if you got that answer then you've done
a perfect job. Now one quick comment before I go on to the next example about multiplication.
Now let's talk about degrees. You might be getting tired of this philosophical conversation
about these degrees but I want you to see this because it helps us with critical thinking.
If you get an answer that doesn't match up with these comments we're making about degrees
then it could tell you very quickly that you've done something wrong. Notice in this problem
that the degree of the result we got after the multiplication is exactly the sum of the
degrees of the two polynomials with which we started. We started with a 3x squared and
we started with 6x cubed minus 4x squared plus 7. Look at the two degrees. The degree
of the first polynomial was 2 and the degree of the second polynomial was 3. And notice
that in the final answer the degree was 2 plus 3 or 5. So multiplication of polynomials
is a way to build polynomials of larger degree from polynomials with smaller degrees and that's
a nice idea. So addition and subtraction weren't really getting us to bigger polynomials
or polynomials of bigger degree if you will. But multiplication does. It actually takes
two smaller degree polynomials and after multiplying together gives us a bigger degree polynomial
and that's nice. Now I'd like to look at a second example of multiplication of two polynomials
and this time we're going to multiply a binomial with a trinomial. That means we're going to
multiply a two term polynomial with a three term polynomial. And this acts a lot like
foil if you've heard that in the past but it's a bit more involved. So let's do the
following example. I want us to expand or multiply out x squared minus 7 times x cubed
plus 9x squared minus 5x. Now the key here which is a lot like the foil method when multiplying
out two binomial expressions is to make sure that every term in the first set of parentheses
is multiplied with every term in the other set of parentheses. So the x squared must
be multiplied with each of the three terms in the trinomial and the 7 must be multiplied
with each of the three terms in the trinomial. So you'll actually have six different multiplications
to perform. Once those are done you can then combine the like terms to get the final answer.
So given those comments let me suggest that you try that expansion, that multiplication
and the combining that happens after. So let me remind you of the problem again. It's x
squared minus 7 times x cubed plus 9x squared minus 5x. Try it yourself. Okay here's how
I would do it. I would actually start by multiplying the x squared through all the terms that are
in the trinomial and when I do that I'll have x squared times x cubed plus x squared times
9x squared plus x squared times negative 5x. Okay that'll be the start there. And then
I have to do minus 7 times all the terms and I'll have minus 7 times x cubed minus 7 times
9x squared minus 7 times negative 5x. Okay so now I have my six terms and now I can start
combining or doing the multiplications if you will in each of those six and simplifying
those. And when I do that I'll have x to the fifth plus 9x to the fourth minus 5x squared
sorry minus 5x cubed minus 7x cubed minus 63x squared plus 35x squared plus 35x squared
and when I combine those like terms together I'm going to have x to the fifth plus 9x to
the fourth minus 12x cubed minus 63x squared plus 35x. And notice again that the degree
of this final answer is 5 and it's equal to the sum of the degrees of the two polynomials
that we started with which were 2 and 3. Now these kinds of problems deserve lots of practice
so let's look at one more example and in this case it's going to be a three term polynomial
or a trinomial with another three term polynomial another trinomial. So let's expand the following
x squared plus 2x plus 3 times x squared minus 4x minus 6. Now again each one of these
terms in the first trinomial has to be multiplied with each term in the other. So that's going
to give me actually nine different terms before we combine the like terms. So let's do it.
I'm going to have x squared times x squared plus x squared times negative 4x plus x squared
times negative 6 plus 2x times x squared plus 2x times negative 4x plus 2x times negative
6 plus 3 times x squared plus 3 times negative 4x plus 3 times negative 6. So every term
in the one set of parentheses is now multiplied with every term in the other set of parentheses.
And that gives me x to the fourth minus 4x cubed minus 6x squared plus 2x cubed minus
8x squared minus 12x plus 3x squared minus 12x minus 18. And when I combine all the like
terms I get x to the fourth minus 2x cubed minus 11x squared minus 24x minus 18. Alright
I'd like to move on now to another operation and in this case we're going to look at division.
We've looked at addition and we've looked at subtraction and we've looked at multiplication
and now I'd like to move on to the next operation which is actually division. Now in the case
of long division of two polynomials you're actually not necessarily going to end up with
a new polynomial because as I've already said when you have one polynomial divided by another
you actually might not end up with a polynomial function. So let's move on now to some examples
of division. They can get a bit messier compared to some of the others and sometimes you'll
even end up with a remainder when one of the polynomials doesn't perfectly divide the
other polynomial but we still need to be able to do this polynomial division, whether we
have remainders or not. So let's look at a couple of examples of polynomial division
just to make sure we know how to do this. This by the way is very helpful when we're
thinking about factoring and I'll try to talk about that in a second. Here's the first example.
We're going to multiply x squared plus 10x plus 21 divided by x plus 3. Well I want to
do this like a long division problem just like you would with polynomials. So we're going
to draw that long division symbol, put the x squared plus 10x plus 21 underneath that
symbol and put the x plus 3 out in front as the divisor. And now what I want to know is
how many times does x go into the x squared? So what would I need to multiply x by to give
me x squared? And the answer is x because x times x is x squared. And now I'm going
to ask myself what is x plus 3 times x and I'm going to write that just underneath the
x squared plus 10x plus 21. And x plus 3 times x is the same as x squared plus 3x. So I put
that underneath and now I do just like with long division of numbers, I subtract. x squared
minus x squared is 0, it's gone. 10x minus 3x is 7x. And now what would you do with long
division of numbers? You would next drop the 21 down and you would have 7x plus 21. And
now you ask yourself just like with long division of numbers, how many times does that x that's
up in the divisor go into 7x? And the answer is it goes in 7 times. And when you multiply
x plus 3 times the 7, you're going to have 7x plus 21. And now when you do the subtraction
as usual, you're going to get 0 because 7x plus 21 minus 7x plus 21 and that's minus
the quantity 7x plus 21 is just going to be 0. So your final answer is x plus 7 with
0 remainder. So in that case, we divided a quadratic polynomial by a linear polynomial
and the answer turned out to be just another linear polynomial. Now that's not typical.
It turns out that sometimes you'll have no remainder, you'll have 0 remainder as we did
a moment ago. But that's because the two linear pieces were actually factors of the quadratic
piece. We could have actually factored the quadratic polynomial into those two linear
pieces. In other cases, you're going to have a remainder that's not 0. And in this case,
I think we'll see that. So let's take the following example and again do the long division. I want
us to simplify x cubed minus 6x squared plus 19x minus 4 divided by x minus 2. Why don't
you try it yourself and see what you get? Now you might have noticed that that didn't
come out quite as neatly. There's a bit of a remainder, but that's okay. Let's walk
through it together step by step and see if we can actually see what our final answer
is. So I'm going to draw a big long division symbol. Underneath it, I'm going to write
x cubed minus 6x squared plus 19x minus 4. On the outside where the divisor goes, I'm
going to put the x minus 2. And now I'm going to ask, how many times does the x in the divisor
go into the x cubed? And the answer is x squared times because x squared times x is x cubed.
And so now I have the x minus 2 times that x squared. I write that x squared up above
the division symbol. And I multiply the x minus 2 times the x squared. And I'm going to have
x cubed minus 2x squared. Now I must subtract that term. And remember, I'm subtracting the
x cubed. And I'm also subtracting negative 2x squared, which is the same as adding positive
2x squared. When I do that subtraction, I'm going to have 0x cubed, the x cubes will cancel
each other, minus 4x squared. That's from a negative 6x squared plus 19x minus 4x squared.
That's from a negative 6x squared plus 2x squared. I have negative 4x squared. And now
I can drop down the next piece, the next term, which is a plus 19x. And now I ask the same
question. How many times is that x minus 2 going to go into the negative 4x squared plus 19x?
Well, I need to really simplify that problem by asking, how many times will x go into negative
4x squared? That's really the question. And the thing I need to multiply the x by to get
negative 4x squared back is negative 4x. So I'm going to put a negative 4x on the top,
just after the x squared. And now I'm going to ask, what is negative 4x times the x minus
2? And when I do that, I'm going to have negative 4x squared plus 8x. Negative 4x times negative
2 is plus 8x. And now I have to subtract all of that. And again, I've got to distribute
that minus sign carefully as I go. Negative 4x squared minus the other negative 4x squared
is 0. 19x minus 8x is 11x. So now I have an 11x there, and now I just do the same thing
again, drop the minus 4. So now I have 11x minus 4. And I need to ask myself, how does
the x minus 2 go into 11x minus 4? More importantly, how many times does x go into 11x? And x goes
into 11x 11 times. So I put a plus 11 on top, and I have to multiply that 11 times the x
minus 2. When I do that, I get 11x minus 22. And I must subtract that. And again, I've got
to be careful. That means I've got 11x minus 4 minus 11x plus 22 when I distribute that
minus sign. And the 11x minus 11x is 0. Minus 4 plus 22 is a plus 18. And now I'm done.
And the reason I'm done is because 18 doesn't have any x's in it. Its degree, if you will,
is smaller than the degree of x minus 2. So I quit. And I know that my final answer then
is x squared minus 4x plus 11 with a remainder of 18. And by the way, because that remainder
is not 0, it means that I know that x minus 2 does not evenly divide or perfectly divide
the original numerator, the first function, x cubed minus 6x squared plus 19x minus 4.
And I can say that another way, it means, since I have that non-zero remainder, it means that
if I took the function x cubed minus 6x squared plus 19x minus 4, divide that by x minus 2,
I definitely would not have a polynomial. I would have a much more complicated function.
Okay, let's look at another example of this long division very quickly. Let's simplify
x cubed minus 8x squared plus 7 divided by x minus 1. Now I wanted to do this example
because I'm actually missing a term. If you look at the function we're going to divide,
it has no x term, if you will. The x cubed minus 8x squared plus 7 is missing an x term.
What do we do? Well, you just simply insert it with a 0 in front. And that means when you're
ready to draw everything, you're going to have an x cubed minus 8x squared plus 0x plus 7
underneath the division symbol, and you're going to have the x minus 1 outside as the divisor.
Okay, so once you've written that, let me ask you this, try it yourself. Try dividing that
x minus 1 into x cubed minus 8x squared plus 0x plus 7 and see what you do.
Okay, let's come together and see how we worked it out. We're going to ask ourselves first,
how many times does the x go into x cubed? It needs an x squared. And once I multiply
the x minus 1 times that x squared that I've written on top, I'm going to have x cubed minus x
squared. Doing this subtraction gives me negative 7x squared, and then I'm going to have to
drop a plus 0x. And yes, drop it. You really need to do that.
Now, the x minus 1 then goes into a negative 7x squared. Well, it goes in negative 7x times.
Again, only focusing on the x going into the negative 7x squared. So I put a minus 7x on top.
Multiplying by that minus 7x gives me negative 7x squared plus 7x when I multiply the negative 7x
times an x minus 1. Subtraction, again, remembering to distribute the minus sign,
gives me negative 7x. Drop the 7. I have negative 7x plus 7 at that point, and I have to ask
myself, how many times does the x in the divisor go into negative 7x? And it goes in negative 7 times.
Put that negative 7 on top, multiply that negative 7 times an x minus 1, and I get negative 7x
plus 7, watching out for my minus signs again. Subtraction gives me 0. And that's cool because
it means that the x minus 1 evenly divides, or is a factor of, x cubed minus 8x squared plus 7.
And the final answer then when I do that division is actually a nice polynomial. It's x squared minus 7x minus 7.
And again, you're going to see a lot of remainders that are not 0. In this case, we actually did have a remainder of 0
most of the time. If you just write down two polynomials, you're going to see a non-zero remainder.
Now, these division problems can get kind of messy, but I'd like to look at one more of them where we divide by
a quadratic function rather than a linear one. And so let's look at the following problem.
Let's divide x to the fourth plus 9x cubed plus 2x by x squared plus 2x plus 1.
Now, if you remember to add in those terms that we're missing by putting a 0 in front of them, you're going to have
x to the fourth plus 9x cubed plus 0x squared plus 2x plus 0 underneath the division symbol.
And in the divisor area, you're going to have an x squared plus 2x plus 1.
Now, you ask the same question. How many times does the x squared go into the x to the fourth?
And it goes in x squared times because x squared times x squared is x to the fourth.
Multiplying that x squared by the divisor x squared plus 2x plus 1 gives you x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus an x squared.
And now you subtract. It's the same as usual. And the x to the fourth's cancel and you're left with 7x cubed minus x squared
plus 2x after you do the drop down of the 2x.
And now how many times does x squared go into 7x cubed? The answer is plus 7x times.
Put that on top. Multiply the 7x times the x squared plus 2x plus 1.
And you'll have 7x cubed plus 14x squared plus 7x.
Do the subtraction remembering to distribute the minus sign.
And you'll have minus 15x squared minus 5x.
And now you drop down the zero, if you will, that's up there inside the original function.
And now you ask yourself how many times does x squared go into negative 15x squared? Answer, negative 15 times.
Multiplying the negative 15 times the x squared plus 2x plus 1 gives you negative 15x squared minus 30x minus 15.
Subtract. Careful being very careful of those minus signs.
And you're left with 25x plus 15.
And you stop there because the degree of 25x plus 15 is actually smaller than the degree of x squared plus 2x plus 1, which was your divisor.
So my final answer is x squared plus 7x minus 15 with a remainder of 25x plus 15.
Now, we've talked enough about division at this point.
We've shown three or four examples of long division of polynomials.
I'd like to close with one more operation today and that's composition.
Now, we've talked about composition of two functions already in some of our earlier lessons.
Let me just make this quick comment and that is that when you compose two polynomials, you get a new polynomial, which is great.
And when you do this composition, you have to be a little careful.
It's a bit trickier than the other operations.
So let me do a couple of examples here quickly.
So the first example is the following.
Let's let f of x equal x cubed plus 3x minus 1 and g of x equal x squared minus 2.
I want to determine f of g of x and g of f of x.
Now, f of g of x is like plugging g of x into f.
So when I do that, I'm going to have the following.
f of g of x equals f of x squared minus 2.
I've just plot the g of x into the function f and that's the same as x squared minus 2 cubed plus 3 times x squared minus 2 minus 1.
Now, I've got to expand the x squared minus 2 cubed and this is similar to just taking something like t minus 2 and cubing it.
All it means is you have to multiply it by itself three times.
So you'll have the following.
x squared minus 2 cubed equals x squared minus 2 times x squared minus 2 times x squared minus 2.
And when you multiply that out, the first two terms give you x to the fourth minus 4x squared plus 4 times x squared minus 2,
which is x to the sixth minus 4x to the fourth plus 4x squared minus 2x to the fourth plus 8x squared minus 8 by doing the distribution,
which is x to the sixth minus 6x to the fourth plus 12x squared minus 8.
And that means that this composition, once you do all of the work together, is going to be x to the sixth minus 6x to the fourth plus 15x squared minus 15.
And now let's do the composition in reverse order.
Let's find g of f of x when f of x is x cubed plus 3x minus 1 and g of x is x squared minus 2.
So g of f of x now takes f and plugs it into g, which means I want g of x cubed plus 3x minus 1,
which is just x cubed plus 3x minus 1 squared minus 2 because I've plugged f into g.
So I want x cubed plus 3x minus 1 times x cubed plus 3x minus 1 minus 2.
And when I do all that distribution that we've talked about earlier and simplify,
we'll have x to the sixth plus 6x to the fourth minus 2x cubed plus 9x squared minus 6x minus 1.
I know that's a lot of pieces, but it really works out in the long run and you get this nice clean function.
It's a little long, but it's still a polynomial.
And notice f of g of x here is not equal to g of f of x.
I've mentioned this before. When you do composition in either order, you often get a very, very different answer.
Well, we've talked about operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and now composition today.
I hope you've enjoyed this work. It feels very algebra-like, doesn't it?
We'll continue to use these operations in our future lessons.
And next time, we're going to come back to factoring. I'll see you then.
