So we've spent a good bit of time talking about finding roots or solutions of polynomial
equations in the last few lessons.
I'd like to close this discussion in this lesson by sharing with you two additional
tools for locating the roots or knowing how many you should have.
These two tools are known as Descartes' Rule of Signs and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
Let's start with Descartes' Rule of Signs.
So Descartes' Rule of Signs is named for René Descartes, a French mathematician and
philosopher born in the late 16th century, 1596 to be exact.
Descartes is known for lots of things, including his famous quote, I think, therefore I am.
The Cartesian plane, or the XY plane as we sometimes call it, bears his name.
His Rule of Signs is what I want to focus on in this lesson as we finish this study
of finding roots of polynomial equations.
Basically this rule can tell us quickly how many positive and how many negative roots
we have for a polynomial equation.
It does not tell us where those roots are.
It just gives us an idea of how many positive and negative roots we might have.
So even though it doesn't tell us where they are, the rule can still be very, very helpful.
I think the best way to describe this rule is by walking through an example.
So let's do that here and then I'll try to talk about the rule in a little more theoretical
way later on.
Let's look at the following and determine how many positive roots and how many negative
roots there are for this equation.
5x to the 7th minus 8x to the 6th plus 19x cubed plus 2x squared minus 14x minus 8 equals
0.
As I start this example, let me point out and I need to make this very clear that Descartes'
Rule of Signs is going to tell us the possible number of positive roots and the possible
number of negative roots that this equation can have.
It doesn't care about whether the roots are rational, nice fractions like we talked about
in the previous lesson, or more complicated real numbers like 4 minus the square root
of 7, that's a real number which is not rational.
So Descartes' Rule of Signs is not only worrying about rational roots, it's worrying about
all real roots.
Now let's see how it works.
The rule first says to start with the polynomial in standard form and that's the way our left
hand side already looks and it asks us to see how many times the sign changes as we
read the polynomial from left to right.
So let me remind you again, the polynomial that we have is 5x to the 7th, that's positive
5x to the 7th minus 8x to the 6th plus 19x cubed plus 2x squared minus 14x minus 8.
Now the signs when you look at them in pairs go as follows.
First you have a plus and then a minus and then if you look at the next pair of signs
you would have a minus and then a plus and then you would have a plus followed by a plus
and then a plus followed by a minus and lastly the last two numbers are both negative so
you'd have minus minus.
Now did you notice there that you actually had three sign changes where we either went
from a plus to a minus or a minus to a plus when we were looking at those pairs?
Descartes' Rule of Signs tells us what that means.
It means that the possible number of positive roots for this equation is either 3 which
was the number of sign changes that we saw above or 1.
Now where did this 1 come from?
Well once you see the exact number of sign changes then you start from there and you
keep subtracting down by 2 to see all the other possible amounts.
So for example if the number of sign changes had been something like 7 let's say then
the number of possible positive roots would have been 7 or 5 or 3 or 1.
Okay now that's the positive possible roots.
What about the negative ones?
What about the possibilities for the number of negative roots?
Well Descartes tells us how to do that as well.
Go back to the original polynomial and everywhere you see an x plug in negative x and the whole
polynomial.
In this case that would give you the following.
5 times negative x to the 7th minus 8 times negative x to the 6th plus 19 times negative
x cubed plus 2 times negative x squared minus 14 times negative x minus 8.
And now you simplify this and when you do you'll have negative 5x to the 7th minus 8x
to the 6th minus 19x cubed plus 2x squared plus 14x minus 8.
Now again look at the pairs of the sign changes.
First you're going to see a negative 5 with a negative 8 so that's going to be a minus
minus.
Then the next pair is going to be minus minus again because you have a negative 8 with a
negative 19.
Then you have a negative 19 with a positive 2 so that's a minus plus and then you have
a plus plus and the last pair of signs is going to be plus minus from the plus 14 and
the negative 8.
Now how many changes of sign do you see in those pairs?
Well there's exactly two.
One of them went from a minus to a plus and one of them went from a plus to a minus.
And Descartes' rule now tells us the following, that the possible number of negative roots
is either 2, which was the number of sign changes we saw, or 0.
Remember we start with the number of sign changes that we see and then we keep subtracting
down by 2 until we either hit 0 or 1.
Those are the only two possibilities.
Ok, so in this problem we now know that the possible number of positive roots is either
3 or 1 while the possible number of negative real roots is either 2 or 0.
Well, how might that help me?
Well for example, let's say we found out that a certain negative number was a root.
Well, since the possible number of negative roots is either 2 or 0, if we found one number
which was a negative root, we would know that we'd have to find another one which is also
negative so that we could get up to the 2 because the only two possibilities were either
2 or 0 for the number of negative real roots.
So Descartes' rule of signs is great for checking our work and also for making sure we've done
everything that we need to do.
Now it turns out that the original equation I gave you, 5x to the 7th minus 8x to the
6th plus 19x cubed plus 2x squared minus 14x minus 8 equals 0 actually has exactly one
positive real root, you can actually find it, and 0 negative real roots.
And those fall into what Descartes' rule of signs told us as the possibilities.
Now by the way, did you notice that there were some terms missing in the original polynomial?
I actually did that on purpose.
Like there was no x to the 5th term.
What do we do?
Why didn't I try to do anything with that?
Well it turns out it's not a problem if a term is missing.
You just skip right over those and do just as we did.
So if you have a term that's missing, like an x to the 5th was missing earlier, you simply
ignore it, don't even look for it and just keep doing the problem as we just did.
Now let's look at another example.
I'm going to suggest you try this one first on your own and then we'll check back together
to see how you did.
Given the number of possible positive roots and the number of possible negative roots
for the equation 2x to the 4th plus 5x cubed minus 2x minus 5 equals 0.
Okay, let's look at the number of sign changes in the original polynomial thanks to Descartes'
rule of signs.
Remember, you've got to have that polynomial in standard form.
Thankfully, I wrote this one in standard form for us.
If it hadn't been, you'd have to rearrange the terms until the highest power term was
in front and then the rest of them descended from there.
So the original polynomial is 2x to the 4th, that's plus or positive 2x to the 4th, plus
5x cubed minus 2x minus 5.
Well the signs there go plus plus, that's for the plus 2 and the plus 5, and then a
plus minus for the plus 5 and the minus 2, and then a minus minus from the negative 2
and the negative 5.
So there's exactly one sign change in these pairings.
Descartes' rule now tells me that there must be exactly one positive real root for this
equation.
That was the number of sign changes we just saw, one.
And of course you can't subtract 2 there because if you took 1 minus 2, you get negative
1 and it makes no sense to have negative 1 real positive roots.
So we're going to have exactly one positive real root for this equation.
That's cool.
It tells me I need to go find that in just a minute.
Now what about the possible number of negative real roots?
Well remember what the rule says to do.
Go back to the polynomial, replace all the x's by negative x, and when you do that you're
going to have 2 times negative x to the 4th plus 5 times negative x cubed minus 2 times
negative x minus 5.
Simplifying a bit, you'll end up with positive 2x to the 4th minus 5x cubed plus 2x minus
5.
Now let's look at the sign changes of this new polynomial.
Now they're going to go plus minus followed by a minus plus followed by a plus minus.
There are actually three such changes there, and that means the number of negative real
roots must either be 3 or 1 when you subtract 2 out of 3.
So now you know quite a bit from this example thanks to Descartes' rule of signs, and you
know that you have to have exactly one positive real root and either one or three negative
real roots.
Now you might recall that we actually studied this particular problem in a previous lesson.
If you don't remember it's okay, I won't blame you, but let me remind you of what we
found in a previous lesson.
Using the rational roots theorem, we were able to show that x equals 1 and x equals
negative 5 halves are roots of this equation.
So we already know of one positive root, that's the x equals 1, and one negative root x equals
negative 5 halves.
Both of those are real numbers, 1 and negative 5 halves.
So what can we conclude thanks to Descartes' rule?
Well we know that the x equals 1 is the only positive number, which is a root, because
remember Descartes had already told us there was only one positive root that was going
to be available.
And we know that there might either be zero additional negative roots, because x equals
negative 5 halves is a negative, or there might be two others.
Remember Descartes said that there would either be one or three negative roots in this case.
In fact, if you just look at a graph of the polynomial, we can actually see that there
aren't any more roots other than the two that we've already mentioned.
Remember roots of that equation correspond to x intercepts of the graph of the polynomial.
So thanks to that work, we know that we're done.
There's exactly one positive real root and one negative real root.
Okay let's look at one last example to see how useful Descartes' rule of signs can be.
See if you can find the answer before I work it out for you.
Let's find the possible number of positive real roots and the possible number of negative
real roots for the equation negative 4x cubed minus 32 equals zero.
Okay let's start with the positive roots.
There's only two signs here in the polynomial, it's kind of a short polynomial.
And they're both minuses.
And that means that there are no sign changes in the original polynomial on the left-hand
side of the equation.
Thanks to Descartes' rule of signs, it means that there are no positive real roots for
this equation.
So if I walked up to you and said, hey I think x equals 4, or x equals 10, or x equals 23,
I think those are roots, you could immediately tell me that I was wrong because 4, 10, and
23 are positive, and Descartes' rule of signs rules those out, pardon the pun.
So let's look for negative real roots then.
What happens if I replace the x by negative x?
Remember that's what you have to do to check for negative roots using Descartes' rule
of signs.
Well when you plug negative x in, you're going to have negative 4 times negative x cubed
minus 32, and that first term is going to actually become positive 4 x cubed, and then
you'll have minus 32 after it.
Now look at the signs.
You have a plus for the plus 4, and then a minus for the negative 32, and that means
you have exactly one sign change here.
And what does Descartes' rule of signs tell me then?
It tells me that there must be exactly one negative real root, and it has to be there.
There has to actually be one there.
Now can we find it?
Well let's go back to the original equation, and let's see if we can find that one negative
real root.
We had negative 4 x cubed minus 32 equals 0.
If we just multiply through on both sides by negative 1, that's the same as 4 x cubed
plus 32 equals 0, of course a negative times 0 is still 0.
If you're factoring out the 4 that's common, you'll have 4 times the quantity x cubed plus
8 equals 0, and you can divide that 4 out, and 0 over 4 on the right hand side will still
be 0, and you'll be left with x cubed plus 8 equals 0.
Now just subtract that 8 over to the right hand side, and you'll have x cubed equals
negative 8.
Now here's a question, do you know a negative number which satisfies x cubed equals negative
8?
Take negative 2 for x.
Negative 2 cubed is negative 8.
And so thanks to Descartes' Rule of Signs, I knew there was a negative real root out
there.
Now I know from the work I just did, it's x equals negative 2, and I don't have to look
for any others, because Descartes' Rule of Signs told me there were no positive real
roots, and there was exactly one negative real root.
Now let's transition to our other very important root finding tool for this lesson.
It comes from something called the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
Now before I get to this tool, I have to make a confession.
Just like with Descartes' Rule of Signs, this new rule isn't going to tell me where
the roots are.
Did you notice how Descartes' Rule of Signs was useless for telling me exactly what the
roots were?
He was just telling me how many there might be.
Unfortunately, this new tool is going to be the same way.
Even so, it's an amazingly important rule.
So let me talk you through a little bit of mathematics just to show you what this new
rule is.
First, let me state the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
Now this way of stating this doesn't look like it's going to help much, but let's state
it this way first.
If you have a polynomial p of x and it has a degree at least one, then the equation p
of x equals zero has at least one root.
Now that root might be a rational number like two-fifths, or it might be a real number that's
not rational like four minus the square root of two, it might actually even be a complex
number with that i equaling the square root of negative one sneaking in somewhere.
But the point is that the equation must have at least one root.
So that's what the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is trying to say.
Now it might not look like that's going to help, but let me show you a byproduct of the
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra which is extremely helpful, and this is the tool that we want
to include in this lesson.
If you count all the roots of an equation, rational, real, but not rational like five
plus the square root of ten, or imaginary as well where you have to include the i equaling
the square root of negative one, and you count all the roots in terms of how many times they
appear, even if they appear multiple times, then it turns out that an nth degree polynomial
equation has exactly n roots.
So for example, if you have a polynomial of equation of degree, let's say five, and you
set that polynomial of degree five equal to zero, the rule I just told you tells me
that there must be exactly five roots as long as I count how many times each root appears,
one root might actually appear two or three times, and as long as I count the rational
ones, the real ones which are not rational, as well as the imaginary ones.
That's what the rule says.
So let me try to demonstrate that with a few examples.
Consider the quadratic polynomial equation x squared minus 14x plus 15 equals zero.
I know from the quadratic formula that I can find the roots of this thing really quickly,
and they're going to be x equals the negative of negative 14 plus or minus the square root
of negative 14 squared minus four times one times 15 divided by two times one.
And if you do the arithmetic, and we've done it several times in other lessons, you're
going to find that the roots are x equals seven plus or minus the square root of 34.
So I have two roots.
One of them is seven plus the square root of 34, and the other is seven minus the square
root of 34.
Now thanks to this rule that we quoted, which was a bit of a byproduct or a spin-off from
the fundamental theorem of algebra, I know that that's the only two roots.
And notice that they're both real numbers because they don't require us to consider
any square roots of any negative numbers.
So we had a second degree polynomial, and I found two roots with the quadratic formula.
Those two roots are the only two because the polynomial in question had degree two.
Okay, let's try another example.
Let's take the polynomial equation 4x squared minus 20x plus 25 equals zero.
We know that this must have exactly two roots because it has degree two, and thanks to the
fundamental theorem of algebra.
Now it might not be two different roots though, so let's be careful.
What are those roots?
If you stare at that polynomial long enough, you realize that the left-hand side actually
factors, and it factors as 2x minus five times 2x minus five, and then you set that
equal to zero for the right-hand side.
Now there's a root then that's trying to sort of jump out at you off the page, namely
x equals five-halves.
Just set 2x minus five equal to zero, add five to both sides, and divide by two, and
you'll see the root five-halves appears.
And now I can hear some of you saying, wait a minute, I thought there were supposed to
be two roots.
Where's the other root?
Well, the other root is actually five-halves again, if you will.
I didn't say that the fundamental theorem of algebra told me they had to be different
roots.
Remember that it says once you count the roots and you count the number of times that each
root appears, then that will have to equal the degree of the equation.
Notice that five-halves is a root from the equation, but it's going to be a root from
the first factor of 2x minus five, and it's going to be a root from the second factor
of 2x minus five.
So actually, you would have to count the five-halves twice.
And since the degree of the polynomial was also two, you know you're done.
There are no other roots.
Okay, let's try another example.
And again, we're just trying to practice with this fundamental theorem of algebra and its
byproduct.
Let's look at the roots of, or find the roots of, x cubed minus 4x plus 15 equals zero.
Now let's try to put together all the things we've learned up to this point, or at least
some of them, and see if we can actually find all of these roots.
First, the fundamental theorem of algebra tells me how many roots there have to be as
long as I count how many times each root will appear.
Remember, the fundamental theorem of algebra, or at least the byproduct of it, is that an
nth degree polynomial equation will have exactly n roots.
Some of them might be complex or imaginary.
Some of them might be real.
Now how many roots then are there for the equation x cubed minus 4x plus 15 equals zero?
The answer is easy.
It's three, because I have a cubic polynomial on the left-hand side.
And again, remember that three might be counting how many times the same root appears, it might
appear twice, for example.
But where are those roots?
Okay.
If there's anything I need to find, let's find them.
Well, according to Descartes' Rule of Sines, I should be able to at least try to locate
how many positive and how many negative roots there are.
Well, we did several examples with Descartes' Rule of Sines, so I think we can go through
this pretty quickly.
Let's go back and look at the equation once again, and try to see how many possible positive
roots there are.
Remember, you're looking at x cubed minus 4x plus 15 equals zero.
When you look at the sign changes of that, you're going to have plus minus, and then
you're going to have a minus plus.
And so, you have two sign changes, so Descartes' Rule of Sines tells me that the number of
possible positive roots for this is going to be either two or zero.
Okay, that's the positive roots, or the possible positive roots.
How about the negative, potential negative roots?
Well, let's go back and look at our equation again.
You're going to have x cubed minus 4x plus 15 equals zero, and now remember what you
have to do to find the negative roots in Descartes' Rule of Sines?
You have to replace x by negative x, so we're going to have negative x cubed minus four
times negative x plus 15 equals zero.
And that's going to equal negative x cubed plus 4x plus 15 equals zero.
And the sign changes will be negative positive and then positive positive.
So how many sign changes did we have?
Actually, just one, right at the beginning, negative positive.
So how many possible negative roots will there be from Descartes' Rule of Sines?
Exactly one.
Ah, so let's figure out what we've learned so far.
We know there have to be three roots thanks to the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
And now thanks to Descartes' Rule of Sines, I either have two or zero of them being positive,
and I have exactly one negative real root.
And keep in mind, Descartes' Rule of Sines is only trying to keep track of the real roots.
It has nothing to do with the imaginary or complex roots that might show up where you
have to have a square root of negative one thrown in, or the value i.
Okay, so far so good.
Now we've used a few tools already.
Let's go work with the Rational Roots Theorem to see how many of these possible real roots
from Descartes' Rule are actually rational roots, okay?
So now I need to look at the equation again, and remember the Rational Roots Theorem says
that any rational roots are going to be a divisor of the constant term divided by a divisor
of the leading coefficient.
So in this case, my constant term is 15, and my leading coefficient is one.
And so the possible rational roots of this equation are going to be something like one
over one, or negative one over one, and then possibly three over one, or negative three
over one, five over one, or negative five over one, and fifteen over one, and negative
fifteen over one.
And since all of those are divided by one, I can just write them as whole numbers as
one, negative one, three, negative three, five, negative five, fifteen, and negative fifteen.
Now those are the possible rational roots in this case.
Now I suggest we look at the negative numbers in this list to see if one of them is the
negative real root that was already predicted by Descartes' Rule of Science.
Notice how we're sort of bringing all these tools together.
So I'm going to suggest that you check to see if x equals negative one, negative three,
negative five, or negative fifteen is a root of the equation x cubed minus 4x plus fifteen
equals zero.
Okay, did you find it?
Well let's see.
We could try a few together here real fast.
Let's plug in negative one.
When you plug in negative one and do all the simplification of the left hand side, you're
going to end up with the equation 18 equals zero.
That's false.
Negative one is definitely not the negative real root we're looking for.
Let's plug in negative three.
When you plug in negative three and you do the arithmetic, you're going to end up with
negative twenty-seven plus twelve plus fifteen, and the right hand side is just zero.
But wait a minute.
That's the equation zero equals zero.
And that's true.
Now guess what we can say?
We just found that negative three is a negative real root of this equation.
The Descartes rule of signs told me that there was exactly one negative real root.
I just found it.
So I don't have to check negative five, and I don't have to check negative fifteen, which
were on the list of potential real roots from the rational roots theorem.
It would be a waste of time.
Descartes rule of signs says there was only one negative real root.
I just found it.
It was negative three.
I'm just going to throw negative five and negative fifteen away because they're definitely
not going to work.
So you see how that's a time saver?
Descartes rule of signs actually came to our help, and now we can do less work, and we
can move forward to look for other things.
Now let's remember another tool that we saw recently.
If x minus three is a root of the equation, then the factor theorem tells me that x minus
negative three, or x plus three, must be a factor of the left-hand side.
So I'm going to suggest that we factor that out with long division and see what the left-hand
side looks like once we do the factoring.
So let me suggest that you now divide the original left-hand side, which was x cubed
plus zero x squared minus four x plus fifteen.
Remember to add that zero x squared in there if you're going to do long division.
Divide that quantity by x plus three and see what you get.
Well, first of all, you should have gotten a division that had zero remainder because
x plus three is supposed to be a factor of the original polynomial, and secondly what
you should have gotten was x squared minus three x plus five as the final answer of that
long division.
And that means that I can rewrite my equation as x plus three times x squared minus three
x plus five equals zero.
Now you might say to me, well, how do you get that?
Well, the long division actually does it for us.
Now, let's see, can we find the rest of the roots?
That's what we were doing in the first place.
Well, you know what root comes from the x plus three.
That was the negative three that you already found.
So now let's look at the other part of the polynomial, x squared minus three x plus five.
Can we find the two roots that are there?
Well, of course, use the quadratic formula.
How many tools have we used in this example?
Tons of them, but these are all great tools.
And when you use the quadratic formula and you just go through the work, you're going
to see that the equation is going to have the roots x equals three plus or minus square
root of negative 11 divided by two.
So there are your other two roots, three plus the square root of negative 11 over two and
three minus the square root of negative 11 over two.
But I want you to notice something.
Those are complex numbers.
They're not real numbers because you're taking the square root of a negative number.
That's okay though.
We knew that there had to be three roots.
We now know what they are.
One of them was the real number, x equals negative three.
And the other two are three plus square root of 11 times i divided by two and three minus
square root of 11 times i divided by two.
And that means we're done.
It also means, by the way, if we were to graph the polynomial we started with, x cubed minus
four x plus 15, we would only see one x-intercept because that would correspond to the negative
three root.
The two complex roots are not going to show up in any way on the graph because they're
not real.
So you would actually only see one x-intercept.
Well, we've used a lot of tools today and we've done a lot of examples of how to find
roots thanks to all of these tools.
I hope you've enjoyed trying to put all those together because they really are helpful once
you learn how to master them all and once you learn how to use them in the right times.
In the next lesson we're going to shift our focus quite a bit and we're going to study
things like square roots, cube roots, and functions a lot in those lines.
