Throughout the next four lessons, we're going to be talking about the same idea, and that
is going to be solving systems of equations or inequalities.
Before we get started on the mathematics of solving those systems, I'd like to give
you an analogy today, which is the same sort of idea, but in the real world.
So here it is.
Let's say you wanted to buy a car, a lot of us need a car or want a car, let's say you're
buying a car, and you have a few things you want to make sure this car is like.
Maybe you want the color of the car to be red, for example.
You also want the car to have really good gas mileage.
Maybe you want it to have at least 30 miles to the gallon, for example.
And you don't want to spend too much on this car, so maybe you set the limit of your cost
at something like $25,000.
So you want a red car, you want it to have this gas mileage, and you want to make sure
that the cost isn't too high.
Now that's a problem, it's a real world problem really, and you want to solve that problem
by finding a car.
Now the wrong way to solve that is to go out and buy one red car and then a second car
that gets really good gas mileage, and then a third car that doesn't cost very much.
That's really not satisfying your problem, it's not solving your problem.
The solution to this problem is to find one car that is red and gets really good gas mileage
and costs less than $25,000.
That one car would solve that problem.
Well that idea of one thing solving a bunch of different problems at the same time is
the same idea behind solving a system of equations.
And so that's what we'll talk about today and for the next few lessons.
We'll talk about solving systems of equations and inequalities where one set of numbers will
satisfy all of the problems at once.
So let's define a few terms as we get started with the math today.
A set of two or more linear equations form a system of linear equations.
So just like the cost of the car and the color of the car were two different things, here
we're going to have two different equations that are going to form a system of linear
equations.
We say that an ordered pair of numbers that makes all of those equations true is called
a solution of the system.
Just like one car, which is red and doesn't cost very much and gets good gas mileage,
that one car would have been a solution of your original problem.
So for example, y equals 2x minus 5 and y equals x minus 2 is a system of two linear
equations.
A solution of this system is actually the set of numbers x equals 3 and y equals 1 or
the ordered pair 3 comma 1.
Now to check to make sure that really is a solution, we can confirm it by plugging in
these numbers into each of the equations to make sure that everything is true.
So for example, with the first equation, we would have plugged in 1 for y and 3 for x
and we would have the equation 1 equals 2 times 3 minus 5 or 1 equals 6 minus 5 or 1
equals 1 and that's true.
But we haven't confirmed yet that 3 comma 1 is a solution of the whole system until
we make sure it also satisfies the other equation, the second equation.
If we plug in 1 for y and 3 for x into that equation, we will have 1 equals 3 minus 2
or 1 equals 1 and again that's a true statement that 1 equals 1 and now we can say that 3
comma 1 really is a solution of our system.
Now systems of linear equations, they arise very naturally and we'll see a few problems
later on to demonstrate this, but for now the biggest question that you and I need to
answer is this, if we're given a system of two linear equations with two unknown variables
like x or y, how would we find the solution?
Did you notice that in the work we just did, I gave you the solution.
I actually told you that 3 for x and 1 for y was the solution.
We just checked to make sure that it really worked.
Now we need to figure out how to find that solution, how to find the x equals 3 and y
equals 1 like we did in the last example.
So in this lesson, we're going to learn about a very special technique for solving systems
of two linear equations and it's called solving by graphing.
Now to start talking about solving these kinds of systems by graphing, we need to ask a very
special question.
From a graphical perspective, from a visual perspective, what does a solution to the system
y equals 2x minus 5 and y equals x minus 2 look like?
I mean what does the solution really mean from a visual perspective?
Well, the solution needs to be a point on each of the two lines.
That point has to satisfy the first equation and it has to satisfy the second equation.
So it has to be on both of the lines and it needs to be the same point on both lines.
Just like one car and the same car had to satisfy all the different criteria.
So how can you be a point on two different lines but be that same point?
The answer is you must be an intersection point of the two lines.
So when we're looking for a solution of a system of linear equations, what we're doing
is looking for an intersection point between the two lines and that's what solving by graphing
is going to do.
It's going to look for intersection points once we graph the two lines.
So let's solve a system that we've mentioned a few times by now and do it by graphing.
So this is the system I talked about a moment ago.
The technique is pretty straightforward.
We graph the two lines that we had and we find their intersection point.
So if you look at the graph, we have two lines.
One has a y-intercept of negative 2.
That's going to be the one for the equation x-2 or y equals x-2.
And the other has a y-intercept at negative 5 and that's going to be the line that corresponds
to the equation y equals 2x minus 5.
Now if we've drawn the graphs carefully, we see an intersection point and it looks
like that point occurs at 3, 1.
So we see from the sketch that that intersection point really is at 3, 1.
That's the solution.
But in order to really be sure, we still needed to plug in 3 for x and 1 for y in the original
equations to make sure we were right.
We did that a moment ago so we know we're good to go here.
Now before we move on to some other examples of systems of equations, let me share just
a bit of terminology here.
When a system has a unique solution just like the example we just did where x equals 3 and
y equals 1 were exactly the solution, we say that such a system of linear equations is
an independent system.
So if you have one unique solution as a system, you're called an independent system.
Now before we move to our next example, let me make a comment here that's extremely important,
I believe, when we're solving by graphing.
You should notice that something like graph paper or grid paper would probably be really
smart to use for these problems.
Why is that?
Because you're going to want to be very, very accurate if you're going to try to spot
exactly where that intersection point is.
If the answer is 3, 1, you don't want to look at it, visualize it and guess 2, 1 or 3, 0.7
or something like that, you really want to see it as 3, 1.
So some graph paper or grid paper would be very, very helpful in this lesson.
And secondly, it would probably be very, very smart to check your solutions when you're
solving by graphing, just to make sure you're right.
What do I mean by that?
Remember to check your solutions means you plug the numbers back into the original equations
to make sure that everything is true.
So in this lesson especially, you're really going to want to spend the time to check your
solutions to work with the equations and plug in the numbers just to make sure that you've
gotten everything right.
Now I would suggest that at this point, you take a sheet of graph paper or grid paper
and you try the following example yourself and then we'll check back together in a moment
to make sure you got it right.
Here's the example.
Solve the following system of two linear equations by using graphing.
Y equals negative 4x plus 3 and Y equals 3x minus 11.
Okay, did you get a solution?
Let's check.
Let's work it together and make sure.
Now before we actually check, let me point something out here.
Notice that we know that there has to be a solution of this example before we ever get
started with the drawing.
Can you think about why?
Look at the slopes of those equations for just a second.
Well one of them has a slope which is negative and the other one has a slope which is positive.
So if you think about it just for a second from a critical thinking perspective, one
of the lines, the line with positive slope is going to go up like this and the other
line is going to be going like this, the one that has negative slope.
These two lines must cross somewhere and remember it's that intersection point that you want
which gives you the solution.
So we know there is going to be a solution here and now the question is can we find it?
Well if you draw those two graphs which are going to be two straight lines, you're going
to see that there is an intersection point and it looks like it happens at about 2, negative
5.
Is that the point that you found?
X equals 2 and Y equals negative 5?
Well if you did you're in good shape but let's make sure that that really is the solution.
We go back to our two original equations and we plug in X equals 2 and Y equals negative
5 and we see if everything works out.
So the first equation was Y equals negative 4X plus 3, plugging in X equals 2 and Y equals
negative 5 gives me negative 5 equals negative 4 times 2 plus 3 and on the right hand side
that's the same as negative 8 plus 3 using our order of operations a bit doing the multiplication
first and negative 8 plus 3 really is negative 5.
So I have the equation negative 5 equals negative 5, of course that's true.
Now we try the same numbers again with the second equation, Y equals 3X minus 11, plugging
in 2 for X and negative 5 for Y gives me negative 5 equals 3 times 2 minus 11 or 6 minus 11
or negative 5.
So I have negative 5 equals negative 5 again, of course that's true and so we've now confirmed
that 2 comma negative 5 or X equals 2 and Y equals negative 5 really is a solution of
the system because that information took care of both the first equation and the second equation.
It made both of those equations true.
And remember it's good to think ahead just a bit as we did a moment ago to make sure
that you really will have a solution.
If one of the slopes was positive and another one was negative then you're guaranteed that
there's going to be a solution somewhere and your problem then is just to find it which
is exactly what we did a moment ago.
Now here's another question that we should really ask, could there have been any other
solutions to the system of equations that we just studied?
This is a good question, maybe there's a second solution somewhere else.
Well let's think about this for a second.
We're dealing with straight lines in this lesson and the equations that we're dealing
with are the equations of straight lines.
So if you have one line going in one direction and another going in the other and you have
an intersection point there won't be any other intersections later on because one of the lines
is just going to keep going up and that other line is just going to keep going down.
They're never going to intersect anywhere else.
So we were guaranteed in this example that there would only be one solution and if you
remember the terminology we used a few minutes ago that means that the example we just did
was an example of an independent system of equations.
So there were no other solutions to that system at all.
Alright let's move to another example.
I think it's very good to keep working through these and to make sure we've got all of this
settled.
So let's solve the following system by graphing again.
The system of equations will be 3x plus 2y equals 5 and 6x plus 4y equals 19.
Now we see here two equations, they're both the equations of lines but they're in standard
form.
They're not in point slope or slope intercept form like we talked a few lessons ago.
So we need to convert both of these equations into something like slope intercept form or
point slope form before we actually draw the lines.
At least that would make it easier.
So let's try to convert those into slope intercept form and see if we can finish the problem
for there.
Now slope intercept form remember is y equals mx plus b where m is the slope and b is the
y intercept.
So we really want to solve that system and convert those equations into that form if
we can.
Now we go from 3x plus 2y equals 5 and 6x plus 4y equals 19 into these converted equations.
So let's walk through that together.
Let's take that first equation, 3x plus 2y equals 5, subtracting 3x from both sides
gives me 2y equals negative 3x plus 5 and dividing both sides by 2 gives me y equals
negative 3 halves x plus 5 halves.
That's in slope intercept form.
Perfect.
Let's set that aside now for just a second and look at the second equation.
6x plus 4y equals 19.
Subtracting the 6x from both sides gives me 4y equals negative 6x plus 19 and dividing
by 4 gives me y equals negative 3 halves x plus 19 over 4.
The original system that we started with is the same as the system y equals negative
3 halves x plus 5 halves and y equals negative 3 halves x plus 19 over 4.
Now what do you notice about those two equations?
They both have the same slope, don't they, but they have different y intercepts.
What does that mean about the graphs of the two lines?
It means that they're parallel.
What does that mean about their intersection points then?
The answer is they're not going to intersect one another.
They both have slope negative 3 halves and they're just going to stay parallel the whole
way, no intersection, and that means that there is no solution of the original system
that we started with because those lines are parallel.
Now we should talk about a little bit of terminology here just to make sure we get this down.
The example I just showed you had no solutions.
That's the first example we've seen like that and anytime you have a system of equations
that has no solutions, we're going to call it an inconsistent system.
So that's a second word or second phrase we need to remember.
If a system has no solutions, we call it an inconsistent system.
Now let's go on to another example.
It looks pretty innocent at first.
It turns out to be pretty interesting.
So let's take the following system and solve it by graphing.
Y equals 4x plus 3 and 24x minus 6y equals negative 18.
Go ahead and try to solve that yourself.
Now if you tried that and you did it correctly, you're probably smiling a bit as you look
at this example.
It's a unique example.
Let's walk through it together.
OK, the first of the two equations is already in slope-intercept form.
So you can graph that line immediately and not worry about it.
Let's look at the second equation and rewrite it in slope-intercept form.
It's straightforward to do.
Once we've rewritten it, we can draw the graph.
So we started with 24x minus 6y equals negative 18.
Subtracting the 24x on both sides gives me negative 6y equals negative 24x minus 18.
And now if you divide by negative 6, you get y equals positive 4x plus 3.
Remember when you divide both sides by negative 6, a negative divided by a negative gives
you a positive.
So the equation here is equivalent to y equals 4x plus 3.
But now look at the two equations you have.
They're actually the same equation.
Now what does that mean then about the system of equations we started with?
It turns out that instead of being two different lines, they were actually the same line.
There's one line right on top of the other.
Now what does that mean about solutions of the system?
Well, it means that not only is there one intersection point, there's actually infinitely
many different intersection points because every point on both lines will be an intersection
point.
So in this case, when the two lines intersect one another everywhere, we're going to say
that the solution set is actually the set of all real numbers.
You can think of the two lines as simply laying one on top of the other.
And when you work through that and you see a system like this, it's very special.
And we're going to have a different name for that sort of a system.
When a system has infinitely many solutions, because the two lines are actually the same
line, we're going to call it a dependent system.
Now the examples of systems where two linear equations with two variables really fall into
three categories now.
I've shown you actually all three types of systems that you can have.
Let's just review them very quickly.
You might have no solutions.
No solutions means that the two lines are actually parallel with one another.
Do you remember what we called that?
We call that an inconsistent system.
You might have infinitely many solutions, which means the two lines are actually just
one and the same line, and that's known as a dependent system.
Those two things are interesting, but the case we really care about the most is when
the system actually has exactly one solution when the two lines just cross at one point.
And remember what those are called?
Those are called independent systems.
And now let me emphasize this.
Any system of two linear equations that you study has to fall into one of those three
possibilities.
No other possibilities, either zero solutions, infinitely many solutions, or exactly one.
That's the only three possibilities we have.
Now I'd like to look at another example where there's just one solution to the system.
I think that's important to do as we move forward in this lesson because really it's
these independent systems that are of most importance and the ones that we're going to
see most often.
So here's the example I want us to think about.
What are some of the following system of equations with graphing?
Well the system of equations is going to be pretty simple actually, y equals seven and
x equals four.
Now when you first see that system of equations, you might be thinking something like, wait
a minute, are those really representing lines?
But I mean, y equals seven just sounds like y a number equals seven and x equals four
is the same.
Are those missing one of the variables?
Don't I need some x's and some y's in both of the equations?
Well that reaction, if you had it, would be very understandable.
But if you pause and think for just a second, you realize that y equals seven and x equals
four actually are the equations of lines.
It's just that they're equations of very special lines.
So let's think back a few lessons and think about what these equations actually mean.
In the Cartesian plane or the xy plane, the x and y plane, y equals seven really is an
equation of a line and it's the equation of the line which is horizontal and has a y
intercept at seven.
So it's the line that goes through points like zero comma seven and three comma seven
and negative five comma seven.
It goes through all the points where the y coordinate is seven.
So it's that horizontal line.
Okay, so that's how we would start with graphing there.
What about the line that's given by the equation x equals four?
Well we've run into this kind of an equation before as well.
It's simply the line that goes through all the points where the x coordinates are all
equal to four.
You know, points like four comma zero and four comma two and four comma eight and four
comma negative five and so on.
If you plot a couple of those points and you draw the line that connects them, you're
going to see that you get a very special line again.
It's now a vertical line.
So anytime you see an equation like x equals four or x equals nine or x equals negative
three, you should think vertical line.
Now if you plot those two lines in the plane and you look for a solution of that system
of equations, will you get an intersection point?
Well, try it yourself and see what you get, okay?
What did you get?
Well, it turns out that you really do get an intersection point, right?
You've got a horizontal line and you've got a vertical line.
Those have to meet and they meet in this example at the point four comma seven or x equals
four and y equals seven.
And therefore, the system of equations that we started with has only one solution, four
comma seven, and that means this is an independent system.
Now we've seen several examples today of solving systems of two linear equations with two unknowns.
I've used the unknowns or variables x and y most often.
We could have actually solved systems with other variables, a and b or s and t.
We could have made up all sorts of names for those unknowns.
We often will use x and y to remind us of the x, y plane so that the solving by graphing
will allow us to see that intersection point most naturally.
Keep in mind though, we will be allowed to use other unknowns or other variables later
on.
Now it turns out that this method by graphing, which is really fun and really cool, very
visual, has some drawbacks.
And so as we close this lesson, I'd like to talk about a couple of those drawbacks, those
negatives if you will, about solving by graphing.
First of all, what if I decided to look at a system of three linear equations with three
unknowns or variables?
So just so you know, lots of people want to actually look at this kind of thing in their
work.
So it's not a really crazy or bizarre idea to think about three equations and three unknowns.
What would it mean to try to solve that system of equations by graphing?
Well, it means that we'd have to draw three different lines in three dimensional space.
So not just the x, y plane, but the actual space that you and I live in, x, y, and maybe
z as the three variables.
That can be pretty difficult for some people to visualize.
And I personally would not suggest solving that system by graphing.
And you might say, well, I could have handled that.
Three dimensions wouldn't have been hard for me.
I could have drawn that.
Well, what if I up the ante a bit and I want to solve a system of four linear equations
with four unknowns?
Really, that's a very natural question to ask.
And at that point, it could be very hard to draw lines in four dimensional space.
In fact, it makes no sense to me what that would mean.
So the method of graphing is limited in that it really only works in, say, two dimensions,
x and y, in the x, y plane.
And for some people, it works pretty well in three dimensions.
But beyond that, the method of graphing, solving by graphing, is really limited.
But that's actually not the only reason that the method of graphing is a bit on the downside
or the negative side.
A second drawback is that it's sometimes difficult to pinpoint what the exact solution of the
system is or to pinpoint where that intersection point really occurs.
For example, take this system of linear equations, 3x plus 5y equals 7 and 2x minus 4y equals
7.
It's actually a fairly innocent looking system.
It's got all whole numbers for the values inside the equations.
But guess what?
The solution to that system is x equals 63 over 22 and y equals negative 7 over 22.
Let's be honest.
If you were drawing those two lines on graph paper and you tried to pinpoint exactly the
intersection point as 63 over 22 and negative 7 over 22, it would be impossible to determine
that that's the exact point for that intersection.
So even with really good graph paper and really good eyes, it would be very difficult to identify
that specific point.
So with these two drawbacks in mind, I'm going to suggest that we should come up with a second
different approach to solving these kinds of systems of linear equations.
Even if it's just two equations, I'd like for us to come up with an alternative approach
for solving those systems.
Thankfully, those approaches exist.
And in the next lesson, we'll talk about exactly that.
