In the next few lessons, I'd like to introduce you to two new families of functions.
They're called exponential functions and logarithmic functions.
They're very closely related.
In fact, they're basically opposites or inverses of one another.
And they're extremely important in many real-world applications of mathematics, including studying
population growth, compounded interest in a bank account, the net worth of a car or a
piece of equipment due to depreciation, and they can even help with calculating things
like pH of a chemical solution or the intensity of an earthquake based on the Richter scale.
In this lesson, I'll focus attention on introducing you to exponential functions, and I'll share
a similar introduction to logarithmic functions in the next lesson.
So let's start with the definition of a basic exponential function.
An exponential function is a function of the form f of x equals a times b to the x, where
x is a real number, a is a non-zero constant, and b is a positive real number, which is
not equal to 1.
The value b, which is being raised to the x power, is sometimes called the base of the
exponential function, and that's why many authors will use the letter b to denote this.
And at times, we're going to refer to this value b as the growth factor of the exponential
function if b is bigger than 1 and the decay factor of the exponential function if b is
less than 1.
Later on, as we get to some examples, I'll try to show you why we call one set of b's
growth factors and another set decay factors, depending on whether they're bigger than 1
or less than 1.
So as a quick example of an exponential function, we could take f of x equal 2 to the x.
That is an exponential function with base b equal to 2, and so we would call it a growth
factor in this case, and we would also note that a here is equal to 1, so 1 times 2 to
the x is just written as 2 to the x.
Similarly, we could define g of x as an example to equal 3 times 1 fourth to the x, and that
would also be an exponential function, and in that case, the base would be 1 fourth and
the value of a would be 3, and since the base of 1 fourth is less than 1, we would call
that a decay factor here.
Now let me make a very important distinction, one that is often lost on some students.
I want you to notice that these exponential functions are not polynomial functions.
Let's go back to something like f of x equals 2 to the x.
It's important that we see that this is not the same as something like h of x equals x
squared.
Do you see how between 2 to the x and x squared, we've actually switched the roles of where
the x is located?
In the case of the exponential function, the x or variable is up in the exponent, while
in the case of a polynomial like x squared, that x is not the exponent, the 2 is the exponent.
So it's very important that we understand the difference between exponential functions
where the exponent is the variable and polynomial functions where the exponents are just constants.
So because these are two very different types of functions, we would expect them to have
very, very different properties, and they really do.
They have different sorts of graphs, for example, and they're going to behave very, very differently.
So we're going to need to keep track of those as we go along, and whatever you do, don't
confuse those two types of functions.
Now let me make one other very quick comment, which is this.
Notice that the value a, which is sitting out in front of the b, is not being raised
to the x power.
So it's very important that we realize that the only value that's being raised is the
value of b.
Now the first thing we should ask, once we've defined any new kind of function, and you
and I have defined a lot of different functions in this course, the first thing we should
ask is, what does the domain look like?
Well, in the case of an exponential function, it turns out that as long as you've got these
values a, which is not equal to 0, and b, which is bigger than 0 and not equal to 1,
the domain is just the set of all real numbers.
In other words, we're allowed to plug in any real number that we want into an exponential
function.
In that sense, exponential functions and polynomial functions have something in common.
They both have a domain, which is the whole set of real numbers.
There's nothing that we can't plug in to an exponential function.
But here's a really interesting difference between polynomial functions and exponential
functions.
Exponential functions actually have a horizontal asymptote.
We know that polynomial functions don't have asymptotes.
So in that sense, these two types of functions are very, very different.
And I'll try to show you some graphs of these exponential functions later on, and you'll
see these horizontal asymptotes that come into play.
Now, with these comments taken care of, let's move to some examples of some exponential
functions and even try to look at their graphs, for example, just to see what their behavior
is like.
So let's take probably the most straightforward example we could and sketch the graph of f
of x equals 2 to the x.
And the way I want us to do this is the way I've been suggesting we do a lot of graphing,
which is computing several points that this graph would go through and then connecting
the dots.
So here's what we're going to do.
I'm going to suggest we plug in x equals negative 5, negative 4, negative 3, negative 2, negative
1, and 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, just to see what's happening.
So it sounds like we're going to do a lot of work really deep down.
It's not a ton of work, but we need to keep this list of values of f of x so that we can
plot all these points in just a moment.
And if you don't have any graph paper with you, I would grab it now because it'll help
us tremendously as we go to draw this graph.
Now let's start in the middle of the list of x values that I just mentioned that I want
to plug in.
Let's start with x equals 0.
When you plug 0 into this function, you're looking at f of 0, which equals 2 to the 0.
Notice again, the variable is up in the exponent, so I'm plugging that 0 into the exponent,
and I have 2 to the 0, which is 1.
So I now know one of the points that this graph goes through, it goes through 0, 1.
And if you were to plot that on a piece of graph paper right now, after you've drawn
your x and y axes, you would notice that this is the y-intercept of this graph.
And you're going to notice that that seems to happen a lot as we study these exponential
functions, that they're going to have a y-intercept often at 0, 1.
Not always, but often.
Now let's keep moving.
Why don't you try calculating a few of these points?
Plug in, let's say, x equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, and see what you get.
All right, here's what I got as I plugged in those values into this function f of x.
f of 1 is 2 to the 1, so it equals 2.
f of 2 is 2 to the 2, or 2 to the second power, and that's 4.
f of 3 is going to be 2 to the third power, or 2 cubed, so it's equal to 8.
f of 4 is 2 to the 4, which is 16, and f of 5 equals 2 to the 5, which is 32.
Now if these are a bit of a problem for you, you might want to practice these sort of exponential
calculations.
It's extremely helpful to be able to do these in your head and to do them quickly.
It makes doing these problems so much easier.
Now let's interpret this information.
In the outputs that we just got when we plugged in 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, we now know six points
that are on this graph, 0, 1, we already talked about that one, also 1, 2, 2, 4, 3, 8, 4, 16,
and 5, 32.
So if you wanted, you could pause for a moment, go back to your graph paper now, and plot
those points, and you could start to see the general shape of at least one part of the
graph of f of x.
Now what happens if we plug in some values of x, which are negative?
You and I just plugged in 0 up through 5, which are on sort of the right-hand side of the
x, y plane.
Now I'd like to plug in a few values of x, which are negative, like negative 1 up to
negative 5.
Let's remember one of the laws of exponents that we've seen in the past, which is going
to be very, very helpful to us here.
Remember that if you take a number like a and raise it to the negative b, it's the same
as taking 1 over a to the positive b.
So the point of that is, when you have a negative exponent, you can basically flip what you're
doing and then take 1 over the same value to the positive exponent.
So what does that mean when we're trying to do these calculations that we're doing here?
Well for example, f of negative 1 is equal to 2 to the negative 1, which is the same
as 1 over 2 to the positive 1, which is equal to just 1 over 2.
So I now know another point that's on this graph.
It's at negative 1, comma, 1 half.
And now I'm going to suggest that you try finding the same types of values, but now plug
in x equals negative 2, negative 3, negative 4, and negative 5.
Okay, when you try plugging in, let's say negative 2, you're getting the same as 2 to
the negative 2 power, 2 to the negative second power.
And that's the same as 1 over 2 to the positive 2, so you're looking at 1 over 4.
So f of negative 2 is 1 fourth.
And similarly, f of negative 3 is going to be 2 to the negative 3, which is 1 over 2
to the positive 3, which is 1 over 8.
And f of negative 4, in a similar fashion, is going to be 1 over 16.
And f of negative 5, again, by the same ideas, is going to be 1 over 32.
So I now have five new points that I can also plot on my graph paper.
Negative 1, comma, 1 half, negative 2, comma, 1 fourth, negative 3, comma, 1 eighth, negative
4, comma, 1 sixteenth, and negative 5, comma, 1 over 32.
And now I want you to think about what's happening with those y values as we plug in larger and
larger negative numbers.
Now what I mean by that is, as we plug in things like negative 1, negative 2, negative
3, negative 4, negative 5, what if I wanted to plug in something like negative 10, or
negative 100, or negative 1,000?
What's happening to those y values is that they're actually getting smaller and smaller
and smaller, but they are staying positive.
Did you notice how we had things like 1 fourth, and 1 eighth, and 1 sixteenth, and 1 over 32?
Those are all positive, but they sure are getting close to zero.
In fact, they're getting close to zero extremely quickly.
But here's an interesting point about this exponential function, 2 to the x.
The output will never equal zero.
It might get close to zero, like 1 over 32, or even 1 over 64, or 1 over 128, or something
like that, but none of the y values, none of the output values, will ever equal zero.
So the graph of this function, f of x equals 2 to the x, has a horizontal asymptote at the
line y equals zero, which is the x-axis.
But here's a really cool thing about this.
It's got a horizontal asymptote just on one side over here where the x's are negative.
Did you notice what the points do on the other side?
They go up.
So this graph of this exponential function, 2 to the x, almost has two different sides
to it.
The one side gets very flat and has a horizontal asymptote at y equals zero, and the other
side seems to take off and go up to plus infinity.
I want you to, again, notice that this graph is never going to touch the x-axis.
If you use a calculator, and some students do like to use a graphing calculator just
to look at their graphs, the screen might make it look like the graph touches the x-axis.
But it's not hard to convince ourselves that the y values will never equal zero.
They may get tiny, but they're never going to be zero.
They're always going to stay positive.
And so the graph really, really stays above the x-axis, but it gets really, really close
to it in the process.
And that's the exact idea of a horizontal asymptote.
Now let's talk about this graph for a few more moments.
We see that horizontal asymptote at y equals zero.
We've already talked about that.
Notice that the right-hand side, as you read it from left to right, is going to grow, and
it grows exponentially, sorry, but that's what we mean by exponential growth.
And I want you to notice that since B was equal to two, we called it a growth factor.
We call it a growth factor because as we read the graph from left to right, the graph is
going up.
And let me emphasize again, we know the y-intercept is at zero, one.
Now the next question you might ask, which is a pretty natural question, is what happens
if the B value, the base, changes to something like three or four rather than two?
Well that's actually a very good question to ask.
And so I'm going to leave it to you to calculate some points for the functions say g of x equals
three to the x and h of x equals four to the x.
But let me just show you the graphs for these functions along with the graph of f of x equals
two to the x, which we just found.
Let's do that on the same set of axes.
Now what do you notice about these different graphs?
Well, the first thing that I want to notice anyway is that they all have the same y-intercept.
They all go through the point zero comma one.
So that's cool.
The next thing I see is that the graphs grow much faster on the right hand side if they
have a larger value of B or the growth factor.
And this is why we call that a growth factor because as that value of B gets larger, the
graph on the right hand side of the xy plane on the right hand side of the y-axis, if you
will, is actually growing faster.
It goes up quicker than say the graph of two to the x.
So you should notice that y equals two to the x is sort of below the graph of y equals
three to the x, which is below the graph of y equals four to the x on the right hand side
of the y-axis.
And one other thing you should notice about all three of these graphs is that they all
have that same horizontal asymptote of y equals zero on the left hand side of their graph.
Not on the right, but on the left.
None of these three graphs ever intersects the x-axis.
They always stay just above it, but they do have that as a horizontal asymptote.
So they don't go below it, and they also don't swoop back up like something like y equals
x squared would want to do.
They do flatten out and they stay flat throughout that whole left hand side of the graph.
Now with that said, let's deep tour very quickly just to make sure we know how to shift these
kinds of graphs just a bit, just the way we've been shifting other types of graphs during
this course.
So why don't you try doing this problem?
Sketch the graph of f of x equals two to the x plus five.
Now it's extremely important that we notice that the plus five is not in the exponent
of this function.
What we've done is added five to the whole function.
We have not just added five to the x up in the exponent.
And because we've added five to the whole function, it means that the graph of two to
the x plus five is the same as the graph of two to the x, which you and I just drew a
few moments ago, except that it shifted up by five units.
So the graph would look something like this.
Now I'd like, notice that that has the same sort of shape as y equals two to the x, but
now by shifting it up by five units, two new things have happened.
One is we've moved the y intercept to zero comma six now, one plus five being six.
And we've moved the horizontal asymptote now.
So this graph never gets down to y equals five in this case.
Now let's try a different alternative of what these graphs can look like by trying the following
example.
And again, I would encourage you to try it yourself.
Sketch the graph of g of x equals three raised to the x minus four power.
Now this example is different from the one I just did, not only because the base is different,
of course, but because now what I've done is I've actually changed the exponent from
x to x minus four.
So remember what happens when I actually change the value of x to something like x minus four
when I subtract a positive constant like that?
It shifts the graph now, not up or down, but it's actually going to shift the graph to
the right by four units.
So to graph three to the x minus four, we start with the graph of three to the x, which
I showed you a few moments ago, and we just shift that graph by four units to the right.
And that would give you a graph that looks something like this.
Now it has a similar shape to the graph of three to the x, and it might be hard to tell
that we really did the shift that I mentioned, but it really has happened.
In particular, notice that the y-intercept is no longer at zero comma one.
It's now at a different point, zero comma one over 81, which is very, very close to
the origin because one over 81 is a relatively small positive number.
Okay, we've seen the basic shape of the graph of a basic exponential function when the value
B, or the base of the function, is a growth value, a growth factor, that is when it's
bigger than one.
Now the next very natural question you might want to ask is, what if that base is between
zero and one, like one half or one third?
So let's move now to another example where we look at the sketch of a graph of an exponential
function where the base is between zero and one.
Let's sketch the graph of f of x equals one half raised to the x.
Now as we did when we started sketching these graphs earlier in the lesson, I'm going to
suggest we just plot some points and carefully put them on a piece of graph paper and then
connect those dots.
So I'm going to plug in the same values that I plugged in earlier from minus five up to
five and I'm going to see what I get.
Now let me suggest you start that yourself.
By calculating f of x equals one half to the x for values like, let's say, negative
five, negative four, negative three, and so on, and let's see what you get.
Okay, so what happened?
Well, let's start at the f of negative five.
I think that would be a good place to start.
F of negative five is going to be one half to the negative five power, which of course
is one to the negative five divided by two to the negative five.
Now one to any power is one.
So the numerator is just one and the denominator is still two to the negative five.
But remember what happens when you raise a number to a negative number.
It's the same as moving that number to the other location, in this case from the denominator
up to the numerator and making the power positive.
So one over to the negative five is the same as just two to the positive five and that's
equal to thirty two.
So f of negative five is thirty two.
F of negative four is going to be one half to the negative four, which is one to the
negative four over two to the negative four, which is just one over two to the negative
four and now the two to the negative four comes up to the numerator again, giving you
a two to the positive four which is sixteen.
So f of negative 4 is 16.
And in a similar fashion, f of negative 3 is going to be 8, and f of negative 2 is going
to be 4, and f of negative 1 is going to be 2.
So now I know five points on this graph, the last of which would have been negative 1,
2.
Now what happens at 0?
Well f of 0 is 1 half to the 0, and any number that's like 1 half, which is raised to the
0 is going to be 1.
So f of 0 is 1, which means my y-intercept here is 0, 1, which is actually the y-intercept
we were seeing for a lot of the other functions that we studied earlier.
Now let's keep going.
What's f of 1?
Well f of 1 is 1 half to the 1, and something like 1 half raised to the 1 is just itself,
so that's 1 half.
So f of 1 is 1 half, or the graph is going to go through the point 1, 1 half.
F of 2 is 1 half squared, which is 1 half times 1 half, which is a fourth, and f of 3
is 1 half cubed, which again is 1 half times 1 half times 1 half, which is 1 eighth.
And similarly, f of 4 is going to be 1 over 16, and f of 5 is going to be 1 over 32.
Now take out a new sheet of graph paper, and draw some axes, and plot these points,
and see what you get.
Do you see any similarity between this graph, which is the graph of f of x equals 1 half
to the x, and the graph of f of x equals 2 to the x, which was the first one that we
did in this lesson?
Well the answer is, if you stare at them long enough, the answer is that the graphs are
mirror images of one another across the y-axis.
The graph of 1 half to the x and 2 to the x have the same y-intercept, 0, 1.
But now, unlike 2 to the x, which when it ran from left to right went upwards, now in
the case of the graph of 1 half to the x, you have a graph that seems to be starting
really, really high on the left-hand side, if you will, and it cuts through that point
0, 1 on the y-axis, and then begins to decrease, well continues to decrease, I should say,
and starts to get very, very close to the x-axis on the right-hand side of the graph
now, not on the left.
So in fact, the graph of 1 half to the x really is the mirror image of the graph of 2 to the
x.
And to be honest, there's a really understandable reason for this.
The key to understanding this mirror image property is that 1 half to the x can be rewritten
with the laws of exponents as 2 raised to the negative x.
And so to get the graph of 1 half to the x, you could start with the graph of 2 to the
x and replace x by negative x, because 1 half to the x is the same as 2 to the negative
x.
Any time you take one function and replace the x's by negative x, this is a trick you
and I really haven't done in this course, but any time you take a function and replace
x by negative x, the graph will flip and it will flip across the y-axis.
And because of that, that's exactly why you and I are seeing that mirrored effect between
the graph of 2 to the x and the graph of 1 half to the x.
Now as before, the next question I'd really like us to ask is, so what about the graph
of 1 third to the x or 1 fourth to the x?
Well, you can see those very quickly all on the same set of axes and you can tell pretty
quickly what happens in relationship as you're looking at those graphs.
So for example, the functions which have a smaller base like b equals 1 fourth, which
is the smallest of the bases I've shown you here, are going to dive towards the x-axis
much more rapidly and they stay below the graphs of the other functions for all the
positive values of x.
Note that none of these three graphs ever touch the x-axis and we've talked about that
before and notice that y equals 0 then serves as a horizontal asymptote for all three of
these graphs.
So they all have similarities to one another just like the other example we did with 2
to the x, 3 to the x and 4 to the x, but now the horizontal asymptote is on the right-hand
side of the graph rather than on the left.
You can also see why these values of b which are between 0 and 1 are called decay factors
rather than growth factors.
As you look at the graph of these functions from left to right, you see that they're going
down or decaying in the process and these kinds of graphs help us model things like
the depreciation of a car after it's been driven for a number of years as well as the
temperature of a hot cup of coffee after it's been left in a room to sit at room temperature
which we assume to be constant all day.
So we could play similar games with shifting these graphs around just like I did a few
moments ago with 2 to the x or 3 to the x, but I'm going to skip doing that here.
Instead, let's look at a different kind of problem that involves exponential functions
now pretty quickly.
I want us to find an exponential function y equals a times b to the x for a graph that
includes the two points 3, 24 and 2, 12.
Now you might not know how to get started, but believe it or not, this is really just
solving two equations with two unknowns.
Let me explain how.
If the graph passes through 3, 24, it means that when x is 3, y equals 24.
So you can go back to y equals a times b to the x, replace the x by 3 and the y by 24
and you'll have this equation, 24 equals a times b to the third power.
Next, if the graph passes through 2, 12, it means that when x is 2, y is 12.
So you can plug that information into the equation as well and get 12 equals a times
b squared.
Now I can solve 12 equals a times b squared for the value a just by dividing both sides
by b squared and I'll have a equals 12 over b squared.
By the way, I know b is never 0 and so I know I'm not dividing by 0 when I do that, so that's
great.
So I can take a equals 12 over b squared and substitute 12 over b squared for a in the
first equation that I had.
So I had 24 equals a times b cubed and now if I replace a by 12 over b squared, I'll
have 24 equals 12 over b squared times b cubed.
And just using a few of the laws of exponents and so on, that means the right hand side
is actually just equal to 12 times b.
So 24 equals 12b, which means b is 2.
So my base is equal to 2.
And now if I just go back to one of the earlier equations and replace the b by 2, I can find
a.
So go back to the first equation we started with, 24 equals a times b cubed.
If b is 2, I have 24 equals a times 2 cubed or 24 equals 8a, which means a is 3.
So the function I had in mind is the function y equals 3 times 2 to the x.
That function is the exponential function of the form a times b to the x, which will
go through the two points that we started with.
Well we've started today talking about exponential functions and I've looked at some basics,
especially related to their graphs and so on.
Next time I want to look at logarithmic functions, which are the sort of natural companions of
exponential functions.
I'll see you then.
