In this last lesson of our course, I'd like to utilize some of the counting strategies
that we've developed in the last few lessons to answer some questions in elementary probability.
But before I can do so, we need to define a few terms that are going to come up throughout
this lesson.
So first, let's define something called the sample space.
The sample space is the set of all possible outcomes for a particular activity or experiment,
and each element of the sample space is going to be called an outcome.
So for example, if the activity in question was just a flip a coin one time, then the
sample space would just be the set with an H and a T in it, where H would stand for getting
a heads and T would stand for getting a tails.
Similarly, if the experiment was rolling two number cubes or dice and looking at the sum
of those two faces, then the sample space would be the set of numbers from 2 up to 12,
because these are the possible sums that you can get.
The 2 is the smallest from 1 plus 1, and the 12 is the largest from adding 6 and 6.
Now from here, we can then define the theoretical probability of an event.
So here's that definition.
If a sample space has N equally likely outcomes and an event, let's call it A, occurs in M
of those outcomes.
Then the theoretical probability of event A is denoted by little p of A, and it's given
by p of A equals M divided by N. Now, just to get the idea of what's really going on
with these probabilities, let's just do a few basic examples to make sure the terminology
makes sense.
First of all, find the theoretical probability of getting an odd number when you roll one
cube or one die.
Now in this case, when you're just rolling one of these, the sample space is the set
of numbers from 1 to 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
So in that formula we had just a moment ago for probability, we had a fraction M divided
by N, and that denominator is going to be 6 in this case.
That would be the value of N, because we have six elements in the full sample space.
Now, the next question we have to ask is how do we get the numerator of that probability,
and in order to answer that we have to ask this question.
How many of the outcomes in that sample space give us what we want, which is an odd number?
Well, the outcomes we would want in this case would be the 1, the 3, or the 5, and there's
three numbers there, 1, 3, and 5, so the M in this formula is going to equal 3.
That's the numerator in this probability fraction, and therefore, for this example, the theoretical
probability would be 3 divided by 6, which is the same as 1 half.
Now I hope that actually makes sense to you, sort of common sense, because half of the
outcomes in the sample space are odd, and the other half are even, so hopefully we would
get the theoretical probability of 1 half if what we're trying to have as an outcome
is an odd number.
Now, given that we've done that example and we feel okay with it, why don't you try the
following problem on your own and see how you do.
What is the probability of randomly selecting a prime number from the first 20 positive integers?
Remember, the probability of that event is going to be M over N.
Now, what's the sample space in this problem?
You know, you actually have to figure out what the sort of large space is of all possibilities
before you can ever move forward with one of these problems.
And the size of the sample space is the denominator of that theoretical probability formula, so
we need to know what the set of numbers is that we're choosing from.
In this case, the sample space is all the positive integers from 1 up to 20, so 1, 2, 3, and so
on up to 20.
That means that there are 20 numbers in the sample space, so N, the denominator in our
probability, is 20.
Next, how many elements in the sample space are the ones we want?
In other words, how many of them are prime?
That's the question here.
Well, remember, the prime numbers are going to be the numbers whose only divisors are
themselves and one.
So for example, 2 is a prime, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, and 19.
Those are the primes in the set from 1 to 20.
And now you need to ask yourself how many numbers are in that little set.
We had 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, and 19.
Well there are eight of those.
And so M, or the numerator in my probability, is going to be 8.
And therefore, the probability of selecting a random prime number out of the set of numbers
from 1 to 20 is equal to 8 divided by 20, which I can reduce down to two-fifths after
I simplify that fraction.
Now let's try one more example of this kind just to make sure that we're settled on it.
And this time, we might have to bring in some material on permutations and combinations.
We'll see.
Here's the example.
A jar contains 70 red marbles, 25 white marbles, and 5 blue marbles.
You plan to choose one marble at random from the jar, so you're just going to close your
eyes and reach into the jar and pull out a marble.
What's the probability that you choose a white marble?
Now and then I would like to ask, what's the probability that you choose a marble that's
not blue?
So we're actually asking two questions here.
Probability of choosing a white marble and then probability of choosing a marble that's
not blue.
Now how many possibilities are there, so to speak, in my sample space?
The sample space is now the selection of each of those different marbles, just one at a
time.
So there's 100 different possibilities here just from choosing one marble out of the
total 100 marbles.
So the denominator of my probability formula is 100.
Now there are 25 marbles in the jar.
We were told that.
So there are 25 different marbles that we would want to select in the jar for this first
experiment of choosing a white marble and therefore the numerator for that problem is
going to be m equals 25.
So the probability of choosing a white marble out of this jar at random is going to be 25
divided by 100, which is one fourth.
Now what about that other question?
How do we find the probability that we randomly select a marble that is not blue?
Well the probability of not blue is the same as the marble being either red or white.
We only had three colors of marbles here, red, white and blue.
And the number of ways of getting either a red marble or a white marble is 95.
And so the total number of ways that we could successfully actually do the experiment if
you want to think of it that way is m equals 95.
And therefore the probability of selecting a marble that's not blue and doing so at random
is going to be 95 over 100, which is the same as 19 over 20.
Now in that example we didn't have to use combinations and permutations, but we're going
to use them a lot more as we move forward and get some slightly more complicated examples.
The cool thing is that they're so helpful, these combinations and permutations from the
previous lesson for counting things intelligently and counting them quickly.
So let's look for those now as we move forward in other examples in the rest of this lesson.
Let's move to this example.
When you're dialing a phone at your local school campus you only have to use the last
four digits of the phone number to dial the number.
This happens at some businesses as well where you only have to use say the last three or
four digits.
In this case we have to use the last four digits and they could be anything from 0000 to 9999.
Now here's the question.
What's the probability that you dial a four digit number at random where all the digits
are different?
So you randomly are selecting your four digits if you will and you want to know what the
probability is that as you choose those four digits at random that the digits are all different.
Now let's peel this problem apart a little bit at a time so that it doesn't feel so big
to us.
First of all what is the sample space if you will in this problem?
I need to know the size of the sample space because that's going to give me the denominator
of my probability.
Well I was told in the problem that I could have any of the numbers from 0000 up to 9999.
That means the number started 0000 then the next one could be 00001, 00002, 0003 and they
could go on for a long time until I get up to say 9997, 9998 and 9999.
Now that's the sample space remember not everything in the sample space is going to be what you
want but that's the set of all the possible four digit numbers you could have.
How many numbers are in that set?
Well the answer is that there are 10,000 of them and that might be a little confusing
you might have wanted to say that there were 9999 of them but remember we've not started
the numbers at 00001 we started at 0000 and when you do that you actually will have 10,000
different four digit numbers that you could have.
So the size of my sample space is 10,000 and that means the denominator in this probability
question is 10,000, good.
Now let's move forward then and think about the numerator as we're working through what's
happening in this probability question.
Now think about what we want to do.
We want to ask how many of the numbers in this sample space are going to have distinct
digits.
So what I've got then is a question of four different blanks and filling in those four
blanks with different digits.
That feels quite a bit like the previous lesson that we were working with where we were trying
to fill in these kinds of blanks.
Now I'm trying to fill in these blanks with different digits.
How many ways can I do that?
Well since the digits are allowed to be anything from 0 to 9 the first blank is allowed to
have 10 different possibilities.
So the first blank has 10 choices.
Now the second digit then because it has to be blank, I'm sorry because it has to be different
only has nine different choices for that second blank.
So I have 10 choices for the first, I have nine choices for the second and now I want
to look at the third blank and in that case I'm going to have eight different possibilities
for the third blank and finally I would have seven different possibilities for the fourth
blank.
Now if you think about it for just a second that means that the total number of different
possible four digit numbers that we want to have with distinct digits is going to be
10 times 9 times 8 times 7 and that by the way is one of those p values that we saw in
the previous lesson.
So the numerator of my probability which is the total number of the four digit numbers
that I want is going to just be p of 10 comma 4 because we want permutations here right
because the numbers and their orders matter.
So the numerator of this probability is p of 10 comma 4 which is 10 times 9 times 8 times
7 and that by the way is 5,040.
Now I now know everything I need to know about the probability that I was asked for in this
problem.
Turns out that the probability of just sort of randomly getting a four digit phone number
which has all different digits is actually 5,040 divided by 10,000 which is if you reduce
just a bit 63 divided by 125 and let me just make a comment to you really quickly.
I don't know if you paused when we started this example to think to yourself I wonder
how big that probability is going to be but notice that this probability is just barely
bigger than one half.
I think it's pretty cool actually that this probability landed right near one half.
I don't know if your intuition told you where it would be whether it would be one tenth
or one half or three fourths or whatever but it's really interesting to see here that the
probability of randomly getting a phone number which has different digits is extremely close
to one half.
Now for the rest of this lesson I'd actually like to use examples that relate to a deck
of 52 playing cards the kind of deck that's often used in something like poker or a similar
card game.
Now if you're not familiar with a deck of 52 cards that are used in something like a poker
game then I might suggest you actually get a deck of these cards and just stare at them
for a while so that it makes sense to you what I'm about to say the ideas of how many
cards there are how many of each type how many are red how many are black and so on.
So you may want to actually go out and grab a deck of 52 cards just to get used to the
kinds of things we're going to talk about.
Now as a quick reminder the standard deck of 52 playing cards that's used in games like
poker contains four suits and the suits are the spades the clubs the hearts and the diamonds
and in each suit you have 13 cards and these are the cards that are numbered from two up
to ten along with a jack a queen a king and an ace.
Now using such a deck without any of the jokers included we want to throw the jokers away they
would really mess up these problems otherwise let's work out several different probability
questions and again it might help you to actually have a deck with you if you're not really
used to the standard deck of 52 playing cards.
So here's the first probability question I would ask you related to such a standard
deck what is the probability that you draw one card at random from the standard deck
of 52 cards and that one card that you draw is a red king okay that's the question what's
the probability that you draw a red king at random from a 52 card deck.
Well the first question you should ask yourself is let's see I've got to find a probability
I need to get two numbers and I would suggest believe it or not that the first number you
try to get is that denominator which means you need to ask yourself what is the sample
space of this event or this experiment that I'm doing well notice what you're doing you're
actually just drawing one card out of a 52 card deck and then looking at it to see what
it is in this case then the sample space just has 52 possible outcomes in it basically one
outcome for each card you could pull out an ace of spades you could pull out a three of
diamonds and so on and each of those would be an element of the sample space so in this
example the size of the sample space is 52 which means the denominator of your probability
is also going to be 52 now you're ready to think about the desired outcomes in other
words the actual events that you want to really have happen in this case and in this case
you want to have a red king be one of the cards that you pull out or be the card that
you pull out so how many ways could you have a red king in this deck well the answer is
there are exactly two red kings in the deck one is the king of hearts and the other is
the king of diamonds and those are the only two desired outcomes that you would want which
means the numerator of your probability is just the number two you only have two cards
that you really want to have come out as you do this experiment and therefore the probability
of randomly selecting this red king from the deck is exactly two divided by 52 which is
the same as one over 26 okay let's try another example and now the example is going to get
a little bit bigger as we think about what our sample space is what is the probability
that a five card hand is dealt to you which contains only black cards now I have to be
honest this example contains some pretty big numbers so it's it may feel a little overwhelming
to start thinking about the size of the sample space for example but just stay patient I
think you'll be okay as we work through the example let's first talk about the size of
the sample space and to do so let me just clarify what I'm saying I have my deck of
52 cards and I'm just going to deal five cards to you so I'm not worried about doing anything
beyond just handing you five of those 52 cards and I want to see if they're all that same
color in this case then the sample space is going to be the set of all possible five card
hands that you could have dealt to you at random now how many different ways could you
have five cards given to you at random out of a deck of 52 well this is a combinations
question and by the way it's not a permutations question because the order in which the cards
are handed to you does not matter you only care about getting those five cards and looking
at them so the number of items in the sample space is going to be C of 52 comma five the
number of ways to choose or select five things out of the set of 52 cards now that means
that your denominator is going to be C of 52 comma five and by denominator here I mean
the denominator of your probability that number which is the number of different five card
hands that could be given to you at random is actually 2,598,960 that's big but just
put it there as your denominator now let's figure out the number of ways that you could
get the outcome that you want because the number of ways you get the outcome you want
is the numerator in your probability well if you only want black cards then it means
that basically you want to ignore all of the red cards if that's possible if you wanted
you could just throw them away or something like that so what that means then is that
the number of hands that we actually want would be the number of ways we could choose
five cards from the 26 black cards that are in the deck remember there are 26 black cards
there are 13 clubs and 13 spades and I'm not worried about which of the clubs or spades
I get I'm only worried about the color of the card so this means that the total number
of hands that you might want to have dealt to you which is the numerator of your probability
is exactly the number of ways to choose five of those 26 black cards and the number of
ways to do that is C of 26,5 again it's C for combinations and not P for permutations
because I don't care about the order in which I received the five cards so it's a C 26,5
and as my numerator of this probability and therefore my probability is C of 26,5 divided
by C of 52,5 so that's the probability now if you wanted to actually calculate that you
could and you'd find after you simplified everything that you'd have 253 divided by
2996 as your probability and if you wrote that as a decimal number it would be about
.025. Okay let's move forward then to another example of how we can look at these probabilities
related to poker hands that might be dealt to us so here's the example what's the probability
of having a flush dealt to us at random from a 52 card deck now you might not know what
a flush is from a 52 card deck so let me just share it with you here a flush is a hand
where all five cards come from the same suit so either all five cards are hearts or they're
all five diamonds or they're all five spades or they're all five clubs now the denominator
of this probability is the same as the denominator of the probability in the previous example
it's going to be C of 52,5 because the sample space is the set of all possible five card
hands that you could have dealt to you at random from a 52 card deck so your denominator
is C52,5 now you need a numerator and that means we need to understand the number of
different ways that we could have a flush dealt to us out of that 52 card deck well the flush
then means that I want all the cards to either be hearts or all diamonds or all spades or
all clubs how many ways could that happen well I'm going to suggest that we do this
problem using the multiplication principle to help us and we're going to think about
it in two stages first of all one of these hands that we want which would be a flush
we would depend on which of the hearts diamonds spades or clubs that we choose in other words
we can choose one of those four suits and so the first stage in this process would be
let's pick the suit that we're going to come from and there are four choices for that now
let's keep that in mind we'll need a four then as part of our final answer now once
you've picked that suit let's say you pick hearts for example because you're sentimental
you could put aside the other three suits then leaving you just 13 cards in your hand
from which you want to have five dealt to you those 13 cards would be the 13 hearts
that were in the deck so once you've done that the number of ways to have five hearts
dealt to you would be C of 13 comma five in other words it's a number of ways of picking
five of the 13 cards which are hearts and again I'm not worried about the order in which
you hand me the cards so this is a combinations problem and not a permutations problem so
the number of ways then to have all of the different possible flush hands figured out
would be four times C of 13 comma five it's a multiplication principle problem first stage
pick the suit there are four ways to do that second stage once the suit has been chosen
deal out five of those 13 cards in that suit so the numerator of your probability or what
we were calling M earlier is four times C of 13 comma five the denominator we already
said was C of 52 comma five and therefore your probability is just that ratio which in this
case is going to be five thousand one hundred forty eight divided by two million five hundred
ninety eight thousand nine hundred sixty and as a decimal that's point zero zero one nine
eight and that's not very probable that that sort of thing is going to happen now let's
try a couple more of these kinds of examples just to try to nail down this idea let's do
the following what's the probability of having a full house dealt to us at random from a
52 card deck now a full house is a very different kind of hand from what we were talking about
earlier a full house means I want to have three cards of one kind like maybe having three aces
along with another pair from another kind like having a pair of sevenths for example so I want
to know what's the probability of having a full house well in my probability formula the denominator
is still going to be C of 52 comma five because that's the number of ways of having five cards
randomly given to me out of 52 so now what's the numerator well the numerator is going to be
the number of possible full house hands that we can have let's figure that out again using the
multiplication principle now unlike the last example where I sort of wanted to think of the
cards first in suits you know a pile of hearts and a pile of spades and a pile of clubs and a
pile of diamonds now I don't want to think of the cards that way because a full house doesn't
worry about those kinds of things I want to think of the cards in little piles all the twos all the
threes all the fours all the fives up to all the kings and all the aces which means I would have
13 little piles in front of me now once I've done that I then need to think about how I would build
a full house from those cards well the answer is to do it in stages in the first stage I would
pick one of those 13 piles from which I'm going to choose the three of a kind so I have 13 choices
for which of the kinds of cards I have in order to pick my three of a kind so I need to remember
that 13 that's stage one stage two says now pick one of those 13 piles and put it in your hand
there are four cards in that pile now maybe four aces and now how many different ways could I make
a three of a kind out of that family of four cards well the answer is C of four comma three why is
that you have four cards in your hand now and you want to pick three of them and you don't care
which of the three out of the four you pick so you now in stage two can say that there are four
different ways to pick your three of a kind out of those four cards now stage three go back to the
table again and now you have 12 piles left from which you want to pick the pair so to speak
that's left in your full house so you need to pick one of those 12 piles and you have 12 different
ways to pick that pile so now you have a 12 and now you choose that pile and you ask yourself out
of those four cards maybe you're now holding the four sevens how many ways can I give myself a pair
of sevens out of these four sevens well the answer again is a combinations problem it's C of four
comma two now because you want to choose two of these four cards to make a pair and that's six I
now walked you through a four stage process for building an arbitrary full house and now if you
think about the multiplication principle it means that the number of ways you could build that full
house would be 13 times the C of four comma three times 12 times C of four comma two and if you
use the formulas we've had for those C functions in the past that total number is 3744 which means
the probability of having a full house dealt to me at random is 3744 divided by 2,598,960 now
let's try to do one last example from these poker hands just to see if we can understand fully how
this probability works so here we go find the probability of being dealt a straight from a
randomly shuffled deck of 52 cards now let's make sure we understand what a straight is a straight
just is five cards in order of their size if you will so two three four five six for example would
be a straight or ten jack queen king ace for example would also be a straight and by the way
ace two three four five is also an allowable straight now how do we figure out all the total
ways to get a straight handed to us or dealt to us at random well the answer is to first start by
thinking about what the lowest card is in my straight now how many ways can I pick what the
lowest card is well it could be an ace or a two or a three or a four or a five or a six or a seven
or an eight or a nine or a ten the ten is actually the highest of the cards that can serve as the
starting point for a straight you can't start at a jack because then you'd have to go jack queen
king ace two and that kind of wrapping around is no good so the starting point for the straight
has to either be an ace two three four five six seven eight nine or ten so you actually have
ten choices for where you're going to start building your straight now from there you're going
to then have to worry about how to build it after you've chosen that first starting place
for this straight so we're going to build the straight then in the following way we'll pick
our starting kind there are ten ways to choose that starting value if you will and from there
we're going to then pick the number of ways to choose the cards out of each of those piles so
let's say I started a five I've got four fives to choose from right and I only want one of them
so there are four ways to choose the five then there are four ways to choose the six four ways
to choose the seven four ways to choose the eight and four ways to choose the nine so when I look
at that I realize that the ways to build the straights are the following choose the starting
value there are ten ways to do that and then there are going to be four times four times four times
four times four ways to pick the actual cards that will be in the straight and that means that the
total number of possible straights is ten times four times four times four times four times four times
four so my probability then is that number ten times four to the fifth divided by c of 52 comma
five and that number is approximately 0.00394 well in this lesson we've discussed a lot of
things about probabilities some of it's probably scary feeling and you might have to look at these
over and over again just to see what's going on but I hope you understand from this multiplication
principle and combinations and permutations how you can actually build up to these probabilities
with relative ease I really hope you've enjoyed this algebra two course I really have and I
strongly encourage you to check out the teaching company's new pre-calculus course as well as
calculus course from Bruce Edwards and hopefully you'll continue in your mathematical studies
and continue to enjoy
so
