In our previous lesson, we introduced the idea of a solution of a system of two linear equations.
And we talked about one way to find such a solution.
We called it graphing.
We're going to be using the two lines that correspond to the two equations in the system
and looking for their intersection point.
When we finish that lesson, I mentioned a few reasons why the method of solving by graphing
is a bit weak.
And I hinted that it would be nice to have some other ways to solve these systems.
So in this lesson, we're going to talk about two such ways to solve the systems that don't
need the visual or the graphical approach.
They're going to be much more algebraic.
And they have names.
They're called the method of substitution and the method of elimination.
So let's start by talking about the method of substitution.
The method gets its name from the fact that you substitute information from one of the
equations into the other equation and then solve this newly modified equation.
The solution of that new equation is the solution of the system.
So even though you're playing with the equations, changing them and making them look like new
equations, it turns out that whatever you find for the solutions of those new equations
is exactly the solutions that you wanted to the original system.
So let's start with an example, a pretty straightforward example, and see how we use
this method of substitution.
Let's take the system 2x plus 3y equals 4 and negative 6x plus y equals negative 7.
Now I want you to notice that if you tried solving this system by graphing like we had
in the previous lesson, it would take a little bit of work.
You'd have to change or rewrite these equations into something like slope intercept form before
you could easily sketch the graphs and then you'd have to do some other work to look for
that intersection point and so on.
So instead of trying something like graphing, let's try solving this by what I'm calling
substitution.
So here's how.
First I'm going to add 6, 6x to both sides of the second equation and it's going to
give me a new equation, y equals 6x minus 7.
Now in fact, I've now written that in slope intercept form, but that's not my goal in
doing that.
The reason I've written that equation as y equals 6x minus 7 is that I now know that
I can replace any y that I see with the quantity 6x minus 7.
That's because y equals 6x minus 7.
So I'm going to go back to the other equation in the original system and anywhere I see
a y, I'm going to substitute 6x minus 7.
That's why we call this technique the method by substitution.
And that other equation, instead of being 2x plus 3y equals 4, is now the same as 2x
plus 3 times 6x minus 7 equals 4.
I've substituted for y the quantity 6x minus 7.
And now if you look, there are no more y's in that equation.
There's only one variable and it's x.
Now it does appear a couple times, but there's just that one variable x.
So if I can now solve that equation for x, I'll be halfway to finishing this problem.
So let's look at this equation 2x plus 3 times the quantity 6x minus 7 equals 4.
And let's start trying to solve that for x.
The first thing I'm going to do is distribute that 3, and that's going to give me 2x plus
3 times 6x minus 3 times 7 equals 4.
We have to distribute that 3 with the 6x and with the 7.
And that means I have 2x plus 18x minus 21 equals 4.
2x and 18x added together gives me 20x, so I have 20x minus 21 equals 4.
I can add 21 to both sides, and that gives me 20x equals 25.
And if I divide both sides by the 20 to get the x by itself, I will have x equals 25 over
20, which is the same as 5 fourths.
So I now know that x equals 5 fourths is actually part of my solution of the system.
That's great.
Now I need to find the value for y.
Well, I knew that y equals 6x minus 7.
So if I plug in x equals 5 fourths into that equation, I can get y.
And namely, I'm going to have y equals 6 times 5 fourths minus 7, remember x is 5 fourths.
And that's the same as 3 times 5 halves minus 7 or 15 halves minus 7.
And if I get a common denominator, that's the same as 15 halves minus 14 halves.
And of course, when you do that subtraction, you just get 1 half.
And guess what?
We now know the solution of our system, assuming we've done all the mathematics correctly.
It's going to be x equals 5 fourths, I found that a few moments ago, and y equals 1 half.
If we wrote that as an ordered pair to think about a point in the xy plane, it would be
5 fourths comma 1 half.
Now as I mentioned earlier, it might have been kind of hard to see this point, 5 fourths
comma 1 half, if we had solved this by graphing, even with graph paper, 5 fourths and 1 half,
neither of those are whole numbers.
It would have been hard to see that.
But I'd like to suggest that we get into a good habit of checking our solutions to these
systems.
Let's do that with the equations by plugging in x equals 5 fourths and y equals 1 half into
each of the original equations.
Let's do that quickly.
We start with 2x plus 3y equals 4, plugging in x equals 5 fourths and y equals 1 half
gives me 2 times 5 fourths plus 3 times 1 half equals 4, that's the same as 5 halves
plus 3 halves equals 4, or 8 halves equals 4, or 4 equals 4.
That's correct.
So that's good to go.
Let's try the other of the original equations.
Negative 6x plus y equals negative 7, plugging in the information for x and y gives me negative
6 times 5 fourths plus 1 half for y equals negative 7.
That's the same as negative 15 halves plus 1 half equals negative 7, or negative 14 halves
equals negative 7, or negative 7 equals negative 7.
That's also true.
So the solution works for both of the original equations and therefore I'm guaranteed I'm
certain that x equals 5 fourths and y equals 1 half is the solution of that system.
Now I'd like to look at a second example of solving by substitution just to make sure
we have it down.
So let me suggest if you'd like that you try this one first on your own if you want
and then we can check back together to see how you did.
So the following system, 4x plus 2y equals 8 and y equals 2x plus 1.
Okay, so what answer did you come up with?
Well, let's solve it together and let's make sure that we got the same answer.
Notice that the second equation in the original system already had one of the variables isolated
or by itself.
Notice that y equals 2x plus 1 was given to us.
So we can just substitute 2x plus 1 in for y in the first equation and see what we get.
So let's do that.
That first equation was 4x plus 2y equals 8.
I know that y has to be the same as 2x plus 1, so I'm going to put 2x plus 1 in for y
and it's going to give me 4x plus 2 times the quantity 2x plus 1 equals 8.
And that's the same as 4x plus 4x plus 2 equals 8.
I just used the distributive property again and that's the same as 8x plus 2 equals 8
or 8x equals 6 after I subtracted 2 from both sides.
So x has to be 6 divided by 8 which is the same as 3 fourths.
So we now know that our x value in the solution is 3 fourths.
Well, what about the y value?
Well, go back to the original equations again.
We knew that y equals 2x plus 1.
We now know that x has to be 3 fourths in order to be the solution.
So I'm just going to plug in 3 fourths for x into the equation y equals 2x plus 1.
And when I do that, I'll have y equals 2 times 3 fourths plus 1.
So y is 6 fourths plus 1.
And if I get a common denominator of 4, that's the same as saying y equals 6 fourths plus
4 fourths.
And that's the same as y equals 10 fourths when you do the addition.
And simplifying that fraction just a bit gives me y equals 5 halves.
So the solution of my original system is the point 3 fourths comma 5 halves.
We can check this by plugging these values into the original equations and confirming
that everything is correct.
We could also just sketch the graphs of the two equations to see if the intersection point
is 3 fourths comma 5 halves.
Well, I'm going to suggest we try that graphical approach here instead of plugging in the numbers
and checking everything.
I always like to go visual if we can.
And if you look at those graphs for just a second, you'll notice that there is an intersection
point.
And it appears that the x coordinate is just less than 1, maybe like 3 fourths, which is
what it's supposed to be.
And the y coordinate looks like it's somewhere between 2 and 3, kind of like 5 halves, which
is 2 and 1 half.
And this gives us a good sense that we found the correct solution.
Of course, if we wanted to be completely confident in the answer, we'd actually have to plug
our numbers back into those equations to make sure everything worked.
And if you want to do that, I think it would be a great idea to plug those numbers in just
to make sure.
Now, before I move on to the next example, let me point out again that using the method
of graphing from the previous lesson, it may have been hard for us to see the exact solution.
So this example, again, points out that the method of graphing, although it's nice and
if you're a visual learner, it's a really wonderful way to find those solutions.
In this case, it can be very hard to find the exact solution unless the coordinates of
that point are whole numbers.
So I wouldn't mind if we used the method of graphing always, but it can be very hard
to find the exact answers sometimes.
And that's why something like the method of substitution is so great.
Now I'd like to transition to another example of solving a system of equations where even
the method of substitution might not be the best way to go.
So let me walk through the example and hint at why I think a different method might be
better in this example.
Here's the example.
The system is 2x minus 5y equals 12 and 6x plus 5y equals 36.
Now I want you to notice something.
There doesn't appear to be a natural choice for what to do in order to use the method
of substitution.
You don't really have one of the variables isolated in either one of the equations.
Either of the equations has something like x or y completely by itself.
And it looks like we're going to have to do a fair bit of work just to get one of those
variables by itself.
So although that work is not impossible to do, what I just mentioned I think is some
motivation for y, we might want to look for another method for solving this system.
In this case there is another method and that's what I want to talk with you about for the
remainder of today's lesson.
It's called the method of elimination.
So let me demonstrate the method by working through the system that I just showed you
and pointing out the different steps in the method.
So first I want you to notice that if we added the two left hand sides of the system that
I gave you, you would have the following, 2x minus 5y plus 6x plus 5y.
If you add those two together, the 2x plus the 6x gives you 8x and the minus 5y plus
the 5y gives you 0y.
So you actually have 8x plus 0y which is the same as 8x.
Now what significant thing just happened?
Well the y, the variable y was completely eliminated and this is where we get the name
for this method, the method of elimination.
If you add the full sets of equations now, both the left hand sides and the right hand
sides, it turns out that what you'll be left with only has one variable because the y gets
eliminated.
So now go back to the original set of equations and just add both the left hand sides and
the right hand sides and let's see what you get.
You have 2x minus 5y equals 12 and 6x plus 5y equals 36.
We know that the sum of the left hand sides of the equations is just 8x, we did that together
a moment ago, and the 12 plus the 36 is 48.
And so now you're left with a new equation, 8x equals 48 and that equation only has one
variable, the y has been eliminated, you just have the x.
So if I just take 8x equals 48 and do a little more algebra, I can actually find the x value
which is part of the solution of this system, it's really cool.
So let's take that, 8x equals 48 and divide both sides by 8.
On the left hand side then I'll just have 1x or x because the 8s will cancel and on
the right hand side I'll have 48 divided by 8 which of course is 6.
So here's the point, that value x equals 6 is actually part of the original system of
equations.
So we need to keep that in mind, x equals 6.
I now need to find the y, well what do I do?
Well I know x equals 6 so I can go back to either of the original equations, plug in
6 for x and solve for y and it doesn't matter which of the two original equations you choose.
I'm going to choose to go back to 2x minus 5y equals 12 and I'm going to plug in x equals
6.
Let's see what I get.
Well I'm going to have 2 times 6 minus 5y equals 12 which is the same as 12 minus 5y
equals 12 and now if I subtract 12 from both sides I'll have negative 5y equals 0 or y
equals 0.
So the solution of the system appears to be 6 comma 0.
Let's check.
I've got 2x minus 5y equals 12 and if I plug in 6 for x and 0 for y I'll then have 12 minus
0 on the left equals 12 or 12 equals 12.
So that's true.
Let's try the other equation now which hasn't really played much of a role in this example.
I have 6x plus 5y equals 36.
I can plug 6 in for x and 0 in for y and I'll have 6 times 6 plus 5 times 0 equals 36 which
is the same as 36 plus 0 which is equal to 36 and of course that's just 36 equals 36.
That's also true and that means we're done.
That we really did have the right solution x equals 6 and y equals 0.
So that was good.
That was the method of elimination.
Now I want to try a second example that also uses that method to see if we've got the idea
down.
So let me suggest that you try this one first if you want and then we'll get back together
in just a moment.
So here's the question.
I want us to solve the following system by elimination.
The system is 5s plus 4t equals 27 and 3s plus 4t equals 31.
Now let me give you a bit of a hint just in case you weren't sure how to start that problem.
I'm going to give you the hint that the t variable is the one to try to eliminate.
Now let me also point out before we move forward that the variables here are not x and y.
They are s and t, but that is not a problem at all.
It's just new names and that's not going to be an issue for us.
We just need to remember that one of the variables is s, the other one is t, so the solution
is going to be some number for s and some number for t.
Now let's start the problem by trying just to add the two equations together.
In fact that's what I did in the previous example, so let's just add them both together
and see what we get.
When I do that I'm going to have 8s plus 8t equals 58.
Now what happened or maybe I should ask you this way, what didn't happen?
Well what didn't happen is that neither of the two variables got eliminated.
You still have some s and you still have some t floating around in the equation.
That's a sign that what we did didn't really help us.
Now what we did was legal, it was mathematically correct, but it didn't help us at all.
So we should try something other than adding the two equations together to see if we can
eliminate a variable.
And if you look at those original equations again, you realize that if you can subtract
one of the equations from the other, then the t's will be eliminated.
So I'm going to subtract the second equation from the first.
Let me think of it this way.
Let's multiply the second equation by negative one and then let's add.
If you multiply the second equation by negative one, then that equation becomes negative 3s
minus 4t equals negative 31.
And if you add that to the original first equation, 5s plus 4t equals 27, you're left
with 2s equals negative 4.
Notice that by adding the 4t and the negative 4t, we've eliminated the t.
You're down now to just the variable s and so you can solve that 4s.
Now before we move on though, let me point something out.
There's a common mistake that students often make when they have to multiply by negative
one throughout one of the equations as I just did a moment ago.
You have to make sure you distribute that negative one throughout the equation.
So make sure that all of the signs become negative.
In particular, I needed a negative 4t in order to get that eliminated.
Now once that t's been eliminated and I have 2s equals negative 4, I can just divide both
sides by 2 and I'll have s equals negative 2.
But of course we're not done yet because in order to find the solution of this system,
I need a value for s and I need a value for t.
All I have right now is s equals negative 2.
But if I just go back to one of the original equations and plug in s equals negative 2,
I can solve for t.
In this case I'm just going to choose the second of the original equations and plug
in s equals negative 2 and that'll allow me to find t.
So let's do that here.
We have 3s plus 4t equals 31.
With s equal to negative 2, I need 3 times negative 2 plus 4t equals 31.
So negative 6 plus 4t equals 31.
Adding 6 to both sides gives me 4t equals 37.
So t equals 37 divided by 4.
And that means our solution is s equals negative 2 and t equals 37 over 4.
Now if you want to write that as an ordered pair, you can, just as negative 2 comma 37
over 4.
But the key now is that you have to remember which one of those was s and which one of
them was t because we're no longer using the variables x and y.
But as long as you keep that straight, s equals negative 2 and t equals 37 over 4, you can
actually write the solution as an ordered pair.
And let me just point out again at the risk of sounding like I'm really down on the method
of graphing.
I hope you realize that if you tried to draw the graphs of these two lines and spot the
point negative 2 comma 37 over 4, that would have been really hard to do.
I would have given you two gold stars if you could actually see 37 over 4, exactly.
So let's, before we move on to another example, just make sure that negative 2 comma 37 over
4 really is our solution and then we'll keep going.
How do we check that it really is?
We go back to the original equations, plug in negative 2 for s and 37 over 4 for t.
Here we go.
5s plus 4t equals 27.
That means 5 times negative 2 plus 4 times 37 over 4 needs to equal that 27.
That gives me negative 10 plus 37 because those fours are going to cancel each other.
And negative 10 plus 37 is 27.
27 does equal 27.
That checks.
Now let's try the second equation.
3s plus 4t equals 31.
Plugging in negative 2 for s and 37 over 4 for t gives me 3 times negative 2 plus 4 times
37 over 4 equals 31.
The left-hand side is just negative 6 plus 37, which is 31.
And so those two values really make both equations work or make both of them true.
So indeed I really do have a correct solution.
Now let's look at another example which appears at least at the beginning to cause us some
trouble but I don't think it really does.
It's going to take a little more work and if you're feeling pretty confident that you
might be able to see what that work is, I want you to try stopping the video and trying
it yourself.
Let me give it to you first and then we can do it together in just a moment.
Follow the following system.
Negative 2x plus 15y equals negative 32 and 7x minus 5y equals 17.
Okay, let's try this thing together now especially if you didn't see exactly how to get started.
Let's just start somewhat carelessly if you want by just adding the two equations together.
Let's just see what happens.
If you add the two equations together you get 5x plus 10y equals negative 15.
Well, x is still there and y is still there so we didn't eliminate one of the variables
so that doesn't help us much at all.
Okay, we've tried adding, let's try subtraction, we did that earlier, let's try subtracting
the two equations and if you do that you get negative 9x plus 20y equals negative 49.
Remember you've got to distribute that minus sign throughout in order to do this correctly
but notice the x is still there and the y is still there, ug.
So this elimination doesn't look like it's helping but it turns out that there's something
else we can do in order to make the elimination work.
We are allowed to multiply either of our equations on both sides by any constant that we choose.
So we can just multiply, we've multiplied by negative 1 a couple of times but we can
actually multiply by other numbers as well and in this case let's try multiplying the
second equation by the number 3.
You might have had that idea already and if you did that's fabulous.
Let's try it together here.
Take that second equation and multiply it by 3 and you'll get 21x minus 15y equals 51
and if you write that with the first original equation negative 2x plus 15y equals negative
32, do you see what you might try?
Let's try adding.
If you add these two equations now the y variable will be eliminated so let's add them and let's
see what we get.
Well the left hand side is going to become 19x plus 0y which is just the same as 19x
and the right hand side becomes 19 and the huge thing that just happened is that the
y variable was eliminated.
You can now divide both sides by 19 and you just get x equals 1 and that means you're
halfway home to the solution of this system.
You can now plug in the 1 into either of the original equations and solve for y.
Let me go back to negative 2x plus 15y equals negative 32 and plug in x equals 1.
In that case I'm going to have negative 2 times 1 plus 15y equals negative 32.
That's the same as negative 2 plus 15y equals negative 32.
Adding 2 to both sides gives me 15y equals negative 30.
Dividing both sides by 15 gives me y equals negative 2 and that means my final solution
as long as I've done everything right is 1 comma negative 2 or x equals 1, y equals
negative 2.
Let's plug the information in just to make sure that we've done everything correctly.
You should always do these checks.
So we go back to the original equations and plug in 1 for x and negative 2 for y.
The first equation is going to then be negative 2 times 1 plus 15 times negative 2 equals
negative 32.
That's the same as negative 2 minus 30 equals negative 32, which is negative 32 equals negative
32 and that's correct.
So that's good.
Now let's try the other equation.
7x minus 5y equals 17.
Plugging in 1 and negative 2 for x and y respectively gives me 7 times 1 minus 5 times negative 2
equals 17.
That's the same as 7 minus a negative 10 equals 17 and those two minuses cancel each other
if you will or turn into a plus and you get 7 plus 10 equals 17 or 17 equals 17.
And since we've made both of those equations true, we know that x equals 1 and y equals
negative 2 really is the solution of the original system of equations.
Well we've talked in this lesson about two new methods for solving systems of linear
equations.
One was called the method of substitution and the other was called the method of elimination.
They both feel a lot like algebra where we manipulate the symbols in the equations to
get to our answers.
They're much less visual or graphical compared to the method of graphing that we saw in a
previous lesson.
In our next lesson I'd like to think some more about these methods but I want to take
the problems one step further.
I want to talk about solving systems of three equations with three variables or three unknowns.
It turns out that these problems aren't much harder than what you and I just did but they
do require a bit more work and I look forward to talking about that in our next lesson.
