All right, this is an excellent segue, Leon.
But the problem is, unfortunately, we're short for time.
So forgive me for rushing you with this.
But I think in the forward and in the introduction itself,
you basically claim, of course, as you highlighted,
the subjective structures that Freud and Lacan
identified with neurosis, perversion, and psychosis.
And then in the book, you posit that autism,
you say is not a pathology, but a mode of being.
So again, I know we're short of short for time,
but if you could sort of maybe give us a prelude,
because obviously to get an understanding of that,
you got to read the book, but a very elementary prelude
as to what you mean by firstly, a mode of being,
and then why you claim that autism is another mode of being
on top of the ones identified by Freud and Lacan.
So first, let me say, Rahul, that I don't know.
You can see if your listeners are interested in our talk
or you yourself, and we can schedule another meeting
if you want to continue.
I'd be very grateful.
Yes.
I want to ask you about foreclosure.
And particularly, may you highlight
the difference between a psychotic flakosha
and autistic flakosha?
And I don't think we'll have time today for that.
So maybe this could be just an introduction.
And I'd be very grateful if we could reschedule another talk,
another conversation.
Sure, sure.
So that's, I put this on the table,
so we won't be too stressed for a time, OK?
Thank you.
So yeah, I give this idea of a mode of being,
borrowing this from the phenomenologists, of course,
this kind of term.
But I use it a bit differently in the book.
And this is the idea that one's particular use of language
in order to compensate for the inherent schism
between the inner world and the humanized world
is, for me, a mode of being.
It is a mode of existence.
Because we find our existence in language,
as you were saying and you were quoting from the book.
One is does not only find their meaning,
let's say, in this kind of Satrian way,
existence prior to meaning that you are born
and then you find who you are or whatever your goals or aims
are at your life.
We see with you is this expert that you brought,
is that one is born already endowed with meaning,
already determined by language.
And we say it's a name.
It's these projections that the parents might have on a baby,
even before it is born.
Today, we have the sonogram and these images of the baby
and the womb.
People already start having their fantasies
about even their face structure.
We know if they're a boy or a girl,
one has already meanings that are stuck to them
before they're born.
And so we say one becomes human, one subjectifies,
one is situated in the humanized world
through their use of language, through their relationship
with this language that is alien, that is outside of them,
that exists prior and will exist after.
Now, this particular use of language
is a mode of existence because it situates us
in the world, in the social world, in our body,
in relationship with other people in the world,
in relationship with our own ego.
So language is the mode through which one becomes.
And then neurosis is one of these modes.
And I argue that psychosis and perversion
are also these modes.
But my point is, and this is where
I think maybe this mode of being steps away
from the Heideggerian design, this mode of being
that Heidegger speaks about, is that I'll be a little blunt.
For me, everyone is developmentally disordered.
They say that autism is a developmental disorder.
This is how it's determined.
If you follow Freud, everyone is necessarily
developmentally disordered.
Freud speaks about the fixation of the drives.
So the drives are these things that determine our pleasure
and suffering.
And he says that at a certain point in one's life,
they're fixated, and they stop developing,
uses these words.
They are stopped in the middle of their development.
And then they continue in the same way,
which is not the proper way.
It is just a way that keeps on functioning.
So everyone is, in a sense, developmentally disordered.
We are born split with this inherent schism that
is unmendable.
We use language to compensate for it.
And as we do something in the development of the drives,
of these things that move us, that color the world,
that make the world, basically, objects
exist in the world when they are invested with libido.
They don't exist when they are not invested.
So basically, this means that the world stops developing,
in this sense.
So everyone, the neurotic, the psychotic, the perverse,
and the autistic are all developmentally disordered.
And this is why each of these perspectives
are, let's say, a mode of being.
They're an attitude in relation to reality.
They're a way to do with language.
When I say then that they are distinct,
then I don't make here some kind of an ontological argument.
And this is something that's important to clarify.
I don't mean that here's Woody Allen.
He's neurotic.
Here's Daniel Schreber for its case.
He's psychotic.
And here's, I don't know, Temple Grandin.
She's autistic.
I mean that there are different ways to do with language.
And these necessitate our attention as analysts.
And it means that working with this particular subject that
has this particular way of doing with language
will dictate situating myself in the transference
in such and such a way, and making such and such
interventions.
And with the psychotic subject, that will not be the case.
Because if I will position myself in the same way,
that could be catastrophic.
For instance, this is something, again,
it's not a real example, it's just to clarify my point.
So with neurotic, it's important not to answer one's
demands for love many times.
And this also means that you sometimes go on vacation
and you don't really say, look, I'm sorry,
but I have to go and continue.
You say, I'm going.
We see each other in two weeks.
Let's set a date.
Good.
With the psychotic subject, you will not do that.
Because there is a risk for, let's say,
a paranoid thoughts.
Where is he going?
Is he staying home?
Will he be here?
Is he seeing other people?
Is he actually going to follow me and not tell me?
So with the psychotic, I would say, I'm going for two weeks.
I will be here.
This is my email.
You can contact me.
I'll be available between these and these hours.
I'll come back on Tuesday and we meet immediately on Wednesday.
And you can write to me if there's a problem
and we can reschedule, et cetera.
So you see that there's a different way
one engages with even the logistical level
of handling an analysis.
So this manifests itself on all the other levels.
So what I'm saying, when I'm saying that autism
is a distinct mode of being, is I'm
saying that one needs to handle an analysis under the hypothesis
of autism in a way that is different than the one
that we would do when there is a hypothesis of psychosis,
perversion, and neurosis.
