Hey everyone, today we're going to discuss the idea of Bodum using the existential theories of the philosopher Soren Kerkregard,
and particularly on what he's delineated in his book, Eitheror, which some would argue is his magnum opus.
Also, sorry about the background noise, someone's mowing their lawn, just when I decided to record a video.
But firstly, let me read something from the book.
So here, Kerkregard is writing as the esteem, and I'll get into what that means in a bit.
He says this,
By pressing the speed to the maximum, one need only say to oneself,
Bodum is a root of all evil.
Strange that Bodum, so still and static, should have such power to set things in motion.
The effect that Bodum exercises is altogether magical, except that it is not one of attraction, but of repulsion.
So firstly, starting off this section of Eitheror, you could see clearly Kerkregard's esteem is no fan of Bodum.
He literally states that we're repelled by it.
But it's important to understand this before we get to exploring this idea of Bodum via the lens of Kerkregard,
is that this is particularly not what Kerkregard believes, and that's really important.
Because this, in my opinion, is what makes Kerkregard a brilliant philosopher.
You never really truly know what his beliefs are.
He delineates and outlines different kinds of existential theories.
And the esteem, the person who wants to live the aesthetic life, I think is in a rather uncanny way pertinent to our times.
I wouldn't say uncanny is the proper word, but in a rather interesting way, pertinent to our times,
because I'd postulate that in many ways, aren't we all esthetes?
As in, Kerkregard's esteem is a person who constantly pursues happiness and novelty that they constantly want to be titillated.
Isn't that modern society?
If you think of society, and to use a term that I heard from, in fact, I'm a Ewan,
society itself has this meta-aim, contemporary society, and that meta-aim tends to be happiness.
So if you go to a person and ask, why do you work?
You could say, I'm working for money.
And then you ask, why do you want to make money?
Or I'm making, I want to make money to be financially free.
Or I want to, you know, for starters, most people, unfortunately, would say, I'm making money just to survive.
And that's the harsh, crude reality of the world we live in.
People simply want to get by.
But at the same time, let's say people that are a bit more well-off, a bit more middle-class, a bit more bourgeois.
If you keep questioning what the purpose of what they're doing is, at one point,
what happiness comes up.
I'm making money to be more happy.
I'm making more money to travel the world, experience new things, have novelty.
And for Kierkegaard, this is the esteem.
Now, he doesn't place any moral judgment on being an esteem.
It's simply, again, as I kind of touched on before, is a mode of life, an existential mode of life, a state of being.
And the esteem constantly pursues the new thing, be it sex, be it women, be it flirting, be it money, be it alcohol, drugs,
or on the other side, what some would call high culture, intellectual work.
What I'm doing right now is, in some ways, an aesthetic act, or beauty and art, or classical music,
or indulge oneself in being titillated by such things.
Nevertheless, it's still taking real pleasure in the aesthetic life.
And that's what the esteem is.
And I think, for our times, again, to not to repeat myself, the esteem's mode of living is germane.
But here's the way I bring in Zhezhek.
It's not just that we are esteem because we spontaneously, deep in our covenants and authentic sense,
want to be an estate, that this is the kind of aesthetic life.
Rather, in many ways, the moral imperative, the injunction by society is to enjoy, to live your best life.
And two ways of thinking about it is the typical kind of crude 1960s madmen style, where, oh, it's about sex, drugs, money, women.
It's just being the typical consumer, making more money so it can consume more.
That's the very crude way that we kind of think of how consumerism, for instance, works.
Buy this thing, buy this product, and that'll fulfill your desires, that'll make you happy,
and keep going to the next one, to the next one, kind of like the Jay-Z's song.
But of course, the other side of the same coin is a bit more subtle, but the kind of new age aesthetic life,
self-actualization, live your best life.
People who obsess over self-help and productivity and mindfulness.
And I hate this term because it's really overused.
Well-being, well-being.
You hear Sam Harris types constantly talk about it.
It's important to meditate.
People obsess over listening to Andrew Huberman's, optimizing your health.
And then, of course, there's more of the positive psychology, which is like pop positive psychology.
Focus on being your best self.
And then the kind of new age, spiritualist type is divine, feminine, divine, masculine.
I'm one with the universe, which, unfortunately, in other words, the two-carrier way has a strain of fascism to it, too.
But all these things, all these things, the kind of crude consumerism and even the new age self-actualization,
I put it all on the umbrella of character-guards aesthetic life.
And if you read, so the book, either or, it's a dialectical book.
If you read the either, which is on the aesthetic, you'll see so much of what character-guards writing about in the 1840s remarkably applies to our times,
specifically our times, or especially our times, given the kind of stage of capitalism we are in right now.
And I'm not pointing or like blaming everything on capitalism in a way I kind of am, but a lot of our culture, the way we live,
it's influenced by the ideological impositions of neoliberal capitalism.
I'll leave it there, but it's a bit more complicated.
But I'll put it like this, and I think that's the point Ja'Jak makes.
He states that the super ego imperative is to enjoy.
The traditional notion of psychoanalysis is that because of some inner obstacles,
you internalized, identified excessively, excessively with paternal or other social prohibitions,
you cannot set yourself free to enjoy, to pleasure is not accessible for you.
It is accessible to you only in pathological forms of feeling guilty and so on.
So then the idea is psychoanalysis allows you to suspend, overcome these internalized prohibitions so that it enables you to enjoy.
The problem today is that the commandment of the ruling ideologies enjoy in different ways.
It can be sexual enjoyment, consumption, commodity enjoyment, up to spiritual enjoyment, realize yourself, whatever.
And I think that the problem today is not how to get rid of your inhibitions and to be able to spontaneously enjoy.
The problem is how to get rid of this injunction to enjoy.
So it's because of this super ego imperative that we have to enjoy.
In many ways, we are forced to be esthetes in the modern world.
If we need to understand what Kedrican means about the aesthetic life,
or particularly for this video, the idea of boredom and exploit via the aesthetic lens,
because again, I am beating on a dead horse here, we in many ways are all esthetes.
In the book, in this part of the book, he continues saying, he says,
OK, the quintessential example is to think of children.
We all think of children.
And what happens when children are bored?
They generally get up to no good.
You know, we hear terms of, you know, teenage illinquency,
or we see all these statistics, sociological statistics about when kids have nothing to do, they get up to no good.
And he says, this is a clear indicator that being boredom is repulsive.
It's not a good thing.
It's in fact the root of all evil as the esthetes writes as Kedrican.
I'm going to keep saying, as Kedrican writes, because it's kind of confusing to mix them together.
It's kind of something fun about reading Kedrican, because you never really know
which who he's writing as, because he's got so many synonyms and different ways of explaining existence.
And then he goes on by saying that, oh, look, the fact that children behave in such way
when they're bored is the reason that boredom is a problem.
And then he states, what wounded them that the world is regressing, that evil is gaining ground more and more,
since boredom is on the increase and boredom is a root of all evil.
And then with the stroke of genius, I would say, Kedrican predicts this pathological obsession we all have with being productive,
or with wanting to always be busy, which one would say is the ideology of productivism.
So I kind of touched on this a bit before.
I was talking about people like Andrew Huberman or all these, you know, the myriad self-help productivity gurus on YouTube.
And again, they have a place, a certain place.
But what happens is that what people apply to their lives to be more productive
or to try and kind of be a bit more efficient, the part replaces the whole.
That's all they become.
They all become people who need to optimize everything.
And it comes to a point where where everything, including things like love and family and intimacy,
all these things are viewed through the lens of productivism, ticking off boxes and making the most out of the time you have in for a day.
And for Kedrican, that is that is he kind of in a very sadonic way.
He mocks it and he says that that is not the way we humans are.
We humans, you know, are not machines and we don't have to constantly live this hyper productive, optimized life.
So he's very sadonic about it.
And he says something like this.
There are people with an extraordinary gift for transforming everything into a business whose whole life is business.
To fall in love and marry, listen to a joke and admire a work of art with the same zealous sense of affairs, which they work in the office.
Isn't that so interesting because I've recently been seeing on Twitter of people posting these long Google Docs, Google Docs or long Google Docs documents.
There we go.
Long Google Documents with sort of like checklists on reasons to date me.
So even love has become like a kind of business interaction or a business transaction.
And then of course, dating apps, dating apps is perhaps in our times the quintessential example of how we commodify other people and we kind of, you know, check the boxes and see our interactions become.
Yeah, again, at a very kind of a transactional level, the same way we go to the supermarket and buy, let's say, I don't know, some can of tuna and you got all these myriad options.
We treat other human beings the same way.
But of course, that's not how love works.
Love doesn't work where you pick the best from the rest.
It's rather it's in retrospect, you pick someone and then you make them the best from your own choice.
Hold on to the conversation.
But the point being, again, KKGOT sees how once we start living in a certain way where we repel boredom, we repel not making the best use of our time.
And we think that's kind of like a sin because, again, our moral injunction or the super ego commandment is to live your best life.
Then everything has to be optimized.
We all have to be pathologically obsessed with being productive.
And then he continues.
And here's where he's being a bit sadonic, which I love.
So all people are boring.
The word itself indicates the possibility of a subdivision.
Boring can describe a person who boasts others as well as one who boasts himself.
Those who both others are the general plebians, the mass, the endless strain of humanity in general.
Those who both themselves are the elect, the nobility, and how strange it is that, and I love this line,
how strange it is that those who don't bow themselves usually bow others, while those who bow themselves amuse others.
The people who do not bow themselves are generally those who are busy in the world, in one way or another.
But that is just why they are the most boring, the most insufferable of all.
And I thought that was really interesting because if you think about it, it's kind of like the argument.
In fact, I've got the book right here.
Makuza makes in his book One-Dimensional Man that when people become these kind of hyper-optimized, you know, productivity robots,
they in fact do become very one-dimensional.
All their life entails is a life of optimizing one's finances, optimizing one's time, living this very to-do-less space life.
And I am guilty as charged. I happen to be one of them.
In fact, I would say it's really interesting because I was with a girl for a while.
I was dating a girl for a few months and probably one reason we broke up was she was the opposite of me.
She was very good at relaxing and not doing anything.
So I think it certainly is a bit of a personality trait too.
Although I don't want to get into psychology and psychologize Kegelgaard's philosophy here, I think it's more of a cultural phenomenon where, yes,
we all have this desire, this yearning to constantly be productive.
And I think the point Kegelgaard makes here is that when all our life is treated like a business, as he's stated here,
then we kind of lose this spirit of what it means to be human.
We lose this kind of, I don't even know, in a way we stop being human.
We become an automaton.
And it's even an interesting Marxist critique of modern society.
People like that generally seem to be quite boring.
I find people who are hyper-obsessed with self-help the most boring, artificial people in the world
because it seems that everything in their life is architected, it's contrived,
and I find that to be, yes, as he writes, rather boring and insufferable.
But seeing all that, in the middle of this section, Kegelgaard takes a bit of a turn and he states this,
and afterwards I'll expand on what he means here, which at least my reading of what he's trying to state here.
He states,
It is usually said, is a root of all evil.
To prevent this evil, one recommends work.
However, it is easy to see from the remedy as well as the fear it caused,
that this whole view is of very plebeian extraction.
Idleness as such is by no means a root of evil.
Quite the contrary, it is a truly divine way of life, so long as one is not born.
Certainly, idleness may lead you to lose your fortune and so on,
but of such things, the man of noble nature has no fear.
What he fears is boredom.
The Olympian gods were not bored.
They pondered in happy idleness, oh sorry, they prospered in happy idleness.
A beauty who neither soothes nor spends, nor irons nor reads, nor makes music as happy in her idleness,
for she is not bored.
So far from idleness being the root of all evil, rather it is the true good.
The root of all evil is boredom, and that is what must be kept at bay.
Idleness is not evil.
Indeed, one can say that any human who lacks appreciation of it,
proves that he has not raised himself to the level of humanity.
So at last line, I kind of was kind of what I was trying to articulate,
that in many ways, becoming this kind of one-dimensional person,
you lose a part of what it means to be human,
or you don't raise yourself to the level of humanity one could add.
Okay, so in the paragraph I read, what's Krikgad saying?
My reading is that, of course, as even Bertrand Russell,
who probably comes from a very different tradition, more of the analytical tradition states,
idleness is not a bad thing.
Idleness, in fact, is a good thing to be human.
We humans need a bit of idle time.
As perhaps Nietzsche said, old great ideas come to us when we are walking in walks.
So we need time that is just time spent without any, it's purposeless time.
It's time not, it's not resting so you could recuperate and do more work.
It's rather the subtle art of nothingness, of idleness.
And in fact, in modern society, as I've touched on, we simply don't have to be idle.
We simply don't have time to be idle anymore, although we are essentially both.
Now, I'll explain what I mean by essentially both a bit later,
because as we read this section, what you see is Krikgad delineates
that boredom is an ontological category.
It's intrinsic to being human.
We can't get rid of it.
We can't jettison it from our existence.
And that's the problem.
The problem is that since boredom, despite as he states, or the esteemed states,
is the root of all evil, despite that it still is a part of who we are.
We, in a very fundamental sense, are bored.
But while we are bored, we don't have time to be idle,
which Krikgad views, or the esteemed views as a virtue that idleness is a good thing.
I would agree.
Sometimes the most sublime ideas, the most sublime things happen when we are being idle.
It could even be a random interaction with a stranger that happens when we are really not getting up to anything
and not really rushing to the next thing or the next task.
But of course, the problem is because of our current societal ideology of be productive, be busy,
make the best use of your time, and then the other much more, I would say, dark side of things
where people simply don't have time to relax anymore as they simply have to put food on the table.
Just to get by, people are always working, taking multiple jobs.
Idleness is going away.
It's left our existence while we are also fundamentally bored.
There are subtle differences, but they are on the same thing.
Idleness is something at a very practical level that we need to incorporate into our lives,
whereas boredom, it is existential.
It's constitutive of what it means to be human.
In fact, in the book, it stated quite interestingly, we can trace this, so when he means this, he means boredom,
from the very beginning of the world.
The gods were bored, so they created man.
Adam was bored because he was alone, so Eve was created.
From that time, boredom entered the world and grew in exact proportion to the growth of the population.
Adam was bored alone, then Adam and Eve were bored in union, then Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel were bored on famil,
then the population increased, and the peoples were bored on mass.
So my reading of that little bit is that the estate is saying, despite him despising boredom,
despite him finding it repulsive, we can't get rid of it.
At least for the estate, it's kind of like a predicament.
It's not something we can just choose not to have in our lives.
It's a part of being human.
Then he states, this is the problem when we don't have time to be idle,
which is kind of like a practical thing being incorporated into our lives,
but we are still bored, it leads to meaninglessness.
I think that's where it becomes like a social phenomena,
where people have a mental health crisis as a term,
a neologism coined by social psychologists called deaths by despair.
It's simply people dying from unhappiness, not simply it's tragically people dying from unhappiness.
And for CricketGuard, one reason for this would be because we haven't acknowledged the fact that in the core of who we are,
in some sense this void of boredom, and it's there,
and he puts it beautifully here, he says,
boredom rests upon the nothingness that winds its way through existence, its diddiness,
like that which comes from gazing down into an infinite abyss, is infinite.
So you can see from that little line there how thinkers like Jean-Paul Sartre were influenced by CricketGuard quite interestingly.
So we need to be able to acknowledge this boredom being a part of our ontological condition.
And then, and then what? And the question is then what?
Given the fact that yes, boredom, for the assiduous evil, and what do we do from there?
CricketGuard, for better or worse, and for my belief is that for better, he is not a self-op author,
so he doesn't really write prescriptive texts except perhaps as more of his religious writing.
The fact of the matter is there really isn't no remedy or panacea to the fact that boredom to the core is a part of who we are,
although one thing that helps in understanding that is that then we acknowledge it
and then we also understand that idleness per se isn't a bad thing.
And in fact, we should probably make time and not listen to the societal imperatives or societal injunctions
to constantly do something and allow ourselves to be idle.
But that doesn't mean any of that is prescriptive and that's not the purpose of this video either.
I don't give advice on this channel.
But to kind of end it on a let's say a positive note, what is the solution to this dilemma, this predicament we are in?
The fact that we are ontologically bored, it's innate to who we are and that we don't have time to be idle,
therefore we have this emptiness and void in the middle of our lives.
And what is the solution to compulsive pathological business?
Now, of course, look, I could give the typical self-advice or kind of discuss, you know, or take time,
have me time in your calendar, lock out me time, I don't know, meditate, go for walks, you know, partake in self-care things.
Those are great, do all of that.
I do most of those things, I exercise, I run, I don't meditate, I hate meditating,
but I do engage in these things because they're great.
It's important to take care of your health.
But for me, still, those are rather superficial things.
What I've found personally is that the kind of the remedy to, I wouldn't even call it a remedy, not the perfect remedy,
but what helps me cope with this existential dread, let's say, or this nappingness, this void of boredom,
is to deeply fall in love with the world, to deeply, not to do the whole Western Buddhist thing where you detach yourself from the world
and be like, oh, everything's a cosmic phenomenon.
No, no, no.
Attach yourself more to the world, care more about the world, and find something you deeply care about.
For me, it happens to be writing, philosophy, politics.
These are things that I would go to the ends of my existence to deeply go all the way in some sense.
And I think that's the only antidote to this boredom we have in existence.
It's not playing this middle game where you do a bit of everything, but rather finding something that's like an infinite passion
that takes you all the way to the end, to the point where, in fact, when you truly care about a certain vocation,
let's say, be it a scientist, a political activist, an engineer, an artist, a philosopher,
you would sacrifice your own world for that course, for the vocation.
If you're building something, if you're writing a book, if you're partaking in some kind of political movement,
especially, I would say, if you're partaking in some kind of political movement,
you would sacrifice your well-being, your happiness, which the estate would find that repulsive.
You would sacrifice all of that for the course.
And I think that is the only way to exist in this world.
It's not through taking this kind of middle ground and trying to optimize everything in your life.
I think that's a lie sold to us so that we can, in fact, be suckers and buy more things off the market.
And of course, for many people, this comes in the form of family.
That is certainly something you can commit yourself to.
But the point being, I don't think, I think the worst thing one could do with Bodum is to ignore it, repress it,
don't look into it, and just take on many things in life and just drown yourself with tasks or businesses to use a word credit card.
I don't mean business in the economic transactional sense, but rather in always doing things and not obviously be idle.
My view one should confront that Bodum is a part of who we are.
It's considerative to our existence.
And then, then kind of go all the way, go all the way, find something that will, that will, that will not just wake you up in the morning,
but even keep you up late at night to the point where it's in fact bad for you.
And I think that's where passion lies.
Passion, for me, much like Bodum, passion itself is a, it's a, it's a, it's what it means to be human.
You will achieve the level of humanity when you truly are passionate about something.
And at least that's what I believe.
But again, I'm not being prescriptive here.
I found that for me, that's the only way to live.
It's life of passion.
Thanks for watching.
Hope you found that useful.
Cheers.
