Okay, so to get the ball rolling, as they say, I'm going to read off
Adiga's, uh, the question concerning technology, although, although it's very important, a caveat,
Adiga was a serious Nazi. So whenever you read him, you need to have that in the back of your mind.
He wasn't some kind of peripheral Nazi. No, no, no, he was deeply involved with the Nazi party.
He was an ideological Nazi. And, you know, I even read this good analysis of Adiga that in many
ways he was a metaphysical and SMI, not just the kind of the, you know, run-of-the-mill and SMI
in Germany during World War II. He was a legit and SMI. So it was a Nazi. So whenever we read him,
we need to keep that in mind. Regardless, I personally think one of his best essays I've ever
read is the question concerning technology, which he does an analysis, a metaphysical analysis of
technology. So I'm going to read really two tiny excerpts from that essay, and then we'll go from
there. So here's what he says. Everywhere we remain unfree and chained to technology.
Whether we passionately affirm or deny it, but we are delivered over to it in the worst possible way
when we regard it as something neutral. So that's a really important point. For this conception of it,
to which today we are particularly like to pay homage, make us utterly blind to the essence of
technology. This is essentially in the second paragraph of the essay. So he starts off like
that. And then this is the important bit for me, at least, which I thought was really
perspicacious. He says, yeah, we're questioning concerning technology, and we have arrived now
at alater, which is a Greek term, which means, well, it translates to add revealing.
What has the essence of technology to do with revealing? The answer, everything. For every
bringing forth is grounded in revealing. Bringing forth indeed gathers within itself
the four modes of occasioning, causality, and the rules, and rules them through throughout.
So the four modes he discusses as in his essay, we don't know how to get to that,
but the important bit is about revealing.
What's that? He writes in such a weird way, man. It's so hard to read how to go.
Within its domain, belong and means as well as instrumentality. Okay. I don't know what the
sentence means. Ignore that. Instrumentality is considered to be the fundamental characteristic
of technology. If we inquire step by step what technology represented as means actually is,
then we shall arrive at revealing. The possibility of all productive manufacturing
lies in revealing. And now this is perhaps the most important little excerpt.
Technology is therefore no mere means. Technology is a way of revealing. If we give heat to this,
then another whole realm for the essence of technology will open itself up to us.
It is in the realm of revealing, i.e. of truth. So after reading this a couple of times, my first
insight and the way I connected this to kind of techno-optimism and tech bros of our time is,
I feel like a lot of us, at least tacitly, view technology as a means to an end. A lot of tech
bros think of it as some kind of, as Heidegger says, instrumentality. It's a way to get things
done purely pragmatic, utilitarian kind of way of viewing. However, actually I have some notes here
which I took down. That bit about instrument, sorry, that bit about revealing shows that
technology is not a mere instrument. It's rather a way that truth reveals itself to us. And when I
mean truth, I don't mean truth in like a scientific empirical sense, like facts of, let's say, the
physical world, but rather truths of being as such. So the brilliant insight Heidegger had
in the 20th century, which I think revolutionized philosophy afterwards, at least so-called
colonial philosophy, is that he showed that, you know, truth isn't something that just
kind of prima facie just presents itself to us. It's always something that's revealed through
us, a subject, or as he calls it, a design. And then he used that kind of concept that truth is always
something that's filtered through a framework or framework, again, reduces it to some kind of like
algorithm. It's not in that sense. Rather, it's a, through a mode of being, through an orientation,
let's say. He extrapolated that idea to every other part of being. So technology, art,
obviously history and whatnot. This essays our technology. So the first thing is,
technology is not a means to an end. It is much more deep and much more profound. It's essence,
it makes metaphysical claims, which means technology deeply profoundly changes who we
as human beings. And that's not an eye-opener, especially with social media. People just accept
that kind of, now it's like, it's a given, right? Although it's not just in the sense of our social
reality, but our metaphysics, our values itself changes with technology. And then the other critique
of, let's say, tech bros or tech broism is that, you know, there's this kind of naive optimism,
which I'm going to talk about, where there's like this assumption we have that, oh,
technology is good just for the sake of technology. So it's just kind of, if we keep
advancing and developing our technologies, that's just good for its sake. It's not so simple.
What Heidegger talks about this thing called, yeah, so he has technology as revealing,
but then he also has this thing called enframing, which, okay, I hate to be the
annoying leftist that blames everything on capitalism, but I'm going to be that annoying leftist.
And framing us, we start viewing other human beings also as technical objects, as resources to
be exploited, case in point, human resources. So in that sense, the technological metaphysics
have become our metaphysics. We view other human beings as means to an ends, as things
to be optimized, utilized, to be used, to be technically exploited, certainly in capitalism.
And, you know, a good example is when the whole, as we are going through the current AI revolution,
when the whole, you know, with open AI, a judge if anything came off, the first question, a lot of
the first kind of spontaneous reaction most people have is, oh, what's it going to do to this job,
to marketing that job? What's it going to do to the economy? But rarely did we ask,
what is it going to do to the human subject as such? And I think the reason we asked that
previous question, not the latter one, the reason we asked, oh, what's it going to do to our economy?
What's it going to do to, I don't know, different kinds of jobs is because again, we human beings,
because we have this kind of technical metaphysics, we view human beings as agents of capital.
Simply, that's all we have. We just, you know, we trade and we pretty much move around capital.
So the most important thing isn't the human being, but what the human being is useful.
And that's my critique of tech bros, who kind of, they have this kind of like
massive optimism where technology will liberate us. It's typically on a tower of
Babel from the Bible, right? Typically, it'll liberate us. It'll be a saving grace.
And it's good just for its sake. And in many ways, the human being doesn't even matter what
matters is the technology as such. And that is something. So by the way, Heidegger was not
a Luddite. He was not saying technology is bad. I think the best way to read Heidegger is through
the Hegelian lens and be like, okay, we need to see technology for what it is with its
contradictions. And I'm not saying that's, oh, you see the good and bad and you kind of weigh
out the pros and cons and get the pros. It doesn't work like that. Heidegger's point is more,
more, I'd say more solemn even, that we, with the good, the bad comes,
the bad comes along. It's concomitant to the good. We can't have our cake and eat it too.
That's the point Heidegger makes, in my opinion. And I think that's the best way to read his essay
on technology. Yeah, saying all that, Yun, right? I said a lot there, but the flow's yours.
Yeah. Well, you know, I agree. And I have the same kind of orientation or like
views on technology. And so I think what I can do is kind of build on what you've said.
But first of all, yeah, like Heidegger's take on technology, I think is a really,
really important one, right? Like, I think he sees very deeply, you could call him a prophet
in his sense, because he wrote the book in like 1950. Was it 1950, 1900, something like that?
The essay? No, 1950. I don't know when the essay was published. In fact, you keep going. I'll find
out when it was published. Yeah, it was early enough. But he saw through these things that,
that like he basically saw through how much of an impact to use a simple word, you know, like
exactly, exactly 1950. He hit the nail on the head. Yeah, that's, that's great. But he, he saw all
of this before any of it happened, right? Like in 1950, the world doesn't look like how it did
today, but he saw all of this coming. But I think one of the main points again, I want to
reiterate is like, an interesting thing here, I think is, I think, Raul, you made a few
points around like tech bros and like techno optimism. I think in this context on what,
what everything Heidegger is writing about, you can kind of extrapolate that to kind of
the whole generation, at least the whole new generation, because they're all brought up within
this setting, right? Like technology is inherently a part of the new generation. So in a way like
tech bros have this kind of techno optimism view. But I think it's inherent in everyone who
grows up, everyone who grew up in this kind of way of being, right? Which is times our religion.
Yeah. So I think the important point to make is that it's one of those things now technology is
one of those things now where it's, it's so deeply, it's so deeply encapsulated our ways of thinking.
And I think here it's probably more accurate to say the Western way of thinking that you don't
even notice it. Like no, like people on the street wouldn't be conscious, nearly conscious of like
what sort of effect technology is happening to them. And I think that's kind of the real baseline
idea we kind of trying to, trying to like expound on as well, right? Because as you mentioned,
and like from Heidegger, it's technology is not morally neutral, right? And this is what most people
think. It's not just tech bros, it's kind of most Gen Zs, even most parents, I'd say, although they
have more like more of a conscious idea of like what life was like before technology. I think most
people will, I think it's most, it's rather acceptable for lots of people nowadays to say
technology is neutral and it's just a means to an end. But as you mentioned, like that's kind of
missing like a lot of the point, right? Technology has a fundamental essence to it. There's a
fundamental, fundamental metaphysics to technology. And when you pause it, when you think technology
is just a means to kind of missing the deeper picture. And like, as you mentioned, one of the
ways in which, in which it's affecting us, like the essence is in terms of how we view people,
right? Like we view people as resources, we view nature as resources. And in a sense, it's kind
of like the critique of technology is somewhat similar to a critique of capitalism, right?
As more people might be familiar with. And I think that's fine, because like, if you think about it,
I think like capitalism thrives on technology, right? Like, in a capitalist society, what are
you looking for? Like, efficiency of production, something like that, right? Like, if you want to
excel as a company, as a producer, as a whatever, like what you're trying to do, you're trying to
produce more, more efficiently. And basically, technology, technological innovation is kind
of what drives it. And so I think you can't really divorce technology, a critique of technology and
a critique of capitalism. So you can kind of treat everything we're discussing as kind of
interchangeable in this respect. But that's it, right? It's this very deep and trench thing that
we're trying to kind of expound on. And like, we're trying to discuss the revelation that it's had
that everyone like kind of sees past nowadays. And I suppose the biggest, the biggest
threat or the biggest, the biggest kind of effect I see these days is
from my point of view, and then we can kind of launch into kind of a couple of different
points, because there's a lot out here as well. The biggest point of view, I think, is that people
are, there is like the fundamental metaphysical idea behind technology is also a form of
self-worship. It's a form of, it's a form of like,
from a Nietzschean point of view, like the Nietzschean idea is like a revaluation of values,
right? And so what technology is, is basically an attempt to create like a new order. It's an attempt
to create a new order in which, you know, human nature or man is mechanized in different ways,
let's say, like you can impose a rational order on the way we do things and make it more efficient.
And I think you could then kind of interpret like the whole movement of technology
being techno-optimism, kind of somewhat similar to scientism, right? It's this idea that, you know,
we are our own gods and we can decide whatever the world should look like, we can do whatever we want.
And our goal here is to kind of overcome nature, but then in doing so, like there are a couple of,
there are lots of risks, right? Like we kind of overcome nature, then we overcome ourselves,
we overcome ourselves, right? Like, and that's the point you raise with human resources as well,
right? Because once you see nature as something to be overcome or something to be used as a
resource, what's stopping you from seeing a human, right? As something to be like something to use
as a resource and something to like kind of have power over, it's all, it kind of all exists within
the same framework. And so I think the two things that kind of comes to mind firstly is
where this is all taking us, because there is a kind of development, there's a development to
technology, right? Like it doesn't just end with us having, being in a utopia, it's never that simple,
right? And here if I want to bring it down to kind of the ground level of practical, on a more
practical level, right? I think there's a lot of simple kind of simple ways, like you don't even
have to talk about philosophy. There's lots of simple ways now where people are beginning to
detect like certain faults or effects in which technology is putting us all at risk, right?
And a simple example is like Jonathan Hyde, he's a sociologist. He talks a lot about the risk of
social media and what it's doing to humanity. It's not morally neutral in that sense. And if we're
going to go down the road, the route of social media, it's not a morally neutral route where it's
a pure means in which we are just doing whatever, like we're just using technology for our own sake,
right? Like it's doing something to us as well. And I like what CS Lewis said, I think it was in
the abolishment of man. Let me try and find a quote. He said this, each new power won by man
is a power over man as well. In every victory, besides being the general who triumphs, he is
also the prisoner who follows the triumphal cup. Beautiful quote. And so you're being, you're kind of
the more you kind of overpower nature, you overpower kind of everything, right? You're not,
you're also being taken along for the right. You're in a way a prisoner of what's being done.
Yeah, yeah. Actually, can we revisit that quote because that was a really good quote. I think,
you know, CS Lewis and I, for me, he's a bit too conservative, but I think he's a brilliant thinker.
Isn't it really interesting that you brought up Jonathan Hyde and social media and then you
quoted CS Lewis because social media perhaps is the quintessential example to exemplify that quote.
It shows the inherent contradiction in social media because think about social media.
Its promise was we're going to be global citizens. We're all going to be connected. We're all going
to be knowing what's going on. And it's just this beautiful utopian liberal dream, isn't it?
But then CS Lewis would be laughing at that and saying, oh, look, now we've become slaves and then
slave to social media. And this thing that was supposed to liberate us ended up enslaving us.
And I think that's where he points out that, I don't know, I know he's coming from a very kind
of Christian perspective and that's completely fine. So am I in many ways, but I think what's
more perspicacious is that him pointing out the contradiction in what social media is.
It's what it promised and what it became. No, 100%. And yeah, that's where that's what I was going to.
So like to finish my point, it's where we're at now. Technology has done something to us. It's not
morally neutral by any means. And one of the ways that this is reviewed is there are lots of
simple practical ways in which people are becoming more conscious. But also, I think it's quite clear
that going more and more further and more deeply down this path, it's not a utopia we're kind of
ending up with. It's something weird. And there are lots of words that people use that are quite
interesting. I like the word, I think Paul King's north as well. He used this word, like we're all
kind of entering into a hyper reality. Yeah. Oh, John Baudrillard hyper reality. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Like I really like that word, right? We're not, it's not like when you talk about utopia, that's
kind of the thing that techno optimists look at, right? They romanticize the idea of technology,
really they romanticize the idea of innovation and like overcoming nature and overcoming like
human nature even, right? Like when I see human nature, I mean, like the limitations, supposedly.
But what that doesn't include is this whole, you know,
what's the way to put it? Yeah. Yeah. I'm getting inklings of what I was going to mention. Oh,
it's so weird to like juggle many thoughts. If I'll just finish it, wherever I'm going to take
it now, right? But it's like, basically, the fault of techno optimism is this whole idea of you,
you romanticizing the whole idea of changing the way people do things without seeing,
and this was in the CS Lewis quote, right, that you become a prisoner of what is, what becomes
as well. It's like, it kind of goes both ways. And I also had a couple more. So I think, so
social media is a pretty common way in which the common person can easily detect like thoughts,
right? Where in where this is all taking us, it's not a perfect thing by any means. And it might be
even like immoral in many senses, right? And that's the, that's, I think, like a lot of
heights research around social media is like social media is affecting us badly in many ways,
which we never expected. Yeah, it's already a pretty simple. That's a good example, I think.
And also this morning, I read a newsletter by a tech person, so a technologist,
and I saw a few interesting like things on here, which is also like what people can easily perceive
like to be dangerous or risks, right? And firstly, this relates to what Heidegger mentioned,
but what she wrote here, and there's much more simple language as opposed to what Heidegger
would have written, but part of the problem with the lean startup mindset, lean startup
meaning basically kind of the methodology around startups and tech, right? Is that it sees live
and work as an optimization problem. The point is to help people live a good life, not just an
efficient life. The goal is human flourishing, not convenience. The goal is a good future, not a
technically advanced future. And so it's pretty like technologists and kind of everyday people
are perceiving this. And this was written by, sorry, I think I'm not sure you pronounce her name,
but she's a technologist. And I'll put up her. Is it a substack or what is it? Yeah, yeah,
substack. Put up the substack. Yeah. And the second thing she wrote, also kind of in more
simple words, it's like, I've lost a lot of faith in tech solutionism, the idea that most
problems can be solved by technology. Why? Because most problems are people problems,
not technology problems. I don't believe. Very important point. We need to touch on that. That's
a very important point. Yeah, I don't believe we are about to surrender to a robotic new dawn,
where an AI will replace McKinsey or your therapist. Why? Because a company doesn't hire
McKinsey because they're better than the AI. They hire McKinsey because if something goes wrong,
nobody will blame you for hiring McKinsey. Humans are complicated. And so on this level,
you can kind of see as well, like lots of kind of tech solutionism, that's an interesting word,
is this is the point that kind of that most problems are people problems. And even on this
level, right, kind of the applied technological level, there are already gaps. You could say
problems, right? For me, the word I've been using recently, thanks to Tom McGavin,
is contradictions. Human existence is, ontologically, there's like this,
we have built in contradictions that we can't get away with or jettison out of our existence.
Okay, I took down a lot of notes here, we know what you were saying. I want to get back
to the self-worship point, because that is something that I hadn't thought about much.
And because pretty much everything you said, I've kind of thought about written on and obviously
I resonate with. But the self-worship bit isn't something I have, I have, I have thought about.
And the reason I want to talk about that is I realized in my initial long monologue, I kind of
missed a certain point I was going to make, which was that technology is not neutral as we
discussed, but also another misconception tech bros have is they think that all technology will do
is that it'll just amplify who we already are. And that comes with a lot of assumptions and
ideological presuppositions that we already know who we are, that yes, human beings are static and
that we have a specific nature of some kind. And secondly, that technology will just make
kind of better versions of what human beings are. Whereas I would say if a lot of, well,
I would certainly religion, but also philosophy, 20th century philosophy history, and now more
recent sociological and psychological research is showing us that no human beings are malleable,
not in a bad sense, nor in a good sense. We are malleable as such. And therefore, it's a mistake
to assume that the human subject, even at an individual level, can, can just, we can amplify
who we are. That, that, that doesn't happen. Our social environment deeply affects us. But,
but saying all that though, is it because I don't get it, because for me, my whole,
my whole view with technology is we're moving towards a, thanks to capitalism. And I mean
that obviously, sadonically, a post humanist society where human beings simply become agents
of capital, they become technical agents in society. But when you talk about self worship,
that kind of gives it a bit of a different thrust. So perhaps you could expand on that a bit.
Yeah, yeah. But yes, also, so what you're mentioning around
the technology having kind of its own essence, right, that whole thing. I
think, and so most people now they see it as neutral, but that misses the point. It's like,
when, because I think when you say all technology is self augmenting, you kind of assume that it's
neutral, right, like it just augments. But no, it has its own essence, it has its own metaphysics,
as we were discussing, right? Yes, its own reality in some sense, which
yeah, it's a hyper reality as well, as you mentioned. And I think the last thing I read
is from Jack, Jack's, I'm not sure you pronounce his name, but he he's also written quite a bit
of on technology. And he recognized it as a self augmenting force, but one that kind of
engineers the world on its own terms. And so I guess that's the way that's how that's how
Heidegger ends his essay in fact. Heidegger makes the point towards the end of his essay,
that technology has a being of its own, that that does change and augment the world. Yes.
Yeah, because it is self augmenting in its application, right? And so in that sense,
it's like it's neutral because it just augments the human subject. But no, it kind of does it
on its own terms because then you create something, you create a being, almost a mode of being,
right? And that has its own essence, its own metaphysics, that's what we've been repeating.
And I want to give an example on that. I think kissing point would be the stock market.
Majority of the stock market, it's not human beings, the actors in the stock market aren't
human beings anymore. It's virtually robots. It's program machine softwares that are doing
stock trading and whatnot. And yes, you could argue that the capitalist by by workers and by
human beings. But regardless, the stock market now is a system with with its own metaphysics,
with its own reality. And human beings are becoming unnecessary for it. We're becoming
so before before we get into the self worship bit, I think it's important to kind of get into
what we mean really when we think about the essence of metaphysics
of technology, right? Because I think we've said this many times, but it's not I think it's not
we can make it clearer like what that actually means. And so kind of self worship, if I was to
talk about the art, I would kind of think about it more to like towards the end, like self worship
is kind of where we're leading ourselves ourselves to. But even right now, what we're participating
is in like this whole met like this whole hyper reality that we live in is it's got a it's got
its own metaphysics, it's got its own essence. And what that means, right? I think the example
we mentioned earlier was that we start to see people as resources. That's kind of one way to
look at it. Well, okay, to really, really break this down, because I know that you and I tend to
get very abstract without thinking is metaphysics in a very pragmatic way of putting it is it's
simply telling us an art. That means what are we supposed to do? Now, of course, if you go to
Aristotelian metaphysics, you could you could look for the metaphysics or the essence of a tree.
What's a tree? Is there a platonic tree somewhere? Well, let's let's forget about all of that for a
moment. Let's just simply think at a at a social level, metaphysics is an art. So what are we
supposed to do with a without given reality? And connecting that in my view, connecting that to
human resources would be okay, the metaphysical sort of injunction or what they're told to do
is to take these human agents and use them to, I don't know, maximize profit or maximize
productivity, optimize or be more efficient. So that is kind of the metaphysical injunction or
ideological injunction that is metaphysical after all. And that's the kind of the way I view
the the metaphysics of technology, although, although, and I want to kind of put this caveat
here. So because we started off with Heidegger, look, this port isn't on Heidegger, but we started
off with Heidegger. So it doesn't have to be about Heidegger, but for Heidegger, it's not just
that it's also he's looking for an essence of technology and what that entails. But sorry,
did my kind of point about the, you know, that's good. That's good. So it's kind of
and I think there's one more layer to it as well. Like, I think, you know, we see each other's,
we see each other as as capital resources, essentially, and that's a danger to her, obviously,
right? But I think there's one, like, another layer of art as well is I think
we kind of blend on this idea, like this intrinsic idea that we don't talk about that.
If we, if we liberate ourselves from everything, we would be happier. It's that kind of,
like it's just the classic capitalist kind of ideology, right? And that's something very
inherent in technology, right? It's like the thing that causes us unhappiness is like systems
or structures that we have to be liberated from. And that's, that's sometimes true. But I think now
we're getting to the point where we, we're trying to liberate ourselves from reality itself.
Right. And so, but then the thing is that in a far more fundamental way, it's just making
far more people more unhappy, which is, which is, which is a contradiction, almost ironic
contradiction you pointed out before. And you know, you would, you, you in fact hit the nail on
the head because this guy Ray Kurzweil, who is kind of like a futurist, he, I remember reading,
I haven't read any of his books, but he is kind of known as well. He, he perhaps is like before
Balaji and Elon Musk and all these types. He was kind of the OG tech bro. And he was writing about
these things, you know, in like the nineties. And he has this really interesting essay, which I read,
I forget where, but he talks about how you could just live in a simulation and you won't be limited
by your physical reality. So you could live kind of the mind in a back machine. So if you, one day,
if you feel like a woman, you are a woman. And not to go to the whole gender, you know,
debate about that, like forget about it. But no, I think it's true.
Like if you feel like, look, let's say a biological female, right? You just all you got to do is
kind of cognize that in your, in your, in your brain. And then you become that thing. So
we kind of completely let go of our physical embodied reality, which for Heidegger, Maurice
Molleponti or modern Cogsci, a cognitive science would be an, and complete abomination,
given that we are deeply embodied creatures to be human.
Yeah. Well, at the end of the day, we try and liberate ourselves from reality. So precisely,
that's what we're doing. Yes. Because also that Heidegger is kind of metaphysics, right? It's
not just about you, but it's about, it's not just about subject and object. That's kind of
his metaphysics. He breaks it. Yeah. No differentiation there. It's kind of the
subject participating, subject and object are one. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, he has got many,
like he calls it that's man, he calls it life. Well, the idea being that you can't just, yeah,
you can't isolate the subject from their life world as such. Yeah. Yeah. So to put it simply,
it's like kind of man has a certain relation to nature, right? Man has a certain relation to
others, like the other, right? And there's a certain kind of,
without going into what that should look like, I think what technology does is it comes in
and imposes a certain view on that, right? Like, because traditionally, like pre-modernity,
like man so nature as something to be worked with. Correct. Like man so fellow man as like
something to be treasured as friends. In fact, the kind of what technology does,
what the whole technological worldview does, this is, again, talking of discussing its essence,
is firstly, kind of nature is seen as something to be used as a resource, right? Slash is to be
overpowered, right? And overpowered means used, right? It's kind of the same thing. And the danger
is that the same thing is applied to man, right? Like man becomes human resources, as you say,
it's something to be used. And so in that sense, you can kind of see how technology is not neutral,
it imposes a worldview, that's the essence. I mean, also, on your point on pre-modernity,
the Hegelian point there would be in pre-modern society, and obviously I'm not a historian,
but from what I've read, it's not even that we, that individuals, so other individuals as,
as, oh, that's someone that I'm related to. No, no, no, they saw their subjectivity in them. As in,
I am you as much as you are me. Yeah. Oh, no, no. Oh, yeah. No, but I'll give you the
technological spin, right? It's not like, because nowadays, what's the phenomenon we call the social
phenomenon? Everything is kind of networking, right? Yes. Oh my god, dude, you read my mind again.
But like, when you speak to other people, you are like, what's the career gain here?
Correct. I hate the term networking. It's a total term. It's just even something as
intimate as friendship becomes something where I need to get something from that person
for me to rise in the social hierarchy or whatnot. Exactly. So that's the imposition of
technology, right? Sorry, sorry, sorry. I interrupt you. Can you say that, make that point again,
a bit more, like fresher out a bit more, because I feel like you were getting out,
making a really good point and I got excited. So again, clearly, so people get what you're
saying is really, really, it happens between us. But yeah, so technology has an essence, right?
And two clear examples where I can see it playing out. And I think which Heidegger touched on in
book as well is like nature and fellow men, right? So you, we used to see nature as something to
work with. We used to see men and women as friends, right? Friendships would be cultivated.
We kind of saw everything on equal ground. But then when the capitalistic slash technological
ideals, ideas started playing in the picture, then we, that started twisting our worldview, right?
It started twisting our relation to the things around us. And as Heidegger's metaphysics goes,
and which I actually, I personally agree with, like man is not just an individual, right? That
uses things. No, like it's not just a subject and a relation to the object, like being separate in
any way, right? In the subject very much participates in the object in a very,
like you can't, you can't separate them in a very inseparable way. And so when technology comes in
and twists certain views, you know, it's, it affects the human, it affects the mind to an
understated degree. And that's why I think these days, right? It's something that's so heavily
encapsulates everyone's thinking that they kind of not, you're not even conscious of it.
I mean, it changes you. It makes you something human.
Yeah. Yes. Like nowadays, like meeting someone purely for career gains normal,
whereas it wasn't 50 years ago. And that's what technology does to us. And like using nature
is normal to us, right? Yeah. I mean, we can't use it. We can't exploit. We can't exploit. We
commoditize nature. But if you tell that to like an indigenous, you know, someone in, in this,
I don't know, 1400s, 1300s, that would sound absolutely. Even our own Aboriginal people in
Australia, like, I mean, I'm sure, obviously, don't get me wrong. I'm not making, I hate to
make the racist argument or their primitive native one with nature. None of that nonsense.
But if you, if you speak to, let's say, it doesn't have to be, leave aside the Aboriginal people,
because I hate that argument, you know, noble savage, it's very racist. But if you study, if you
do like, listen, anthropological study, anthropological study and explore these communities,
certainly they don't have this concept of exploiting nature or using seeing nature as a resource.
For them, nature was very much alive. And it was, it was a part of them as much as they were part of
it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, precisely. And that's, and that's one of the things, right? Because now the
danger, I think, is the kind of metaphysical problem. Like it's a, it's a kind of a spiritual crisis,
right? As you will call it. That is, we're losing our relation to everything around us, right?
We start to see nature as something to be used. We start to see humans as something to be used.
And there's something that you lose there. There's something that you lose there. And I think
that's where kind of my whole idea around self worship comes in, because that's a position of
pride, right? That's to say that, you know, kind of my imperative here is to have power over
everything. It's to kind of reinvent, like impose a new order and everything.
It becomes a Hobbesian nightmare, you know, it's just.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And I think like, and that's probably the Christian worldview in me
speaking as opposed to the Nietzschean, because the Nietzschean ideals will be like, no, let's reinvent
the way things are done. But I don't think that's possible in many ways. And that's why I kind of
refer to C.S. Lewis, because like in the abolishment of man, abolishment of, abolishment of man.
My favorite Lewis book by myself, right? He basically writes precisely about this subject,
right? Which is like the Nietzschean ideal kind of falls on its own head, because you can't
revalue values using the values, using the values themselves, right? And so there's,
there's a lot to be. I have a slight disagreement there, but we don't have to get to that. I have
a slight philosophical debate there. We can do it another time. But the whole danger there is one
of pride, right? And I think putting aside the Nietzschean idea, which I think there's some problems
there. I think if you look at it from a Christian point of view, it's like pride goes before a fall
to put it more simply. And also to cover a bit of what Lewis prophesied in the abortion of
ban book is if we keep on trying to go down this path of like gaining power over everything,
we gain power over nature, we can use, we can extract everything as resources, we start doing
the same to other people. And eventually we start doing the thing to human nature itself, right?
And there's the whole kind of thing around the whole he prophesies this endpoint to be kind of
the eugenic event, right? The event at which basically man takes on the position of God as a
creator. Yeah, yeah. And you know, connecting that to a bit of what Heidegger is talking about here,
that's sort of what he means by enframing. And the grand irony of all of that was Heidegger was a
big old Nazi. And the Jews were exactly, they were enframed, they were just used things to be
powered to exploit and used upon. And certainly, you know, even the Nazi ideal has an element of
self-worship. But for them, it's more that they worship a system, they worship the organic unity
or the whole of being, which for me is a fascistic idea. So as you were, as you were
expounding on the self-worship, but I was trying to figure out, how can I juxtapose this with kind
of my thesis, which is the post-humanist idea that we are becoming, we're becoming something that is
not human. The future of humanity is going to be without human beings, so to speak.
I'm going to try to make a point here, but you were going to say something. You go first?
Yeah, yeah. I think that's the hyper-reality element to it. Yeah, yeah. So I don't think
Louis saw it from that lens, right? So says Louis specifically saw it from the lens of eugenics. And
I think there's something to that point as well, which is the final stage of man's conquest over
nature is basically when, you know, in the course of reality, when someone, like when one age,
one age really attains, you know, by eugenics, the power to make its descendants as whatever it
pleases. Yeah. I mean, for me now, I would still say that's post-humanist, because the post-humanist
idea is that there's no, there's no human being per se. We're just, again, we're biological entities
and we can be optimized, we're used. And so, and so what Louis points out is that in a way,
all men who live after this age are patients of that power. So then they are weaker, not stronger.
Yeah. So like, no matter what kind of power. That's a supreme irony. Yeah.
The things we put in their hands, it's this people in this age which has preordained how
they are to use them. So in a very interesting way, Louis prophesied this endpoint, this event
at which we are bringing ourselves to this route, which is we, our conquest becomes over human nature
itself. And I think a very vivid image of this is in Huxley's Brave New World, right? This human
nature is the last part of nature to surrender to men, right? And in Brave New World, in Huxley's
Brave New World, there's eugenics, there's like prenatal conditioning, I believe, right? Yeah.
And of course, happiness drop, yeah. Perfected the human species, right?
And there's like a perfect, I don't know, applied psychology, whatever, and man has
perfect control over it. Behaviorism, BF skin and behaviorism, man, it's a monastic, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. And basically, Louis points out that that's the point at which
man reaches the pinnacle of the power and everyone else is kind of,
you know, a prisoner of that. Yeah. So that's something I find interesting. But the artificial
piece, artificial intelligence is something else. It might be something else or it might not be.
I'm also wondering how we can kind of dive into this. Well, in fact, when I was going to bring
this up to you at the end of the part, but I think we, this whole conversation, we can end on a
positive note. And I'll tell you why. And as you know, I'm very cynical. I don't really end things
on positive notes generally. But this, this topic of technology, there is in the typical
Hegelian move in the failure, there can, there can be something good that comes out of it, I believe.
So firstly, the reason, you know, I was a bit initially a bit confused about the
self-worship point was the way I, the way I view the kind of post-humanist idea is that
human subjects, they, they, they stop viewing themselves as human beings. Whatever this deep
down identity we have as human beings, it's just, it's jenisin. But then I realized, in fact,
no, the self-worship point is perhaps more perspicacious because in post-modern society,
we live in this kind of ruthless pragmatism. So being a self-worshipping, egoistic,
narcissist is one of the best ways to get around post-modern capitalist society if you are a bit
Machiavellian, because then, you know, as we were discussing, if we view other human beings as not
really human, but rather some other biological agents to be used and exploited, then pretty much
the best way is to play the game, play the game and get to the top, whatever the top and, and the,
and the funny thing is in post-modernism, the top doesn't even matter, it's just climb the hierarchy
for the sake of climbing the hierarchy. There, there's no, there's no, there aren't the, let's say
the, the, the, the typical values of, of beauty, love, truth or God, none of that. It's just climb
the hierarchy. We discussed this in the previous pods, isn't it? So, and then in that self-worship
kind of works because it's not self-worship in the sense that you think, I don't know, at least
this is my interpretation of it, but there's something special about me that I'm unique,
I'm divine and none of that, it's just, I am, I am who I am. It doesn't even matter, but what matters
is the, is the game, is the, is the task, it's the, it's the, it's partaking in, in, in the, in the
social game, so to speak. Um, yeah, yeah. Well, I think there are two ways to look at it, right? And
earlier, as I mentioned, like there's kind of a Nietzsche approach, which is to lean into it,
because if you are going to think about, like, because Nietzsche's idea is like,
the Ubermanches, like the Superman, that's the ideal you want to, you want to be, right? You
want to be the person to kind of revalue valuations, right? Yeah. Rebuild and kind of, I mean, you want
to even, you want to rebuild the, the meta values itself, not just values, but reevaluate what values
are itself. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so kind of, as we discussed, technology is a major imposition
on like the way things are done and how like worldviews, like, like to do the modern worldviews,
right? If you were to work and build within that space, you kind of have the opportunity to do
something like that, right? Well, I mean, actually, I was like, sorry, like, I guess the
easiest way to say how much of an impact technology is, is if we were to boil down the ages
into one word, like you wouldn't call this current age we're in and, you know, a post-modern age,
like that does some, that's mean something. If you call it an atheistic age, like, yeah,
that's something, I think people usually call you a technological age. Correct. Because I mean,
post-modern age, you could even call it the last century, but our specific age is perhaps
the technological age. So I think you can conclude from that. Say to say, technology has been like
the genre, like the era defining thing, right? And so if you were to pursue the Nietzsche ideal,
you have the opportunity to redefine the way everything starts, right, in that lens. I think,
although on the Christian kind of religious path, I think there's a, there's quite something to the
whole idea of, I think I saw this coin somewhere, but it's like technological acesis, I think, like,
like acicism, like being a technological aesthetic, right? Basically, distancing yourself from
technology and its metaphysics. And the whole imperative there is like, be aware that, you know,
technology in everything, there is a trade-off, right? Like, no technology is perfect,
everything comes at a price, and prices that we're not aware of. And more importantly,
that you can't have your cake and eat it too. Exactly. Because the trade-off argument for
me, that's too pragmatic. Because that kind of makes the assumption that, oh, you can have the
good without the bad. I don't think that's how the reality works. I agree. But I think, firstly,
you'll become aware of it, right? You'll be aware of it. Certainly. The whole imperative there from
the Christian point of view is to kind of keep the means, the means, and keep the ends, the ends,
right? Yes. I actually made a note earlier, but I think Ivan Illich, I think that's his name,
he's also written quite a bit on technology. You may have to send me all these things because
I need to put them in the show. But he argues for what he calls a convivial use of technology.
Sorry, what was that word? Convivial. Right. I don't actually don't know what it means.
That's what he called it. But what that entails basically is firstly, technology
exists to fulfill man's existing needs and desires, instead of generating new needs and desires.
And so, technology, capitalism, you can kind of, that's when you place the means as means and
ends as ends, I think. The other point is quite simple. Increases man's freedom,
independence, enhances welfare, physical man. Okay, okay. Now here's where my cynical side is
coming out. As a Zhezhekian lecanian, I don't know if that's possible. This is the way I become
very cynical. I don't know if it's possible for us to purely use technology as something that,
as a tool, which is how most of us think it was used. As a pure tool that fulfills our desires.
Because firstly, I don't think human desire can ever be fulfilled. We are desiring beings. And
for me here, lecan is, he is a prophet, he gets it, he gets it precisely. Which again,
is the problem. Which the problem is that our desires are unfulfillable. Therefore, the technological
metaphysics or whatever you may call it, can exploit those desires. And for me though, for me
though, I don't know, as far as I can say, my only way to approach this is to take on that
contradiction. It's not to, it's not to try and take the good without the bad. Because that,
as C.S. Loews points out, would make things worse, is to take on the contradiction. And of
course, that doesn't mean succumbing and giving into the bad. I'm not saying, oh, go and become a
porn addict in, I don't know, Mark Zuckerberg's meta word and just like that. I don't mean that.
I mean, as you said, first be aware of it. And then the only solution I see is through critique,
through perpetual critique, through working through the contradictions and doing all these
things which some people who are a bit more intellectual might find silly. Things like,
you know, social media detoxes, digital minimalism. Those are good things. We should not sneer at them
and kind of look down upon them. Because that's the, again, that's our life world. We can't,
don't play the Buddhist game or the quasi-Buddhist game where you, oh, everything's a cosmic
phenomenon. Detach us. No, no, no. For me, it's partaking the contradictions and work through them.
Which is hard, which is difficult work.
Right. You know, that's a good point. But also, yeah, I guess from a psycho and analytical
point of view, it's like desire is everything. Yeah. Desire is fundamental because we are
lacking beings. That's an interesting one. But I think very much there are kind of different
levels to it. And where my mind goes with that is like to go back to kind of the whole essence
of technology, right? I think one of the major, like one, I'd say even it's, it's driving force
is that within technology itself, it's essence. It's not just that you're engineering tools,
but you're engineering desires. Certainly. Because it reveals. It reveals. Yeah, you're kind of,
and it's, that's a very deliberate thing, right? And that's the whole, that's the whole concept of,
that's not concept. The whole driving force of capitalism and social engineering or propaganda,
right? I mean, I mean, social engineering, ideology, it's also kind of how like people
like Balaji, they talk about the network state where in the network state, we can create it,
where it's not top down planning, but it's bottom up planning. But nonetheless, there still is an
ideology that tells people what to do, which, which communities. But it's like, that's, like,
that's, that's technology. Oh, yeah, certainly. Yeah, he, I mean, he is like technology. It's
like that to me, that is technology. And you know something interesting as, as, I mean, I'm kind
of braver, you know, your, your, your line of thought that I'm sorry for like interrupting
or breaking a lot of thought. So Techne, here's where I really like Heidegger because he placed
his, he's brilliant. Like he's his knowledge on language is unbelievable. Techne in ancient Greek
was also used for art. So art was referred to as Techne and art is perhaps one of the,
you know, perhaps the typical example of something that reveals, right? Art reveals to it. It reveals
new realities, reveals truths. So what's really interesting is that word Techne that was used
for art historically, especially in ancient Greece, is now used for, for technical tools,
for technology. And I don't, I don't know what to make of it, but Heidegger thinks, oh, what,
he's like, okay, why is that? Just got a question why that is. That's really,
Yeah, no, that's just a really good point. But then, yeah, though it becomes clear, right? It's
like, kind of propaganda is, is not part of it. It's like propaganda is almost like,
breathing air. It's like the breathing air for technology itself, right? Yeah, it's not like
a byproduct. No, no, no, it is it. It is the ideology is it? Yeah. Yeah. There's, there's
obviously this very interesting layer as well, where to the whole worldview or essence of technology,
where it's like, engineer, the engineering of desires. And obviously that's kind of
its own, like we can run a whole separate discussion on. Well, yeah, I mean, one thing I
want to do, in fact, one thing I want to do is, because I know we're going to do some book
discussions in the future is to discuss, because I think, you know, this book here by Todd MacGowden,
capitalism and desire, you know, I've spoken about this a couple of times.
I mean, this, this book could easily be technology and desire and the message of the book would
still stand. If we could just, because they did the two things go hand in hand that tightly
related. Yeah, well, is there any insights from that book that relate to what? Well, I mean,
it's the idea of, the idea of desire is metanomic that it desire, desires for the sake of desiring.
And, and then the idea of object, we don't desire something that exists, it's a virtual
category. And then he connects that to our capitalism functions. But like, I haven't,
I need to like prepare properly if I'm gonna do like, I might do a pod that kind of it's on the book.
Yeah, well, because I guess like the, you know, the accompanying idea there is like,
it's ruling by desires, right? Like it's, it's to bring back the brave new world, right? Like,
because what that contrast is, in a few centuries ago, Orwell wrote 1984. And that was basically
the ruling of a nation, whatever you call it, the ruling of people via control and power, right?
Totalitarian top down, basically. But then Huxley, I think Huxley wrote Brave New World before,
Orwell actually wrote 1984. Oh, is that right? I think Huxley, I think Huxley was right.
Huxley was actually Orwell's lecturer, I think I got the order right. And the very
interesting thing is they had some correspondence between each other, where basically Huxley
disagreed with Orwell. So it was like great writing and whatnot. But he thinks that, you know,
at some point, the totalitarians of the 1984 idea will realize that it's a lot more efficient to
control people by means of desire alone, right? I mean, we live more in and Huxley in reality than
Orwellian. Yeah, yeah. Well, it's like, it's power by giving us what we want, basically.
Or by creating false needs. But giving us what we want, just enough. And that's the point
Tottenham government makes. Capitalism works in the contradiction of it works by not working.
It gives us just enough. Yeah, even like, I think probably like Stalin and Mao even would be impressed.
Yeah. So much control can be. Yeah, yeah. I mean, what's interesting is, you know,
Rijek talks about having a Soviet Union. They always
allowed people a certain level of freedom. They always gave people so you could make jokes
against the state against the party. There was a certain level of, you know, kind of
unsaid humor and that that allowed people to that that this that's exactly how control works.
It's not this kind of the way Orwell imagine. I think personally, Orwell is a bit overrated.
This kind of where it's just tight. You can't say anything. You can't can't utter a word. It's
complete censorship. No, no. It's like, it's kind of like teasing us with a bit of freedom.
We're kept in control, which is why I think we live more in a Huxley in reality than
or within reality. Hey, look, I don't know. Pretty much what I've kind of wanted to discuss,
I think I've made the points, although I did say that I have, I'm a bit optimistic about all of
this, right, regardless of my cynicism. So shall we shall we get there? Or are there any more points
you want to make? Yeah, yeah. Well, yeah, we can talk about optimism, because I think
even though that's the kind of ruling the ideology, happiness ideology, technology is going to save
the world, you know, but what Dostoevsky wrote, beauty will save the world. I think the modern
consensus is something more like technology, which obviously for me, I side with beauty over
technology. But okay, my okay, I don't even know if this is optimistic. All I'm saying is this,
the way I view in the failure, there'll be something good that comes out of it is, in fact,
this is interestingly, the part I did with Dr. Grace Tapie, the Lacanian psychoanalyst,
she kind of put this thought in my head. But before that, I've also been thinking about this a bit.
I think given the fact that technology is doing what it's doing to us, it's kind of
taking us towards this hyper-reality or post-humans' reality, people are starting to have these kinds
of conversations. And I know this is like a very cliche thing to say, but people are starting to
question what is the human subject. People are delving more into metaphysics and philosophy.
And if you think about it, Stephen Hawking, he said that philosophy is dead. For me, now philosophy
is revuifying, because first of all, we are seeing the drawbacks in science
with quantum theory or the interpretation. Artificial intelligence, people are questioning.
And AI is, for me, the ultimate, the epitome of where it concludes, where with AI now is where
philosophy, religion, or certainly religion, philosophy, religion, and religion not at this
kind of fundamentalist naive, but the platonic, neoplatonic, that sense of religion,
or mysticism, whatnot. Because we're starting to ask questions about what is the human subject,
what's our relationship to reality, what is reality as such. And therefore, that's why,
you know, I believe with the failures of our society, it creates way for potential successes,
but not, again, not successes or not good in the techno-optimist sense, where it's going to
move towards some kind of synthesis and everything's going to work out. No, no.
The best way to approach this is to take the contradictions on and critique them and work
through them individually, do the hard work. It's certainly true, because we're critiquing
technology while using technology. Yeah, I mean, look at, this is the ultimate irony, right? This
is the ultimate irony, isn't it? Yeah. And, you know, we'll go one step further. You and I both
are tech bros. We work in tech. You work for a Web3 accelerator, which is the full
front of technology. I'm a software engineer. So this is the example of that.
Yeah, no, but we're actually full on tech bros. Yeah, I mean, the problem with tech bros is,
I would say tech bro-ism. It's, again, it's the ideology. And it's, again, it's not that you
can step outside of ideology, but the problem is this kind of, yeah. Yeah, look, I'm going to say
despite this is going to sound very arrogant, but naive and rather an infantile way of viewing
technology without any depth. And again, the point I made before, Heidegger wasn't a Luddite.
He was full of science and technology. He makes the point, in fact, to his end of the essay that,
but we need to start asking these questions about what is technology and what's, what's
its relationship to us as human subjects. And then again, what are human subjects? And I think AI
is allowing us to really have those conversations, which is why AI is an interdisciplinary field,
you know? So for me, that's kind of where the bit of the optimism comes in, although I'm very
careful when it comes to optimism, because again, it's the prevalent ideology of our day. So I'd
rather be cynical and pessimistic. I think you're right. And that's, yeah, that's a very important
thing to make clear, right? It's like Heidegger wasn't against technology, right? It's like,
Heidegger, I think you could say Heidegger was against the mode of being that kind of
encompassed technology, like kind of, let's be aware of that. But it's, what Heidegger is not
saying is like, do away with technology, become an aesthetic, right? And just, yeah, although he
kind of was like an aesthetic, he lived in a heart most of his life. Oh, right. I didn't know that.
Yeah, look, he's a Nazi weird guy. Honestly, Heidegger personally wouldn't want to be him,
but take his take his philosophy, you know, yeah, but yeah, obviously, I think there is
reason to be optimistic, right? Like as you say, and even from our like, what we're doing now,
this is enabled by technology, right? Like the fact that I can have this conversation,
like remotely, and that we can put it up and we can, like it's scalable, right? Like people can
watch it from wherever they want. And whenever, right, that's something, right? That's not
something that we could do. We talk a lot, we might, we might romanticize pre-modernity and like
this and that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I romanticize certain parts of it, but if you ask from me,
what's the best time to be alive? It's now. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I agree, I agree. And so like right
now we're a lot more technologically able, like enable than we were before. We have like
extract, we have machines everywhere we look, right? We can do a lot more than we once did.
And that gives a lot of like power in terms of ideas such as this, right? Like it means that we
can discuss ideas such as this and like have much more reach and other people can discuss ideas like
this and have much more reach. And so like that's the reason to be optimistic within the information
age, I suppose. Okay, you and I think you misunderstood me there. My point wasn't even the
functionalist pragmatic point. That is true, that I agree with you certainly. But mine was more,
I was still working on the level of the metaphysics of technology. So given we're doing this
metaphysical analysis and we've, technologies reveal these things to us about being as such,
what I'm saying is, because technology does that, that allows us to, okay, I'll put it this way.
Let's say all of these tools, modern technology, whatever, the zoom, all these things weren't
there, they didn't exist. But technology, the metaphysics of technology was still there.
That's a bad view of putting it. What I'm trying to say is it's not the, I'm not trying to make
and it's not the instances or it's not this mic or zoom or the internet or what not. What I'm
saying is what, what technology reveals metaphysically, that itself allows us to have a conversation
about what the human subject is. If you could say it's kind of like, like Christianity technology
allows itself to be questioned and doubted. Yes, yes. In fact, yes, the Nietzschean point about
Christianity. Yeah. Yeah. So that's kind of the point I'm trying to make. I mean, of course,
these things are great, but by what technology reveals, we start having these questions on being
as such ontologically, ontological questions. But not man. Yeah. And that's, I think I kind of
exhausted everything I had to say. Anything else you want to add? I think I got the main points too.
But like, I always find it interesting, like even a line of thought that my mind's heading to right
now is, you know, even though we're so much more technologically enable now, we can do a lot more.
We've got power. It's all, you know, an interesting questionable sort of power, right? Perhaps it's
a good way to kind of conclude. And I think there's a certain element. There's a certain element to
human existence that's, I haven't quite figured this out, but it's the element of purity, right?
Like with, with the purity of being human, the purity of engaging with nature, there's a purity
of engaging with fellow humans, and somehow technology defiles that. And if we already discussed,
we've already discussed how that looks like, right? But I do wonder if there's a kind of, you know,
ideal state between, an ideal relation between man, nature, and, you know, other people in which
technology can be a part of the picture. That's probably a crucial, one of the crucial questions
that we have to ask, right, these days. But not one, it's not one that I have, you know, a proper
answer to. It's like, there are many different ways to approach it. And it's kind of like, I don't
know, do you want to lean into it? You know, do you want to become a techno futurist and like
reinvent how everyone does things? There's something there. Do you want to become, you know,
a primitive, you know, like, like, go and retreat into nature and like, you know, like,
like, yeah, like, yeah, like, there's also something there. So, yeah, they are not
co-primitivists. I'm not a fan of that. Yeah. Well, I mean, I guess we both want to conclude
where do what Heidegger did and ask the question concerning technology.
Yeah. And let the answer be, you know, let your answer be a truth for you, as Kierkegaard would
say. Yes. And make it a truth that shakes you, because the Kierkegaardian truths are always
the kind of truths that uproot you. And that's important.
