You said that it was, well, initially human nature or
understanding human nature, but also reading Chomsky, which is
clear from reading your work, your, I don't want to call you a
Chomsky, and that's like a crass fear of putting it, but it
seems like you're settling more on, let's say, Chomsky side over
someone like BF Skinner. And so if I would, if you don't mind, I
would love for you to sort of elucidate this ongoing, I don't
want to call it a war, but debate between the Skinner side
and Chomsky side. And in fact, in one podcast, you even said
that this debate is still ongoing. It's not like it's
Yeah, yeah, very much so. Nothing, nothing changes.
Yeah, there's not a conclusion. This is the answer sort of
thing, which is which is what's lovely about science in my
view. So what's this debate in linguistics and cognitive
science between Chomsky and Skinner?
So that debate at the time was how to explain behavior and
generally in linguistic behavior in particular, and Skinner was
hoping to explain that in terms of properties of the information
that's available to us, what's out there in the environment and
responses and the links between them and associations that we
formed between them. And basically, the idea is that to
explain how we behave, which is all he cared about, all we need
to do is look at the properties of what's out there rather than
what the organism brings internally to that how the
organism views the stimulus and how the organism chooses to
response. And what Chomsky made very clear is that the study of
behavior ought to start with the study of the organism, it's
really kind of maybe you can think about it as a form of
biology thinking about what is it that the organism brings with
themselves to to this task. So to make it very, you know, very
concrete. So why is it that, you know, you you understand a
sentence, how is it, you know, that you have a sentence such as
John is eager to please? How do you know that it's John? Who is
being pleased? Being pleased? Whereas if you know, John is
easy to please, then sorry, put it the other way around. So if
John is easy to please, it is the one who is being pleased is
John, whereas if John is eager to please, then he is pleasing
Bill or somebody else, right? And what Chomsky made clear is
that interpretations such like that, the only way to make sense
of them is to figure out what is it that the person knows about
language and how they encode information that's available to
them. Any pointed out that our ability to do so to encode
information that's available to us is constrained in part by
innate principles of language that he called Universal
Grammar.
And would you say that's sort of something like innate knowledge
that you write about in this book?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So as I read Chomsky, this is primarily a
treatise on human nature and about innate knowledge, which he
happened to advance in the domain of language. But I always read
him as a philosopher, essentially.
Certainly, yeah, I mean, he in fact, I believe he was the he
chaired the Department of Philosophy at MIT, probably for a
long time. So he has a really good background in philosophy
certainly.
I was professor so with the idea of Universal Grammar, I've
always always been thinking about that idea like is is Universal
Grammar itself, this type of innate knowledge? And is it
something that that we can sort of study analytically?
Oh, and empirically,
empirically, beautiful. And I would say experimentally. Yeah,
so. So all you need is to start with a good theory of what you
think Universal Grammar is all about. And then go to the lab and
try to figure out, do you have evidence for this thing? And it's
not easy, but it's doable.
I see, I see. So if we could play a bit of devil's advocate,
because I've read, in fact, apart from Chomsky's political
work, of course, I've read his book on language, which was which
was an excellent read. And I found it quite hard to read as an
ear five, to be totally honest. But I do know there are certain
people still in the field, as you said, it's an ongoing debate
that kind of are either critical or disagree with some of
Chomsky's ideas, or let's say, values of Universal Grammar. So
what are what are the current criticisms of this idea of innate
knowledge or Universal Grammar?
So to make it clear, I think that in fact, the majority of the
field no longer thinks that no longer sides with Chomsky. I'm
not totally convinced in my reading of the evidence that
that's right. And that's the right conclusion. And the debate
as a debates, as I see it in the domain of language, have always
structured, or have always centered onto issues. One is,
what is the machinery that you need to represent language? So
what kind of representations that you have? And what, and what
and do they are they structured? Are they structured in a
systematic way? Do you need something that is akin to
algebraic rules? Or all you have is basically associations,
very rich set of associations, which apparently this is what
GPT is doing, you know, AI is doing today. So A is what kind of
representations do you have? And do you need explicit structure
in your data, so to speak? The second question is, where these
representations, and the rules, the way you operate over these
representations, where is all this machinery coming from? And
is it in parts specific to language? So are you born with
some principles that are unique to language? And that's what
allows you to acquire language? Or are you relying entirely on
generic mechanisms that operate across domains? So what is
your machinery? And how specific it is, where and where it's
coming from? These are have always been the questions. And
the debate these days are centered on a whether there
are in fact algebraic rules. So this is huge debate about that,
which has been increased and confounded by the rise of AI,
because proponents of that state, like, look, you have the
systems that seem to do just fine. And it's not clear. But
some people, there is a question of whether they in fact have
any algebraic representations at all. And the range of
possibilities range between those who say, there aren't any
structured representations in there at all, or that maybe
they start without them, and they grow them somehow. And all
this becomes really difficult to tell, just because there is so
much data that these systems are exposed to that it's really hard.
So one of the tests that you know, how do you know that there
is an algebraic rules? One of the way to test it is to look at
generalizations, can you generalize to items that are not
similar to anything that you've seen before. But if you're
basically your data set includes everything that we have, then
it becomes very difficult to know whether you'd in fact
generalize or not. So that makes the whole question of
machinery very difficult to decide. Questions of innateness
are difficult to decide for two reasons. A, the success of AI
that kind of presents a big challenge. The other reason is
oftentimes when you point out that there are universals
across languages. So this is one of the main argument or an
important argument to foreign aidness is to argue that, hey,
we look at language after language, and they all show a
certain property. So in my work, we looked at syllable
structure and the fact that languages prefer structures
such as blog to structures such as all bog, LBOG. That seems
very clear. But the thing about this as well as many other
preferences is that there is a correlation between what
languages like to do and what the functional pressures of our
body dictate. So if I ask my undergraduates why blog, then
everybody tells me that what to say. And then intuitive theory
behind it is that it's those functional pressures, meaning
how is it is for you to say the constraints on your
articulatory system and an audition that they're driving
the force. And in every area of language universal, I don't
in many areas of linguistic universals, you find such
correspondences between what languages like to do and some
functional explanation. Phonology is probably the area where you
see those things most clearly. But nowadays, people are
exploring those ideas elsewhere as well. And the problem is that
when people find those correlations, they assume
causation, meaning they if you find any functional explanation
of what's going on, people kind of jump to the conclusion that
it's this functional cause, or functional factor that is
causing the structure that you see. So in this specific case,
why do you prefer a blog? Because it's easy to say, or
because it's easy to hear. That's what my undergraduates
think. And so do professional scientists. And to me, it's not
a done deal. To me, this is an empirical question that you need
to go and explore as indeed we have. And there are ways to do
so. So the fact that you find correlation in principle is
ambiguous between two explanations. One is, it's not
language, it's not your G, it's the functional system, the
sensory and motor systems that are driving the cart here,
that's what makes language the way it is. But the alternative
possibility is, well, maybe it is abstract linguistic principles
that are doing the driving, except for those principles are
not entirely crazy, they're not entirely arbitrary, rather, they
have evolved so that they optimize those sensory and
motor pressures, which I don't think is super surprising. So
that predicts that yes, you will find some correlation between
you know, putative UG and those sensory and motor pressures,
but not but what's doing the pushing was doing what's
pushing the cart, so to speak, is UG rather than sensory motor
system. And merely showing a correlation doesn't adjudicate
between these possibilities. So in my work, we took it very
seriously. So, for example, to figure out whether it's blog
that's doing it, I'm sorry, whether the preference for
blog is coming from, it's easier for you to say than in
collaboration with my colleague, Alvaro Pascualeone, who is a
neuroscientist who does transcarnial magnetic stimulation,
what we did is zapped the motor system that controls the
articulators, the leap specifically, and looked at what
this is doing to your linguistic preferences. And
conversely, what happens when you zap brokers area and what we
found is a dissociation between them. So the point is, these
are questions that you need to explore, you may or may like may
not like the evidence that we produced, I think they're clear,
but the my point is not to defend the solution, but rather to
defend the method. I am very concerned about that time to
jump from correlations to causation, I think this needs
to be sorted out. And I think it's this disagreement that is
behind a lot of the ambiguity that we're having in the field
right now.
April first, I did, in fact, read a blog post written on your
work from your lab by Northeastern University. And so
correct me if I'm wrong, in like a very elementary level, if I
could put it this way, is it that you're at the moment claiming
that it's as if these UG or these abstract principles, they
aren't physical, they aren't arbitrary and random, but they've
kind of evolved to suit our existence as home sapiens, the
same way, let's say a physical limb or something has evolved.
Exactly. Yeah, that's the working hypothesis. But again, I
think for me, it's more important to tell people that just
showing a correlation isn't necessarily proof, it's not a
smoking gun of causation. It's more important for me to emphasize
this methodological claim than to push my own interpretation of
the data. So I think that there's, you know, there is
probably a lot that need to be done, many more controls and to
completely look at this question. And we have contributed some
but by no means I would argue that we completely resolve the
issue. What really bothers me is that the attempt to view the
correlation and to jump to the conclusion that oh, we know what's
going on. I think that's that's really unfortunate.
