I completely got your critiques of predictive processing, which I concur with, but what are
your views on something like the free energy principle by Carl Friston, who, after all,
is a neuroscientist. Would you say it's a good model of framework to work with?
No, I think it's a bogus analogy. It's obviously an analogy because the term comes from physics.
In free energy, there's a perfectly well-understood idea where energy is the
capacity to work, and free energy is the energy that's available in the current
contest to do work. Great idea, really important. So what's the free energy principle? Well,
people who are big fans of predictive processing have worked their butts off to try to figure out
what it is. And Friston's a horrible writer. He writes with incredible obscurity. He writes
like a postmodernist, actually, kind of postmodernist mathematician. And that's not what
mathematics is supposed to be like. Mathematics is incredibly powerful because it's clear,
and you can see what's going on. But his math is unclear, and the free energy principle
is what I call a bogus analogy. The term comes from my book, Balance. I wrote a book on balance
a couple of years ago, and it talks both about the neuroscience of balance, but it also talks
about the way balance has become a metaphor that pervades human thought. But different
metaphors have different values. Metaphors aren't all good. Some of them are really evil.
They can be used to defend slavery, for example. So your question is, what kind of metaphor have
we got here? Is it one that's good or unclear or utterly bogus? Well, here, I think it's bogus
because he's trying to carry over from physics some sense of profundity from free energy.
But if you look what he means by that, as much or far as anyone's been able to figure it out,
and people like Anil Seth have tried to figure out what he meant by it, you say, well, it's just
another way of saying predictive processing. So I'm trying to say that what the brain is doing
is to make predictions about the future in order to figure out what's likely to happen and satisfy
its goals. So that's not a reasonable idea. It's a real hypothesis, and I think it's one of the
six things that brains do. But to elevate that into a free energy principle using a bogus physical
expression for physics, as I think is frankly illegitimate. It's not a good use of metaphor.
It's not a good use of analogy. It's a highly misleading term that is pseudo profundity.
It's kind of like, actually, among the post-modernists you mentioned, I don't think
Foucault is bogus. I think he's actually got a lot of insights into the way society works. But a lot
of the other people in that category, Derrida and often Cizek, they really just don't understand
the difference between obscurity and profundity. So that is, you should be able to figure out,
what are they saying? Is it true or is it false? And you can do that often with Foucault. You can
do that with good cognitive scientists. But the idea of free energy is just so kind of obscure
that it's hard to make sense of it. And I think actually the predictive processing idea is clear
enough that you can see that it's not true. Because as I said, the mind does a lot of other
things besides prediction. And it does it by means other than Bayesian processing. So predictive
processing is an idea that's interesting but wrong. Whereas free energy is an idea that's just
too obscure to be even wrong. I see, because as a layperson, my confusion always with the free
energy principle was I saw what Professor Friston was getting. And in fact, I'm currently reading
his book Active Inference. But as a meta theory, as like a theory of mind that encompasses what
the mind is, I always felt it lacked certain other parts of what the mind does. Like for instance,
coherence, explanatory coherence. And emotion for evaluation. And appraisal and communication
with others. You need all of these things. If you're going to have a full theory of mind,
it's really just got one tiny corner. It commits something that I've called Thaley's disease.
Thaley's was really the first philosopher and the first scientist. Absolutely brilliant thinker.
But he came up with a theory that was just a little too simple. His theory is everything is
water. Well, that was brilliant. It's absolutely simple. But even by Aristotelian standards,
whether you also need earth, air, and fire, it just didn't cut it. And of course, now that we
know there's 118 different elements. No, it doesn't work. So what I call Thaley's disease is coming
up with a theory that looks brilliantly simple, but it's just way too simple. And that's definitely
true of predictive processing as well.
