Hey everyone, welcome to my May 2023 book haul video. This one in particular, I'm gonna be quite happy.
My frugal ass is gonna be quite happy.
Specifically because of this pile here. I've got more books, but this pile here is
is making my frugal ass very happy given that all of this costed just I think less than $20.
So I got some some great books here, and I only paid 20 bucks for all of this thanks to
secondhand shopping that I went with with with a few friends. In fact, I looked up this sociology book.
It's just like a kind of like not a textbook really, but more as the title suggests the key concepts
by Rotolidge. It was on Amazon for 35 bucks. I got this for less than five dollars, I think so
that is fantastic. I
highly highly recommend secondhand book shopping. It's not really something I've done a lot given that some of the books that I do buy
to be rather
what's it would not not as popular
as some like let's say a Jane Austen or a Charles Dickens.
So it's kind of hard to find exactly what I want outside of buying it from from Amazon or some
large bookseller.
But man, what I really do enjoy about secondhand book shopping is that kind of like spontaneity where you just pick up great books by
authors that you've been reading for a while and then you get it for like two bucks. It's fantastic.
Okay, let's start off. The first book is I've already
started this book as you can see from the bookmark. You actually can't see that. There you go.
It's Alan Kazupanchek's What Is Sex?
Man, I've only read like what 10 pages so far because I'm trying really quite slowly and really
really
led the idea to settle in me because
you know
sexuality, sex, these words are very loaded terms, but they're kind of the philosophical
and even ontological approach Alan Kazupanchek is taking in this book.
It's it's at least for me being a neo-fight. It seems rather unorthodox and I'm trying to like let the ideas really settle
and
kind of battle with them in some sense and
in fact, I'll be doing a book review on this for sure because I think it's a topic worth discussing
particularly given the current political climate.
The next book is now, you know, okay, I'll take both books out. In fact, Todd McGovern, his
Emancipation After Hegel and his other book Capitalism and Desire. This book, I've read parts of it,
but I want to get through the whole thing. This one, I haven't and man, I am excited for this because
so for instance, here's a review that Slavoj Zizek wrote on this book Emancipation After Hegel. Here's what he said.
This is the book we were waiting for after long years of being bombarded by Hegel as a clotted liberal whose last word is recognition.
With Todd McGovern,
the revolutionary Hegel is back.
However, it is not the old Marxist Hegel, but the Hegel After Marx.
The Hegel who makes us aware that revolution is an open and risk process
which necessarily entails catastrophic failures.
Hegel's problem, how to save the legacy of the French Revolution after its breakdown is our problem today.
How to save the project of radical emancipation
after the catastrophe of starvinism in a truly democratic country.
Emancipation After Hegel would be reprinted in hundreds of thousands of copies and distributed for free to all students.
Read this book or ignore it at your own risk.
I really like the last sentence because generally Zizek isn't a very kind of prescriptive thinker.
He never tells you what to do. He's more like a he's a critique and an analyst and
the fact that he said read this book or ignore it at your own risk, it gives very
Jordan Peterson vibes, in fact.
But now I certainly am going to get to this soon. In fact, I think after
too much to read, but I think after what is sex,
I'm going to read the emancipation after Hegel, not really even for the political aspects of it, but
man, I've been so
just obsessed with this idea of contradiction the past couple of months.
It's been taking up all of my thinking
to probably an unhealthy level because I'm trying to analyze everything via that lens of Hegelian contradiction.
Okay, so yeah, that's that book and then of course
capitalism and desire.
One of my, I'd say one of my personal goals in life, kind of like a dream is to get
Tom McGovern on my podcast and discuss this book
and particularly
let him elucidate as to why
Marxists really need to take psychoanalysis seriously.
So I'm gonna, yeah, try and work towards that and aspire towards that, but I think
I haven't even reached out to him yet, but before I do reach out, I think I need to attune myself more with this work and give it a bit more time
before having a conversation with him.
And the next book is Adrian Johnston's Džek's Ontology.
This is also something, obviously, given that I'm a huge Džek here.
I would certainly want to read soon, although I think this book is gonna wait till the end of the year
because I want to get through some of Tom McGovern's and Zupanček's work.
And you know, given that Džek is this huge figure,
Goliath of a figure in the
Slovenian school of, Slovenian philosophers, you know, Džek,
Zupanček, and in fact, I shouldn't even say that I should say
more of the kind of the, these new Hegelians, the way people like McGovern or Adrian Johnston
or of course Džek.
Džek is such a daunting, towering figure that we tend to focus only on his work.
So I want to try and focus a bit more on the other thinkers.
Zupanček, McGovern, Johnston, before, not long before, why I'm also paying attention to Džek's work.
It's also the fact that Džek is a prolific writer, so he just writes so much.
Okay, I think I went through all of that. Yes. So now let's get to my other book pile.
All of these were not really planned purchases. It's the best part of
you know, going secondhand book shopping, you just pick up whatever's there.
Yep, The Prophet by Khaled Gibran, my friend who I went with, she told me,
she in fact read this book and she told me she hated it.
But I do know some people really, really enjoy this book and it's kind of a very popular book.
So I probably won't read it this year. Let's be honest, I'm reading some other stuff, but
it's just always good to have in the collection. Ah, Jen Austen's Persuasions. I watched the film on Netflix.
Wasn't impressed, wasn't impressed, because to be honest, I did quite like Pride and Prejudice.
I thought it was quite good. But Persuasions, it wasn't all that good.
The next book is Charles Dickens Great Expectations. This is, yeah, I want to get to this.
Dickens, man, I think it's kind of hard because I really do want to spend at least six months
getting through most of Charles Dickens's work, particularly because I think,
even though I've only read Hard Times and what's the other one?
I've read one other Dickens book. Doesn't matter. Hard Times for sure, but there's one on the book
I've read. I feel like a lot of his thinking, I mean, obviously he's a literary figure, but
at a philosophical level, at a sociological level, what he tries to delineate in his books
is kind of what I try to theorize on in society and make sense of. So I gotta take him more seriously.
And then another Jen Austen book, Sense and Sensibility. Honestly, I don't even know
Jen Austen wrote a book called Sense and Sensibility. Yeah, I only picked it up when I saw
her name and I really liked Jen Austen. So, oh, Charlotte Bronte's Jen Air. So
is that how it's pronounced? Jen Air? Okay, this is really interesting. My friend, Tess, who,
I don't think she minds me mentioning her name. She's been reading this book right now and she
recently, I haven't, obviously, I love, love, love Wuthering Heights. So Charlotte Bronte's sister,
Emily Bronte's book, her magnum opus, let's say. And therefore, I really want to get to
Jen Air, too, or the Bronte sisters. I think that they're brilliant. So from this book,
she shared this quote with me and I thought it was excellent. It's exactly why I like the Bronte's,
because they're so, man, I like how crude and in some sense, so violent their writing is.
It just, it's so, it's such good writing. So here's a line by, I think it's Jane saying this and
she says, so Tess shared this with me. She says, I am not an angel. I asserted and I will not be one
till I die. I will be myself, Mr. Rochester. You must neither expect nor exact anything
so let's seal off me. Let me actually change the screen so you could read it too if
so let's seal off me for you will not get it any more than I shall get it of you. So this is a
small excerpt from Jen Air and I kind of tweeted it and I thought that was so good. I thought it was
so good and I even commented the divine feminists cringe. It's yet another patriarchal idea that
harms women. I totally agree. I am not a fan of any of this idealization of women as abstract figures.
In fact, that's why I like, I think, even Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights because it just shows,
well, love it, it's violence, but also the characters, they're such complex characters and
it shows a dark side of both Heathcliff and is it Elizabeth? My god, I forgot. Yeah, and Elizabeth,
it shows both the beauty and the ugly of these characters, which for me is what great literature
does. And last but not least is this book here, The Sociology Key Concepts. I'll probably never
read it. It's just more like a reference book that I'll probably use it as. And yeah, that's kind
of it. Those are the books for this book haul. In terms of quantity, a bit more books than
per usual. The recent being is because of, again, my great little second hand book shopping
thing I did with my friends, which I'm really happy about. Alrighty, thanks for watching. I hope
I, as per usual, gave you a few ideas, put a few books or authors in your mind, in your head
that they'll hopefully be an impetus for you to go read these authors. But just if you're
into philosophy like me, I would highly, highly recommend looking into the work of Todd McGovern.
He is fantastic. And he also has a podcast. Let me pull that out too, in fact, while they're added.
It's on Spotify. It's called Why Theory. It is really, really good, this podcast here.
Why Theory goes through so many concepts and I've kind of been binge listening. I was going to say
binge watching, but it's actually binge listening, this podcast. Sorry for the abrupt ending there.
I clicked stop recording on OBS by mistake. Now, the proper ending. Thanks for watching. I'll see
you in the next book haul video or the next video, which probably is going to be a little, little
vlog slash analysis on Character Guard from this book, either or perhaps it's Magnum Opus
on Bodom, which is going to be an interesting topic to discuss. Alrighty, see you in the next one. Cheers.
