And I'm sorry if this is a very kind of like a vague question, but are you familiar with
the philosopher?
Well, he's he's he calls himself doing foundations of physics.
Tim Modellin.
Um, no, I haven't heard of him.
Yeah.
So basically he's a fellow.
He works in a philosophy department, although what his primary works like he's got a background
in physics.
I think he's got a PhD in physics and he his work is on deriving ontologies of the physical
universe based on physics and what we know about modern physics.
So he calls it the foundations of physics.
And then when I was reading your stuff, it got me thinking, um, uh, is there such a thing
as the, let's say the philosophical foundations of cognitive science and AGI, let's say, is
is that something that we'd say researchers are actively working on or is that just what
we would collectively call a philosophy of mine.
So I think that with, uh, cognitive science, a lot of it is founded in things like logic
and probability theory.
And, uh, like, like there's, for example, the Bayesian brain hypothesis, which is hypothesis
at the bind approximates Bayesian inference.
And there's there are at least some empirical tests that provide some limited support for
this.
And there's more generally things like the problem of induction where there's this open
question of how does the mind, uh, deduce, like induce the future from the past.
But like, even if there's no logical justification for why the sun will rise tomorrow if it's
always risen in the past, human minds will do this and there's some mechanistic explanation
for this.
Um, so I think the, uh, some of the foundations include these like basic things that are considered
like parts of good reasoning, such as, um, uh, logic and probability theory.
Uh, then there's, uh, you mentioned the mind body problem, um, and that's that definitely
intersects with neuroscience a lot because there's this methodological assumption that
these states of the mind are somehow encoded in the brain.
Um, and this is like broadly pretty likely based on current scientific understanding,
um, that like, for example, there aren't, if you, if you notice some difference in your
mind, you have like n bits in your mental state, then that there have to be at least
n bits in your brain state for that to be, um, represented somehow.
Um, so I, I'd say that neuroscience certainly has a philosophy of mind as a foundation in
terms of assumptions about how the mind's processing, uh, relates to the brain functions.
Honestly, um, sorry, keep going.
Oh, you also mentioned, uh, the foundations of cognitive science and AI.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
I would say that AI is more founded in something I said before, which is just foundations of
correct reasoning, which includes things like logic, probability theory, and induction.
Understood.
Yeah.
Because the one thing I was thinking about was, so for instance, uh, if I kind of expand
on that question, uh, like Tim Maudlin, when, when he says foundations of physics, I feel
like that's in a way quite straightforward.
It's trying to, trying to find, uh, kind of the ontological reality of our physical world,
the physical universe.
But then when it comes to something like AI or maybe perhaps more specifically, uh, COGSI,
it gets a bit hazy because yes, we have cognition and the human subject, but then the question's
like, what is human subjectivity?
And that's a question, I guess, asked since the beginning of philosophy in some sense,
right?
And then especially since the Kant and the German idealist and then that got me thinking,
um, are there really, do we really have, uh, people walking?
In cognitive science that are trying to kind of, uh, let's say speculate and, and derive
meaningful, uh, foundations of what a human subject is based on cognitive science and
AI.
So you would, would you say from what you just said that the answer is yes, or is it
still more like, I'll just focus on the science itself, forget about, uh, you know, ontology
or philosophy?
Oh, I would say yes.
And I think that it might be hard to notice this if you're just looking at papers published
because partially the papers are assuming some amount of background of people in the field
already share certain assumptions.
And partially also, um, when people are presenting their findings, they're not trying to look
too speculative.
Um, like I think a big thing in science is that you, an under-specified part of the scientific
method is how do you even come up with these hypotheses in the first place?
Like the method says, once you have a hypothesis, you should go out and test it, but how do
you come up with the hypothesis?
It can, it can be very intuitive.
It can come to you in a dream, even.
Um, so I think when scientists are presenting their findings, um, they might have gotten
their hypothesis in a certain manner, which might be intuitive or based on kind of philosophical
thought, um, that they're trying to show their finding in a non-speculative manner.
Um, but I think in, certainly I've talked with cognitive scientists and they do tend
to speculate about the human subject.
Um, so I mentioned the Bayesian brain hypothesis and I've learned that hypothesis when it,
perhaps the primary thing that humans are doing is constructing a model of the world
based on sense data that is meant to do things such as predict future sense data.
Um, and then you can even go from that to think about values and like what are values
and, um, there's, there's things like planning algorithms, which might tell you like if, if
I have a certain value that will tend to, um, cause me to take certain actions that
will achieve that end.
And there's various algorithms that approximate that.
Um, and it's, it's very much like, uh, that, like if, if you, if you, if you're having
these sorts of thoughts about what it is like to model the world and to want things and
plan towards them, um, that can certainly influence your own understanding of yourself
or other humans as well.
Yeah.
What was the algorithm?
Just because you said to penny algorithm planning, um, yeah.
So if you, I guess things like, uh, reinforcement learning use some form of this, um, we're like
in an alpha code has like an evaluation of board states and some kind of Monte Carlo
tree search to search among the game tree.
Um, and, uh, there, there's other algorithms like, like there's, there's like in, in simpler
logical, um, problems you can do, do like back chaining to start from a goal state and
ask like, what, what is the state before the goal state looked like?
And then like, what does the state before that look like and try to get back to your current state?
