I do want to say something about the way in which Heidegger
defines phenomenology, because I think it's a very brilliant
sort of description of it.
And so Heidegger, when he's describing phenomenology and
being in time, but also in the lecture course, given a few years
before he published being in time, and that lecture course is
called the History of the Concept of Time.
Sorry, just to clarify, so being in time is Heidegger's
machemopus, right? We should probably put that out. Yeah.
Sorry, I didn't interrupt you. Jacob, keep going. Yeah.
No, no, you're good. Yeah, being in time is what he's most famous for.
Even though, I mean, he wrote a lot. He has a lot of books. He has a lot of papers.
His later work differs a little bit from his early work,
but there's also a dispute as to how real the turn is.
Later Heidegger and early Heidegger, yeah.
Yeah, and I'm not really knowledgeable enough to comment on how
different those two things are. I'm kind of working my way chronologically
through this moment's work. But yeah, in being in time and his earlier
lecture course, he described phenomenology by going back to
the ways in which the Greeks use the term phenomenon in logos.
So he's kind of taking apart the term phenomenology
and separating it and looking to the Greek definitions of this.
And in the book, Heidegger says that the Greeks understood the term phenomenon
as, this is going to sound very obscure and esoteric, but I'm going to give,
hopefully, an easier to understand description afterward.
But he says, phenomenon is that which shows itself in itself, the manifest.
Typical Heidegger.
Yeah, and the term for the Greeks also carried connotation of bringing
something to life and eliminating. And then the logos, Heidegger explained,
the Greeks understood by the logos something like discoursing, but not just like,
not just dialogue and not just a verbal utterance, but
it's more of a discursive communication that lets something be seen.
And so you could think of the logos as words, whether uttered or written down
or what have you, that point to something, they let something be seen.
It's kind of bringing something to life, it's bringing the phenomenon to life.
And so we want to understand this in a less obscure and difficult way than
Heidegger likes to put things. We can say something like, the logos points to the
phenomenon in such a way that the phenomenon becomes un-concealed or the logos allows the
phenomenon to come into view by looking and out of experience in such a way that it can be seen.
And so really, it's almost like your words should connect with something that can be
pointed out in experience or can be shown in experience. And so we're not,
and he contrasts this with the idea of free-floating concepts and words and ideas.
And by that, he just means something like, we don't want to abstract away so much from experience
that we're just playing language games. We want our words to be able to meet up with experience
in such a way that if I say something, it's all like in some of my papers about meaning what
I'm trying to do, as I'm trying to point to experience, I'm trying to point to
particular experiences and particular moments in particular experiences where maybe
someone might find meaning. So I'm just trying to bring something into view using words and concepts.
I'm glad you said that, Jico, because in one of your papers, I forget which one,
you've sort of touched on this, but a question that came to mind was,
so from the definition you gave, definition of phenomenology, how does that differ from, let's
say, the empiricist tradition or the empiricist approach, which tends to be quite popular these
days, especially in the world of artificial intelligence, where we think that our epistemology
or our knowledge or our truths of the world is revealed purely based on empiricism, which is
experiencing, measuring things, and that in some sense, the mind is a blank canvas and
the world just gives us information and input. So from the empirical approach, how does phenomenology
differ? So phenomenology is going to differ in the sense that, okay, so if we think about the
empirical approach specifically as it pertains to the sciences, we're getting, we're trying to get a
collection of experiences that kind of compile and point toward the same sort of thing and experience.
Now, a major difference, I guess, is going to be what it is we're trying to discern in empirical
science, as opposed to something like Pythagoras phenomenology, the way that I just described
phenomenology. With a scientific and empirical approach, we're usually looking at objects and
we're trying to figure out what sort of properties these objects have. And so, I mean, I guess physics
or chemistry is a great example of that. And we're trying to see maybe what
how two entities interact with each other. And we're going to perform experiments to do that,
and we're going to try to replicate the experiments. And we're going to try to not let our first person,
perspective, influence exactly what we're investigating. So phenomenology is going to
differ from that. In that we're not, we're not collecting data and we're not measuring stuff.
We're experiencing, we're trying to pay attention to the experience as it's experienced. So you're
not going to measure your experience of meaning, say you're going to more so, if you're doing a
phenomenology and you're trying to discern maybe what you find meaningful, you're going to more
sort of reflect on maybe the way that you feel when you were participating in a certain activity.
And from there, you might also start to look at the structures of the experience,
more so than just the feeling of the experience, which might be, you know, what's involved in
this activity or what's involved in this experience. What are the things that are essential to the
experience without which I could no longer say that it was a meaningful experience? Those are the
sorts of things that phenomena, that sort of questions phenomenology is going to ask. And
specifically high digger, because specifically for high digger, he's wanting to look, he's wanting to
discern the a priori structures of existence and experience, which is just to say
a priori meaning always already there. Like what's necessary? What are the, what, what, what
structures are necessary for this to exist or for me to have this particular experience?
Yeah, I guess I'll leave it at that for now, because otherwise I'm going to get into a really
deep, or you can ask a clarifying question, because otherwise I'm just going to go on at the end.
No, that was perfect, mate. I think in many ways you, you, you lead me to my next question. I mean,
I thought we were going to discuss existentialism too, because obviously it's kind of like the
precursor, so not the precursor, but it's highly correlated to phenomenology. But perhaps since
we're already on this topic, you see, in some sense, I kind of regret even asking that question,
because I'm coming to realize that maybe it's not fair to ask questions such as, oh, what's the
difference? Or what's the stark difference between phenomenology and science? Because if you think
of a field like, let's say, psychology or cognitive science, those fields have had a massive influence
by thinkers like Merleau Ponty or Heidegger by phenomenologists. So, well, the question I was
going to ask is how does phenomenology, and I was also going to say existentialism, but we didn't
get to that still, but let's just say how does phenomenology differ from a more scientific
approach? But maybe to make things even a bit more interesting, let's talk about, in fact,
how does it relate to fields like psychology and cognitive science, where in the world of,
in the scientific approach, what we always try and do is take the, remove the subject, so remove
the subjective experience. But clearly, there are some fields, even within science, where you
can't do that, you can't remove the subject from cognitive science or psychology. So maybe to make
things a bit more interesting, how do they correlate, how do they connect to phenomenology,
those fields I mentioned? Sure, sure. So I want to comment on cognitive science just a little
bit first, and then I want to maybe dive into a little bit of neuroscience and how phenomenology
might be related, because I actually presented a paper last year at a philosophy conference
hosted by a university in the Czech Republic on this topic of phenomenology neuroscience. But
before I get to that, something that I really appreciate about cognitive science is that
it really embraces the subjective experience. And like you said, you can't remove that from
cognitive science, cognitive science, necessarily. And I think the most prevailing approach in
cognitive science right now is 4E cognitive science. And that's just the 440s. I always forget
one, but it stands for embeddedness, embodied, inactive. And I, like I said, I always forget the
fourth one. I don't know why, but I'll leave a little caption or whatever, just too far. It was
all good. Yeah. Yeah, have somebody place in the comment. Kind of take the video. Yeah, it's fine.
But a lot of it, so a lot of those ideas, really, I mean, I believe have an inception in
phenomenology. I mean, they're, you know, especially in Heidegger, with Heidegger's idea of being in
the world, you know, which we'll get to. But it's just this idea that there's a more holistic
structure to the world and existence that we need to take into consideration when we're trying to
understand things about the world and trying to understand things about ourselves and maybe the
way in which we interact with the environment. And so I think phenomenology played at least
the role in trying and getting a lot of those ideas going for cognitive science.
Now, as far as neuroscience goes,
Anil set, I'm sure you've heard of Anil set. Yes, I have. Yep. He recently bought a
quite a popular science book right on the brain. And so he does a lot of work trying to
map the brain correlates of certain experiences. So he's trying to see, like, what's going on in
the brain at a given time when someone's having a particular experience. And he's trying to build
that map out. And you can't build that map if you don't have good phenomenology. Because
if you, if you, if you think, just think about it, if we think about it simply, as far as, okay,
let's say brain region X lights up when I have experience Y. And let's say we can, we can gather
all the data we want about the brain structure and we can reproduce it and map it as much as we
want. But if we don't have a good description of the experience, we're not going to know what
we're mapping this brain activity to. And so in order to have good correlative mapping, we have
to have good phenomenology. We have to have like a good description of the experience. And we have
to have people, the participants in the study that they're studying, trying to get this
correlative mapping going. They have to be familiar with the experience, not only as it is
experienced, but they have to understand what it is that the neuroscientists are trying to map,
like what experience do you want me to have? So then I can tell you what I'm having, so you can,
you know, mark down what's going on in my brain when I'm having that experience. And so you have
to have a whole lot of phenomenology going on, not only the person being the participant being
able to recognize the experience and being able to communicate that to the researchers, but the
researchers also have to have a pretty rich phenomenological description of what it is they
want their participants to experience. And that way they know precisely when the experience is
started, because you might, I mean, there might be like a very important, as far as neuroscience
there might be a very important spike in a particular brain region that they are trying
to map to a very specific, maybe milliseconds of an experience. And if you don't get that right,
it's just not going to be correct. Your description is going to be wrong and your
correlative mapping isn't going to mean anything, because you might have one side of it,
but you're going to be missing the other side of it.
