Hey, everyone. Welcome to this conversation that I had with Professor Iris Berent. It was a riveting,
engaging and fascinating conversation. We discussed some of her work in our blindness to human nature,
how that blindness is innate to human nature itself. We spoke about the twin principles of
essentialism and dualism, some amazing work she's done on how the kind of the beliefs that
us laypeople have. And I even managed to, in fact, ask her a lot more speculative questions,
which I really haven't heard her, you know, publicly at least discussed before,
on qualia and consciousness, and even psychoanalysis and our old mate Freud, and she gave her views
on those two. Of course, given I'm a neophyte, there were certain parts where I was in too familiar
with the specifics of her research. So forgive me if I didn't do a good job at engaging a bit more
with more of her specific points. Nonetheless, you could find most of her papers online on open
journals. And, well, firstly, a bit of a formal introduction, let's say. Professor Iris Berent
is a cognitive psychologist at North Eastern University. She's the author of The Phonological
Mind and the Blind Storyteller, which we discuss rather extensively on the podcast. Her research
seeks to unveil human nature and our intuitive understanding of it to shed light on human nature.
She explores the human capacity for language using phonology as a case study.
Saying all that, without further ado, here's my conversation with Professor Iris Berent.
Firstly, if you don't mind a bit of a personal question, if I'm not mistaken, I believe you
initially studied miscology and then you sort of transitioned into studying psychology and
currently your research is more in specifically cognitive psychology. So perhaps you could just
kind of give us give us a few ideas on as to what you find interesting in this field
and what made you want to do research in cognitive psychology.
So my background is very varied, but to me, it's all a single story that's completely coherent,
because I think, you know, it's interesting how you look at your life history and you
discovered that in retrospect, it was all the same thing. It was all really interesting human
nature. It's really this question of why we know the way we do are the things that we are bound
to think about, to entertain, are there certain truths we are bound to hold,
just by virtue of the fact that we have, you know, a human genome, basically.
And that always really, really kind of bugged me. I think it came primarily from reading
Chomsky very early on when I was really young and it kind of stayed with me for many years.
And at first, this was a question that I explored with respect to music. So
there the question was, are there some structural properties that are common to all
musics, if you will, that we are born with and make us perceive music in a certain way?
And that was super difficult at the time. So we gradually transitioned into
easier question about language and finally kind of remain more in the domain of human nature
and itself in the sense of, can we understand our own human nature? And that's where I am right now.
Excellent. Yeah. I mean, before I jump into your book, of course, I kind of want to
ask a few more general questions. And so you said that it was, well,
initially human nature or understanding human nature, but also reading Chomsky,
which is clear from reading your work. I don't want to call you a Chomsky and that's
like a crass fear of putting it, but it seems like you're settling more on, let's say,
Chomsky side over someone like B.F. Skinner. And so if you don't mind, I would love for you to sort
of elucidate this ongoing, I don't want to call it a war, but debate between the Skinner side
and Chomsky side. And in fact, in one podcast, you even said that this debate is still ongoing.
It's not like it's done. Yeah, very much so. Nothing changes. Yeah, there's not a conclusion.
This is the answer sort of thing, which is what's lovely about science in my view.
So what's this debate in linguistics and cognitive science between Chomsky and Skinner?
So that debate at the time was how to explain behavior and generally in linguistic behavior
in particular. And Skinner was hoping to explain that in terms of properties of the information
that's available to us, what's out there in the environment and responses and the links
between them and associations that we formed between them. And basically the idea is that
to explain how we behave, which is all he cared about, all we need to do is look at the properties
of what's out there rather than what the organism brings internally to that, how the organism views
the stimulus and how the organism chooses to response. And what Chomsky made very clear is that
the study of behavior ought to start with the study of the organism. It's really kind of,
maybe you can think about it as a form of biology, thinking about what is it that the organism brings
with themselves to this task. So to make it very concrete. So why is it that you understand
the sentence? How is it that you have a sentence such as John is eager to please? How do you know
that it's John who is being pleased whereas if John is easy to please, then sorry, put it the other way
around. So if John is easy to please, it is the one who is being pleased is John, whereas if John is
eager to please, then he is pleasing Bill or somebody else. And what Chomsky made clear is that
interpretations such like that the only way to make sense of them is to figure out what is it that
the person knows about language and how they encode information that's available to them.
Any pointed out that our ability to do so to encode information that's available to us
is constrained in part by innate principles of language that he called Universal Grammar.
And would you say that's sort of something like innate knowledge that you write about in this
book? Yeah. So as I read Chomsky, this is primarily a treatise on human nature and about innate
knowledge which he happened to advance in the domain of language, but I always read him as a
philosopher essentially. Certainly. Yeah. I mean, he in fact, I believe he was the, he chaired the
Department of Philosophy at MIT probably for a long time. So he has a really good background
in philosophy certainly. Also professor, so with the idea of Universal Grammar, I've always been
thinking about that idea like is Universal Grammar itself this type of innate knowledge and is it
something that we can sort of study analytically? And empirically. Empirically. Beautiful. And I
would say experimentally. Yeah. So all you need is to start with a good theory of what you think
Universal Grammar is all about and then go to the lab and try to figure out do you have evidence for
this thing and it's not easy, but it's doable. I see. So if you could play a bit of devil's
advocate, because I've read, in fact, apart from Chomsky's political work, of course, I've read
his book On Language, which was an excellent read and I found it quite hard to read as a Neo5,
to be totally honest. But I do know there are certain people still in the field, as you said,
it's an ongoing debate that kind of are either critical or disagree with some of Chomsky's ideas,
or let's say values of Universal Grammar. So what are what are the current criticisms of this idea
of innate knowledge or Universal Grammar? So to make it clear, I think that in fact, the majority
of the field no longer thinks that no longer sides with Chomsky. I'm not totally convinced in my
reading of the evidence that that's right and that's the right conclusion. The debates as I see
it in the domain of language have always structured or have always centered on two issues. One is,
what is the machinery that you need to represent language? So what kind of representations that
you have? And what and what and do they are they structured? Are they structured in a systematic
way? Do you need something that is akin to algebraic rules? Or all you have is basically
associations, very rich set of associations, which apparently this is what GPT is doing,
you know, AI is doing today. So A is what kind of representations do you have? And do you need
explicit structure in your data, so to speak? The second question is where these representations
and the rules, the way you operate over these representations, where is all this machinery
coming from? And is it in part specific to language? So are you born with some principles
that are unique to language? And that's what allows you to acquire language? Or are you relying
entirely on generic mechanisms that operate across domains? So what is your machinery and
how specific it is, where and where it's coming from? These are have always been the questions.
And the debate these days are centered on a whether there are in fact algebraic rules. So this
is huge debate about that, which has been increased and confounded by the rise of AI because
proponents of that state like, look, you have the systems that seem to do just fine. And
it's not clear, but some people, there is a question of whether they in fact have any
algebraic representations at all. And the range of possibilities range between those who say
there aren't any structured representations in there at all, or that maybe they start without them
and they grow them somehow. And all this becomes really difficult to tell just because there is
so much data that these systems are exposed to that it's really hard. So one of the tests that
you know, how do you know that there is an algebraic rules? One of the way to test it is to look at
generalizations. Can you generalize to items that are not similar to anything that you've seen
before? But if you basically your data set includes everything that we have, then it becomes very
difficult to know whether you'd in fact generalize or not. So that makes the whole question of
machinery very difficult to decide. Questions of innateness are difficult to decide
for two reasons. A, the success of AI that kind of presents a big challenge. The other reason is
often time when you point out that there are universals across languages. So and this is one
of the main argument or an important argument to foreign aidness is to argue that, hey, we look at
language of other language and they all show a certain property. So in my work, we looked at
syllable structure and the fact that languages prefer structures such as blog to structures such as
all bog, L, B, O, G. That seems very clear. But the thing about this as well as many other
preferences is that there is a correlation between what languages like to do and what the
functional pressures of our body dictate. So if I ask my undergraduates why blog, then everybody
tells me that. What to say. And then intuitive theory behind it is that it's those functional
pressures, meaning how is it is for you to say that the constraints are you,
articulatory system and an addition that they are driving the force. In every area of language
universal, in many areas of linguistic universals, you find such correspondences between what languages
like to do and some functional explanation. Phonology is probably the area where you see those things
most clearly, but nowadays people are exploring those ideas elsewhere as well. And the problem is
that when people find those correlations, they assume causation, meaning they, if you find any
functional explanation of what's going on, people kind of jump to the conclusion that it's this
functional cause or functional factor that is causing the structure that you see. So in this
specific case, why do you prefer a blog? Because it's easy to say or because it's easy to hear.
That's what my undergraduates think. And so do professional scientists. And to me, it's not a
done deal. To me, this is an empirical question that you need to go and explore as indeed we have
and there are ways to do so. So the fact that you find correlation in principle is ambiguous
between two explanations. One is it's not language, it's not your G, it's the functional system,
the sensory and motor systems that are driving the cart here. That's what makes language the way it is.
But the alternative possibility is, well, maybe it is abstract linguistic principles that
are doing the driving, except for those principles are not entirely crazy. They're not entirely
arbitrary, rather they have evolved so that they optimize those sensory and motor pressures,
which I don't think is super surprising. So that predicts that, yes, you will find some correlation
between putative UG and those sensory and motor pressures, but what's doing the pushing was
doing what's pushing the cart, so to speak, is UG rather than sensory motor system. And merely
showing a correlation doesn't adjudicate between these possibilities. So in my work, we took it
very seriously. So for example, to figure out whether it's blog that's doing, I'm sorry, whether the
preference for blog is coming from, it's easier for you to say than in collaboration with my
colleague Alvaro Pascualeone, who is a neuroscientist who does transcarnal magnetic stimulation,
what we did is zapped the motor system that controls the articulators, the leaps specifically,
and looked at what this is doing to your linguistic preferences. And conversely,
what happens when you zap Broca's area? And what we found is a dissociation between them.
So the point is, these are questions that you need to explore. You may or may not like the
evidence that we produced. I think they're clear, but my point is not to defend the solution, but
rather to defend the method. I am very concerned about that time to jump from correlations to
causation. I think this needs to be sorted out. And I think it's this disagreement that is behind
a lot of the ambiguity that we're having in the field right now. I did in fact read a blog post
written on your work from your lab by Northeastern University. And so correct me if I'm wrong, in
like a very elementary level, if I could put it this way, is it that you're at the moment claiming
that it's as if these UG or these abstract principles, they aren't physical, they aren't
arbitrary and random, but they've kind of evolved to suit our existence as home sapiens,
the same way let's say a physical limb or something has evolved. Exactly. Yeah, that's the working
hypothesis. But again, I think for me, it's more important to tell people that just showing a
correlation isn't necessarily proof. It's not a smoking gun of causation. It's more important for
me to emphasize this methodological claim than to push my own interpretation of the data. So I
think that there is probably a lot that need to be done, many more controls and to completely look
at this question. And we have contributed some, but by no means I would argue that we completely
resolved the issue. What really bothers me is that the attempt to view the correlation and to jump
to the conclusion that, oh, we know what's going on. I think that's really unfortunate.
I see, as any honorable scientist would say, we need more empiricism, more testing, more
experimentation. Love it. In fact, Professor, maybe this kind of opens the way for us to jump
into a question that I've been fascinated by pretty much all my life and kind of obsessed with.
I'm so glad you mentioned this in your book. So if you don't mind, I'm just going to jump
to your book at once here. And this is this question on abstract knowledge and embodied
cognition. And I love the part in your book. So if you don't mind me just reading out a small
excerpt in page 138 you state in chapter nine that abstraction and embodiment are not mutually
exclusive. Cognition could well encompass multiple distinct mechanisms that run according to different
computational principles. The conclusion that one mechanism exists does not automatically preclude
the other. Again, as I said, I loved what you wrote on this. So this also seems like one of those
ongoing quote unquote wars in the world of cognitive psychology. If you don't mind, please
elucidating and educating us on why you believe that they don't have to be mutually exclusive.
They're not at conflict with each other between abstract knowledge and embodied cognition and
what's your current working thesis on these two ideas? So I think why they don't have to be mutually
exclusive is pretty simple. Logically, maybe we should start by talking about what should we
clarify what they each mean. Yes, that would be great. So the notion, the so-called classical
view of cognition, which more precisely is known as the computational theory of mind,
assume that what's doing the causal work in cognition is algebraic representation that
are structured. So there are symbols and the symbols have form and structure of these symbols that
drive mental computations. So for example, if you know that I have a big ball, you know that I have
a ball and that's a property of human cognition. Every time I say I have a big ball, it implies that
I have a ball. The goal of cognitive science in this view was to explain what is it about the
structure of, what is it about the structure of my representation that not only enables that,
but in fact require that each time you think about a big ball, you imply a ball.
And they said, well, you have these complex symbols. Every time you represent the big ball,
it's not like a whole complex, it's not an analyzed item for big ball, but rather it has
formal components that correspond to the semantic components. So there's going to be
a representation of your brain that for the ball and for the big, and therefore if you have big
ball, it literally implies ball as well because the interpretation of the complex symbol depends
on its part. So that's kind of the computational theory of mind. It's the view of language basically
as literally a mechanical system that works on those symbols. And since the symbols have
structure, formal structure, and they have certain meaning, it follows that if you know
the A component of A and B, you must know, if you know A, B, you must know A, for instance.
So all this has to do with the structure for having these abstract symbols and mental representations.
Now, embedded cognition rejects this for the most part. So why is it that your encoding
of concept is not based on this algebraic discrete symbols with this combinatorial structure,
but rather by all my experiences with events in the world. So why is it that this ball,
this, you know, battle is blue? What is my concept of a battle? Well, I don't have any
abstract symbol in my brain. It's how this battle feels. It's how it's how cold it is and how
shiny it is and how round it is in my hand. And if I didn't have a hand, I would not have the same
concept of the battle because my physical interaction with the battle forms part of what I
understand as a battle. So this is the notion of embedded cognition. It's really
embodiment. It's the interaction of my body below my brain with the world that
dictates my understanding of it. In principle, you could have both, right? You can have a rich
sense of sensory-motor interactions and symbolic machinery. And, you know, you can encode them in
both and encode the world in both ways. But proponents, many proponents of embedded cognition
take the strong position that not only you have it, but you only have it. So you don't need,
so all this business of structured representations, the computational theory of mine is completely
baloney. You don't need it. You can explain everything in terms of these sensory-motor
interactions. And when stated in this way, I think this is an empirical claim that, again,
you can test. So as we said before, if your understanding of phonology was entirely dependent
on the motor system, then breaking the motor system, disrupting it, say by TMS, or to have
disrupted your understanding of language. And it doesn't look like it's the case. Only it doesn't
completely eliminate your understanding of phonology, which is an area that should be
very strongly dependent on the motor system. So I'm not arguing against the motor theory.
And in fact, there are certainly other aspects, low-level aspects of speech perception,
such as how do you tell Bach from Pa, where there's very strong evidence that you rely on
embodiment. So I think I jump to this notion of motor simulation.
Part of what this embodied cognition theory is saying is that not only what you know consists
of these sensory and motor interactions, but in order for you to conceive of a notion,
you need to simulate what it would be for you to act on this in a particular way. So for me to
think of battle, I need to simulate what it would be for me from my hand to grab the battle and how
it would feel and so forth. And this is an empirical claim. So you can see whether, so as I started
saying, sorry, at the low levels of cognition, there is evidence that indeed such simulations
take place. So what we have found and many other people have found is that when you hear the sound
Ba, you enact the lip motor area of the brain that control the lips. And therefore, if you're going
to disrupt it, you're going to selectively impair your ability to say, perceive the sound Ba and not
the sound Ta, which involves the tongue. So evidence like that suggests that, yes, there is
embodiment and there is motor simulation just as this view predicts. So the view is not incorrect
categorically. What seems to me incorrect is the strong claim that this is sufficient to get
language off the ground at all levels. And then if we, so how then, how do you propose then that
these, both of these can kind of, let's say, you said, yes, logically, they could coexist.
But what would be an example when you say that embodied cognition on its own can't explain how
languages form? So the example that I gave you came from this case of syllable structure. So
we asked, why do you prefer a blog to a blog across languages, which does seem to be the case.
In fact, it's not just these two structures. There is a whole hierarchy there that certain
syllables are better than others and those are better than others and so forth. So it's a complex
hierarchy there. And the question is, is it that because the good guys are easy to say,
and the bad guys are hard to say. And embodied cognition predicts that that should matter even
if the task at hand is just to listen. So even if all I'm asking you is listen to blah, tell me if
it has one syllable or two. You're not supposed to say anything. And yet, according to embodied
cognition, for you to just hear it, you need to simulate what it would be for you to say it.
So if this thing is presumably easy to say, you should be accurate. If it's hard to say,
it's you should be less accurate. But critically, this ability to say, to literally control the
motor program of, in this case, you lips is going to be causal, play a causal role in your ability
to perceive it such that if you can do that, if you can move your lips, you should not be able
to perceive it properly, to hear it properly. So perceiving depend on acting, perceiving
and perception and action are intimately linked together. And that predicts that if we would not
enable you, if we disable the motor system, then perception of language structure ought to be
impaired. So if language structure is all about this simulation and how easy it is to compute,
then if there's no simulation, you shouldn't care about language structure. You should know
no evidence that you are sensitive to that. And that's not at all what we found.
I see. And that's where you would say, okay, there's some kind of, let's call it UG or abstract
knowledge that does still allow us to. So abstraction and UG are not synonyms. From this,
all you can conclude is whatever you know is not just the result of motor simulation,
whether or not it's universal is a separate question that we have explored elsewhere.
But it tells you something about the role of abstraction, which is further strengthened
by the fact that in the second paper in this series that came last fall, if I remember,
what we did is simultaneously in the same participants looked at both how they respond to,
how they identify simple sounds like bah versus bah, so very low level properties versus how they
look at syllable structure. And what we found is, yes, the lip motor area, this motor simulation
business certainly plays a role in low level perception just everybody else thought. It's
specifically in the syllable hierarchy that we didn't find in language structure, namely,
that we didn't find a role. So that's the selectivity really suggests to us, whereas
rockers area did play a role. So this double dissociation as it's called technically suggests
to us that you might need both. Excellent. Yeah, you truly are a bona fide scientist,
Professor, because I tried to jump across and kind of conclude that the your experiment on
embodied cognition probably means we kind of, we need abstract knowledge too, but then you claim
that no, no, what that really says is that it falsifies the theory that all we need is abstract,
sorry, embodied cognition. So I'm glad he clarified that. So just to clarify again,
what they the experiments show is that you need abstraction, they don't necessarily show you
need the neediness. I see, I see. I understood. Yeah. Okay, so again, I'm going to jump back to
like a vague more and more like a naive question. Clearly, you probably can see that I'm still a
neophyte. I'm still getting my hang around this field. But great question so far. Oh, thank you
very much. I appreciate it. But I guess this is, I don't even know whether this is an unfair
question to ask, because this is pretty much a question we've been trying to answer since
time immemorial really. What is unique about human language?
We don't know for sure. Again, like everything else, it's an empirical question, but we have some
clues. So people so so I think we need to distinguish between two questions.
Is this a definition to the notion of natural language? So is natural language
a kind in the sense that there is something that defines all languages? So English and French and
Swahili and Mandarin, is there something that's common to all of them? And the second is, is it
unique to them? So is it only defining these languages and not other systems?
Right, so that there are different questions at hand. You can look for those characteristics at
two levels. One is to ask, are there some, as the linguist Charles Hockett said, are there some
design principles that are shared across all languages? And you can then look at more intricate
aspects of language structure. And that's really what Universal Grammar is asking. This is really
a question of, is there something that defines human languages as such, because they're all
molded by the same cookie cutter, so to speak, but the same by Universal Grammar.
We talked about Universal Grammar, and I see some evidence for the possibility that maybe it plays
a role, although, as we had discussed, this is only open to discussion and debate in the field.
With respect to design properties, so the linguist Hockett came with all these design
principles of language, and the fact that all languages have meaning, and they talk about
things that are not here and now, and so forth, but many of those things are also shared with other
systems of non-human animals, for instance. There is one component, though, that seems to be
one design principle that seems to be unique to language, and that is this notion that is called
duality of patterning, and that is, so it's kind of the double helix of language, so to speak,
in the sense that language has patterns, so the whole point about language is that it's not just,
you don't just memorize and analyze whole, but rather there are patterns with structure,
but those patterns exist in two levels. The one level that everybody is aware of is syntax,
so if I say the dog, you know, dogs bite men, or men bite dogs, it gets you completely different
meaning, which means that, in this case, the syntactic organization matters, and if you change it,
you change meaning. So that is this area in which you take, to simplify, you take words,
which have meaning, and how you order them, how you pattern them makes a difference.
This is one level, but there is a second level, which is every such word is not an atom, but rather
it's a molecule that is further constructed from meaningless elements, so if I say dog,
you get the dog, one combination of those sounds, you get one meaning, if I say dog, you get a
different, completely different meaning, right? So the ordering, there is pattern, that's the
fact that when you change the ordering, you change the significance of this, of the sequence, means
that the patterning matters, but this is not a pattern of meaningful units, but rather of
meaning less units. In spoken language, those elements are sounds, are phonies, but you can
also have other types of meaningless elements in sign languages, so there are head movements,
hand shapes, and so forth, but they too are meaningless elements. So it turns out that
every human language has this trick, every human language has these two levels of patterning, and
I'm not aware of any exception to this rule. We are not aware of any system of animal communication
that has this trick, so animals can communicate in very complex ways, they even have rules,
so animal communication is great, but the design is different to ours, it's not a value statement
of which one is better and which one is worse, it's different. We have this double layer of
patterning and we are not, we are yet to find an animal that has that, so I think that's such
as something that's unique to human. But again, the field is very much divided as to whether there
is anything beyond that, in fact it defines language, that is unique to language and whether
it's specific to language and this debate is ongoing. Yeah, and of course, I'm assuming this opens
up many other avenues such as if you want to create an agent, let's say an AI agent, that engages in
language the way humans do, we need to understand first of all what our design principles are,
to even build something. Well, this is where we get to the Skinner-Chomsky debate, right, because
the AI, the current AI view, takes the view of let this all emerge, if you feed it enough data and
you have a very good learning algorithm, the system will figure it out and we don't know what is it
that it figures out. Something it figures out and this is really open to a big debate right now.
In fact, I heard Chomsky, which is unbelievable, he's in his I think late 90s and he's still doing
interviews and podcasts, truly. He was saying that with LLMs, that yes, marvelous engineering
tools, but he disagrees with the kind of the notion that as you said, if you just keep feeding it more
data in like a black box kind of way, eventually we'll have some sort of AI, let's say an AI agent
that engages the language the way we do. I think his concern is what does it really tell you,
so it's a piece of engineering, but what kind of explanation does it give you about
what is the cause of every child speaking a language, so obviously children are not exposed
to this massive data, so what it's giving you is kind of, it's mimicking the ability of a child
to form sentences, but it's not clear that it's doing it in any way that is remotely
similar to what the child is doing and so doing this does not provide an explanation
of how human language actually works. I agree with this concern, so again, this is getting to
this notion of to what extent do we need to worry about what human beings bring with them
to the learning acquisition task as organisms, so to what extent do you need to look at the organism
as opposed to assuming it's all out there in the data, so the AI answer is it's mostly out there,
we need to just find a good way to milk it and Chomsky's approach was to start from the inside
and it remains in a huge debate to be determined. Yes, certainly and sometimes even a contentious
one, so the other bit is and what I love about the book is this is also in a way sort of like a
book on social psychology because it's a lot on what laypeople believe and in fact being a layperson
myself I kind of had this belief too for the longest time which is I always equated what we
call human language to reading and in the the blind story teller you state in page 203 if you
don't mind me reading it you say many people think of reading as a process of visual pattern
recognition for example being able to consistently register the contrast between symmetrical letters
such as D and B if that is the case then it stands to reason that when reading goes ory the
culprit is a visual deficit but but in reality visual patterns are just a means to an end which
is language, reading is a technology that gets you there, so professor if you could delineate what
the difference between reading and languages that that would be great please. So there are two
things we need to explain what is reading and how it differs from language yes so the true theory
what is the true science about and the second is what people think how this all works so there is
that scientific theory and there is the intuitive theory which happens to be in disagreement and
that's where we mess things up so um so there is a sense in which reading is very different from
language I often start my psychology of language classes by working really hard to
disabuse people of the notion that language and reading are the same thing they aren't
language is natural you take every child they will develop language if you don't expose them
to language they will grow one naturally even they're not exposed to a language they do it
naturally they don't need language lessons reading is not like that so most children if you don't
teach them how to read explicitly they will never read there are tons of societies that
are doing just well without reading and writing not so for language so language is
universal to all human societies reading is not so they're divorced in this sense for sure
nonetheless there is this interesting property of human brains that the neuroscientist Stanislaw
Dahan has pointed out which is when human brains come to invent a new system they don't
invent it completely an you but rather what they do is recycle existing systems that are innate
and kind of repurpose them for the new for this new purpose and the link between reading and language
exactly follows those lines so when you look at how reading systems are designed they could have been
completely divorced from language they could have been completely arbitrary but that's not the case
because the letters that we use for a system like a phobetic system like English correspond to
linguistic sounds for the most part even in writing systems as in Mandarin it's true that there are
visual origins of the symbols that they call they also have some banding component but eventually
what they stand up for is also phonological sounds they spend they they stand for syllables
so it turns out that when people come to invent language they kind of design it on the principles
of how language works you can think about it in terms of human brains when they start processing
language they start with the phonology and then so when you perceive speech that the first thing
that you get is the sound structure of language and from there you proceed to syntax and so forth
so it's like to go on the linguistic highway so to speak in the brain you need to start by having
some phonological code so if you're trying to hijack the same highway to create reading you
better start by doing by encoding phonology as well and that's how explain the correspondence
between how reading works and how language works reading as a system is taking the language or
hijacking a component of the language system and repurposing it for a new technology and that is why
all reading systems that we know encode some phonological units at some level it doesn't
necessarily need to be at the level of phonemes it could be syllables but there is also some
phonological component there is ton of research that shows that when you and I read well I'm not
an atheist speaker but when I read in my language and you read in your language even though we read
silently we will automatically extract all this phonological component as integral part of the
reading process so you think about reading as a visual affair it's something that happens only
in your eyes of course it begins with the eyes but it looks like it invariably goes through the
phonological system at some point or else reading does not work as it should so you must get some
aspects of the phonology of what you read how do we know that because if you get two words that have
the same phonology such as rose the flower and roses in two rows of you know chairs people confuse
them all the time even if you'll have ROZE which is not the word people will also confuse them
and using the proper experiments you can show that it's really the phonology that that confuses
them which shows that people have consulted this information or else they would not have
been confused so the point about showing how we stumble is to show how reading actually works
and the fact that it actually works is using phonology it's using this part of language
so that's the real theory of reading and we also know that when you know that the ability to perceive
sounds is so it's not just phonology but also speech when the ability to perceive speech sounds is
impaired this is a characteristic of dyslexia so people with dyslexia have problems with
perceiving speech sounds now that's not what lay people think so if you ask a lay person
you know johnny can't read here you know he's a six-year-old and he can't read what do you think
is wrong with him and invariably people tell you there is something that's wrong with their eyes
and if they think that there is something that's wrong with billy because of jimmy what are ratios
that if the problem is congenital which we know that's the case in dyslexia that it is a congenital
disorder people invariably think the problem can only be in the eyes it can't be the
abstract phonological thing and this arises from this intuition that people hold that what's
we hold innately so if you know that the problem is congenital that he was born with that then it
must be somewhere in their body the people don't think just genes they think like in the eyes in
the ears it can be something that is abstract that doesn't make sense that the ability to so what
dyslexia really is about is in part the mechanism that allow you to map letters to sound and which
is an abstract kind of cognitive mechanism and people have trouble recognizing that something
like that could possibly be involved or or or impaired innately so this is unfortunate because
it's first because people misunderstand what dyslexia is all about and and that's a problem because
if you think that you know if you have a child and you think that the only signal of dyslexia is
switching letters then you will find fail to identify and and help these children early as
they need to as you need to but indirectly it also tells you some something about how we think
about what is innate and what is inateness and and explain some of the other biases that
I've shown in this book that show how our misconception about what about how what what is innate
lead us to this crazy conclusion that what we know cannot possibly have an innate basis
yeah and of course this probably leads us to your twin principles the twin principles of
essentialism and dualism now I know you've spoken about this professor in many podcasts
but I still want to ask because it's a fascinating idea well to put it simply sorry you claim that
our blindness to human nature is rooted in human nature itself sorry I'm very bitter for cough
so firstly I'm wondering uh as in could you kind of you know like uh flesh out what that statement
means by the fact that that our blindness to human nature is sort of innate to it's it's sort of a
part of being human itself and then maybe from there develop the ideas of essentialism and dualism
sure so maybe let's start with with the background so upper so first the first thing to show is that
people are blind to human nature it is a thing which people may not necessarily accept because
um so many people so you know assume that when a child is born that newborns know nothing about
the world that they have no abstract concepts whatsoever that there is no possibility that
they would know for example what is an object or that they will have a notion of number
or they will have even a rudimentary notion of um good versus bad in in very basic form
and we know because we ask these questions and it turns out that it's not the case that people
simply think that nothing is innate so if you ask them well do newborns prefer happy faces to angry
faces um they'll tell you sure yeah of course they do that's actually wrong they don't so when the
experiments have been done there's no preferences for the happy face but when you ask them well will
a newborn infants understand that three sounds and three lights share something in common this
thing from say three and nine three seven three and nine lights and they'll look at you like what
and even though when you know you can explain how this can be done so you can these experiments
have been done in in fact and you can give people the exact description of how the experiment was
done and ask them to make a prediction so this is how we can study that and here here is how the
experiment was designed now tell us what will the infants do if they appreciate this fact and
they'll tell you there's no way that they they will do so and that is wrong because the experiments
have been done and newborn infants can appreciate abstract number in the sense as well as they have
a concept of object and so forth um so there is a problem here right because uh science tells us
that there is stuff that infants know and there are good reasons to think that this knowledge is
innate a because it's very difficult to explain how this can be uh uh learned from the experience
that's available to the infant in utero and second because you see it in other animals so in many of
these experiments there are parallel demonstrations in human and non-human animals say in chicks and
you find similar things and this evolutionary continuity gives you further um room to to believe
that this knowledge can be innate and yet we don't accept it right so when you ask lay people they
uh they cannot conceive of the possibility that knowledge can be innate they even kind of look
at you like this is really the very proposition seems to me less to them as as an oxymoron
so the question is why that's the case uh where this bias to innate knowledge comes from now
there can be many reasons that doesn't need to be a single answer so um but and and there have
been other proposals in the literature such as perhaps you have a lot of experience with learning
but yet you know you can learn also motor actions you can learn how to swim so why is it knowledge
specifically that you have trouble with um maybe it is you're worried about the social implications
right so if we're innately the way we are then if maybe we're different and that that's a concern
what it fails to explain is why is it knowledge specifically that that gets us exercise right
if it's we're worried that uh about social discrimination why does the notion of object
is a problem very hard to see what social relevance it has so here is my proposal
um the proposal is that this bias arises from two intuitive principles
you know that are based on innate principles so whether or not these two guys that i'll explain
are in fact innate or not is less clear but the roots certainly are so let me explain what
i'm talking about so there's one in each of the so the two kind of partners in crime and one is
called intuitive essentialism and the other is called intuitive dualism and there's lots of literature
that shows that each of them matters as we think intuitive essentialism governs how we think about
what's innate so when children think about what makes an animal look the way it does why does it
have a tail why does it have this color they're telling you there is something in insides the
animal that makes it what it is inside it body so that the notion is that there is this essence
that doesn't change it lives in your inside and it's in the body okay the problem is that people
will also think about knowledge that as if it's not in the body people think about the
knowledge as it's something that's in the mind as if the mind is ethereal and distinct from the
body so there are intuitive dualists this is completely under the hood it's not something
that it's not a doctrine they're not philosophers but even if you ask children beautiful work by
just say burying by other people who show that children think about the mind as a
ethereal distinct from the body and knowledge it lives in the mind not in the body here's the
problem right if you think about knowledge such as your understanding of number as it's not in the
body and if you think that everything that's innate must be in the body it follows that
knowledge cannot be innate because it's in the wrong place right here is the body here is the
mind there is my knowledge there is what's innate and you know that's in the wrong place it can't be
innate and this is how the bias we think arises so what I've told you so far is how our troubles
with the innateness arise from these intuitive principles but then where do these principles
come from right how to tell essentialism in both cases those are principles that are observed across
cultures even when what children for example believe is different from what they're adults so
the anthropologist Rita Stutte has done really beautiful work that shows that children in
Madagascar in a small community there they the adults talk about you know why is that a person
has something wrong with their leg well some their mother talked ill of some person and they cursed her
and that's how you know that's affected so this is this a very market view of not evolution but
basically you bodily traits are acquired through social transmission
so when you do the same experiments with children in this place they do show evidence that they
understand essence so they think that if you have two animals and one is the biological
offspring of the other what's true of the father will be true of the son rather than an adoptive
and it won't get what it gets its biology from the biological parent not from an adopting parent
so that's a just to us so essentialism is not something that's innate in the sense that you'd
see it in in in very young infants although it has some roots very early on but it seems to do
something that we just develop naturally for whatever reason you see the same for with dualism
extremely prevalent across cultures believing afterlife and the supernatural and and of course
religion and all this stuff you find it very very broadly across cultures even in cultures that do
not tend to speak about those things openly why that's the case was never clear a problem has
long suggested the the psychologist problem has suggested that maybe intuitive dualism
arises from core knowledge so what is core knowledge core knowledge are those innate systems
that infants are born with and two of those systems are critical here and one system guides
how we think about people and another guides how we think about objects and these two systems are
in contrast with each other and because of this contrast that's what leads to dualism
so the idea is that so so basically the way it works is you think about
objects behave what makes the object don't move on their own they can only move if there is a
physical contact between objects people can move on their own because of what they think what's
because of what they what's in their mind and there's obviously a tension between these two ideas
and recognizing this tension a child might decide the mind what makes a person behave
is not bad embedded it's not part of the body because you don't it doesn't obey the laws of
physics that other objects do and that's how you become a dualist in recent work in my lab we tested
this theory and what we found is that the the logic was very simple we reasoned that if dualism
really has its root if in these core knowledge systems that are innate then if you find a group
of individuals in which one of the system is impaired then that should have downstream effects
on their dualism and far the more on their ability to accept the innateness and that's exactly what
we found so in one study we looked at people with autism who are famously
ones that have difficulties reasoning about the minds of others so the people system is weaker
and indeed we found that they are kind of released from the curse so to speak so they are less dualist
than neurotypicals as you would predict and they also are less biased against innateness
also as you would predict in another study we looked at males versus females so males also
tend to be lower on the people system than females and we found the same they too
were less cursed by dualism and less also cursed by this rejection of innate knowledge
so that suggests to us that dualism itself so now I'm talking just about dualism may not be
specifically innate there may not be any selective advantage of you being a dualist directly
but maybe the roots of dualism the constellation of our core systems is such that they lead you
towards dualism and that's how they all this series of unfortunate events arises
certainly I don't know if you've written about this or worked on this in some other areas but
would you say again a bit of a speculative question that there are certain evolutionary
advantages to having these twin principles of being essentialists and dualists as in I don't
want to just say that they're arbitrarily kind of in our nature so to speak but rather do you think
there are any okay as I said there's a reason evolutionary speaking that we do have this kind
of co-knowledge so the core knowledge has advantages for sure so there is definitely
core knowledge to understanding what an object is you want a chick to go after its mother not
after you know you want to recognize it as an entity her body as an entity and having
understanding of the minds of others is definitely advantage so you don't need to assume that dualism
has an advantage it's not to assume that it's engines the two engines that make you a dualist
are innate you don't need to assume that dualism is okay you get it for free so to speak
in recent work I'm actually exploring the possibility that dualism might do some good
but until I know about it I don't want to talk about it so talk to me in a year or so and I would
love to I would love to follow up on that and on the note again of dualism and essentialism
one of again one of my favorite favorite chapters from the book which is your chapter on neuroscience
what is irrational love affair with neuroscience it's and I think this is in chapter 11 where you
say insane about the brain and interestingly just a bit of a funny anecdote in the podcasting world
currently the the the most listened to podcast is in fact a podcast by a neuroscientist
so Andrew Huberman so it's people you are absolutely right that people have this
as you said irrational love affair with neuroscience so yeah from this lens a lens of
essentialism and dualism can I kind of explain as to why lay people are insane about the brain
yeah so I think one clue comes from the fact that I don't think that people care so much about the
details about how the brain does it specifically as much as the fact that it does it so I think what
kind of every time people are kind of marveling at is the fact that the life of the mind has a basis
in the brain which should have been obvious right what what else do you expect right science tells us
that thinking is a physical affair that affects you know physical processes in the brain so of
course think you know that then of course thinking is going to show up in the brain so
what the technical literature in neuroscience is to show exactly what happens and how the brain
gives us to thinking which for the most part we don't understand so we don't understand say
anything about the computational theory of or for the most we understand very little about the
computational theory of mind and how it's actually implemented in the brain but for people that's not
what they care about so when they hear this it's really like oh it's actually in the brain that
it's that that's the news for them which is very strange indeed um if you're a dualist then that
would be big news for you because you know that that in fact if you're a dualist you have troubles
understanding how is it that um the mind can actually affect behavior so if you think about
you know I want this battle and this wish that this this your people theory tells you it's in
your mind causes my very material hand to grab the battle and how is it possible how can mind
command matter this is something that was a problem for the carts and we we did the cart and we did
some research that suggests that it's even a problem for lay people when lay people think
about such interactions it's very they have kind of a dissonance this notion that the mind can
command the body when you look at that carefully and neuroscience solves this problem because it's
telling you listen it's not the mind that's doing the you know the lifting it's the brain that
commands the hand so body interacts with body and um you know basically the problem is solved
um far the more if you're an essentialist and you believe that what's innate is in the body
and how you see it's the body that causes that's the cause of my behavior and then you're beginning
to think well maybe this is something that's kind of telling us something that's very deep in me it's
something about my essence it's something that I'm born with so if I have depression and you
detect it in my brain so all of a sudden oh there must be something that runs in the family and you
better not marry this person and and you know and and you would discriminate against them
and it's all baloney because you know the fact that something manifests in the brain tells you
nothing about whether it's innate or not and yet what we have found is that when you give people
this information they jump to the horrible conclusion that this trait depression for
instance is more likely to be innate um and and that and and they show more stigma so that's
very serious problem so dualism makes you super curious about uh the brain because it solves
the mind body dissonance um if you're an essentialist you look at the brain as providing
further evidence about what's innate and therefore speaking up to to your deep deep essence
what makes you who you are and and both of them are based on on misconceptions yeah interestingly
I wrote a funny uh rather funny essay uh even Descartes was trying to he was he was wrestling
with this problem and then he theorized that in our brain we have this thing called the pineal
gland or something and that's what gives our abstract mind to manifest in the material world and
and so not only a great philosopher like Descartes but as you said even lay people struggle with
this question uh just just I'm a bit cognizant of the time professor but a quick tangential point
tangential question in fact it's on the idea of emotions uh and and in in one part of the book
you say that this idea that innate computational mechanisms are alchemy um and I believe in fact
let me just read out the excerpt that's okay on page 168 you say that it is bad enough to assert
that emotions are computations claiming that these computations are innate goes way too far
but this is precisely what evolutionary psychology asserts and in doing so it challenges our co-beliefs
to the max not only does it claim that emotions are computations rather than bodily states it further
suggests that the mechanisms that affect this reck reckoning are innately specialized that there is
one innate program for shame another innate program for maternal love and so on so I guess my
question would be uh what what is the lay person's understanding of of emotions uh and then would be
what does at the moment the current science tells us or the truth let's say um so lay people
consider emotions very important for who they are they think of them as part of their essence
but of course they think that anything that's innate must be in the body so when we ask them
you know to predict whether certain emotions are innate what we found is that people think that
emotions that they consider to be um embodied that you can see them in the face so they think
they manifest in your stomach and so forth those are the emotions that are more likely to be innate
and you can find that's exactly what of course essentialism predicts and you can further show
this causal link such that if you give people information that a certain emotion is in the
body so if you say tell them you made a scan brain scan and you can detect it in the body
they jump to the conclusion that this emotion is innate so people think that
um again link innateness to to um being in the body um and as we said people don't think that
thinking generally what you know cannot possibly be innate um so you because of this you think
about emotions as bodily states rather than as um cognitions as way of thinking um
there it's interesting though that it's interesting when you look at the history of the field and
you see how these debates are are running that um there's the question of whether emotions are innate
is is very very controversial and most of this literature about whether emotions are innate
really looks at the question of whether emotions show up mostly in the face also in the voice but
mostly in the face and then there is a huge debate between those that say that universally
facial emotions that that facial emotions are universal and in those that are not and um
I'm just sitting I mean that's not my field I'm reading this and I see that the results are very
mixed and then there there's evidence to support both sides but you wonder why people
are asking this question in the first place so why assume that emotions are just facial expressions
to start with from a methodological perspective I could understand why people started looking at
that this way because you know that's an easy way to look at you know people in small scale societies
and to um look at their emotional uh understanding but it shouldn't it there's no reason to assume
that it must be this way there's no in fact you know there might be an evolutionary advantage
for not revealing your emotional expressions and then to be you know to being a poker player
so notion that if if it's innate it must show in in the face seems like like why make this
assumptions in the first place um I I don't know you know there might be as I pointed out
why scientists think the way they do it's hard to tell but um one wonders whether this resistance
that there is to this notion that emotions or computations might come from from this same
empiricist bias and that's exactly what evolutionary psychologists claim right so if
you know um there are there's research that ask why what is the basis of shame and the answer is
it's not necessarily that it's a certain facial expression but rather it's a computation that is
designed to uh uh protect you from social devaluation so the idea is that uh you want to keep your
good standing in society and if there is a danger of it being devaluated because somebody
observed you doing something awful that will cost you you don't want that to happen and
shame protects you from this uh from uh it's kind of an internal signal to to attend to this problem
that makes predictions about what circumstances should elicit shame and when evolutionary
scientists uh have looked at this question they found support for this idea across cultures so
for example if you do something something awful happens to you if you do something shameful
if other people watch it then uh your shame you predict the same response to be more serious
and which is exactly what this theory predicts um so in the segment you've read I tried to answer
the question of why people do not uh think about typically about emotions in this way and the answer
is that such computations do not intuitively seem like they could possibly be innate um because
people don't think that knowledge can be innate so um that that can explain the resistance position
this notion excellent um all right professor since we've only got a few moments left I would love to
get to the more speculative questions I don't want to miss out on that uh and I was glad to hear
that you said before we started recording that you in fact are in the process of publishing a
paper on and core layer uh or the question of consciousness it's published it's already published
excellent so it's uh and and it pertains to dualism and essentialism too right though the
work you've currently been doing yes to infect both of them yes excellent yeah so uh yeah just in
general uh what are your sort of intimations on the idea of core layer and then a bit more specifically
how would how does cognition differ from what philosophers call core layer or in fact does it
differ at all I'm not in a position really to to answer this question um people have uh a sense
of their uh uh conscious experiences um and they have some intuitions about what they are
and in the research that and I think that the big debate in the field is um how we do uh
uh what is consciousness um and and uh what is the its place in you know in reality in ontology
and um the work of the brilliant philosopher David Chalmers uh has long argued that uh
consciousness is distinct from the body so um for example you can think about other creatures
that will have your body but will not have the same conscious experiences as you have
and um debt to him I I'm not doing justice to his argument but basically what the conclusion
that he arrives at is the notion that um consciousness is not physical properties it is
distinct from the physical and this is not because you think about it this way it is this way for him
so he believes that this reflects how things are ontologically that in reality consciousness is
distinct from the physical but of course we just spent like um an hour and a half talking about
how we are intuitive dualist so one wonders is that really because consciousness is distinct
from the body or because it only seems distinct to the body in our human eyes and in many so
Chalmers gives several examples in which those things go together and it's really difficult
to tell which one is going on but in one of these examples which indeed concerns uh uh
qualia uh the the conscious experiences of say seeing a red rose um these properties dissociate
in a way that one can uh I don't know if we have time not to go into all the predictions but basically
this is a case where if you take dualism and essentialism together it will make you predict
that people should think about what it takes for you so what happens when you see a rose for the
first time if it really alters you in a significant way then it must be something that pertains to
your essence and where is your essence it's in your body so that would predict that the properties
the conscious experiences that are possibly transformative the ones that are really important
to you are bound to be those experiences that you can link to the body or else they can't
pretend to your essence they can't be transformative um as I read the Chalmers view
for him consciousness is distinct from the body so it should all experiences should be
separate from the body um and and it should not depend on how how how significant that is
is your experience should not depend on how embodied it is because it's not an embodied affair
but that's not what we found what we found was that when people are given those vignettes and
asked to make predictions about that what they believe is that if you're going to gain a significant
experience you're seeing a rose for the so one of these famous examples marrying the black and
white room marises a rose for the first time and we're asking people well is it significant for her
and to say sure it is and if you're going to run a brain scan is it going to show up in the brain
and tell you yes and which means they think about this conscious experience as part of the physical
world and in fact you know you can make various you know twists on that and the bottom line is
as you gain a conscious experience if you compare that an experience in which she just sees the
rose and she's not conscious of it and wanting which she sees it and it is conscious what's the
difference well being conscious is more significant it's also more likely to manifest in the body
I see I see so and the more likely it is to manifest in the body the more physical you see the
more the stronger is the experience which is not what you would expect right but if the original
explanation child was explanation of the black and white marrying the black and white room is
what she what you think the conscious experience is distinct from the body and somehow you're
privy to this factor else why we care about your intuitions about this case in the first place
so consciousness is different from the body and your and your privy to that and yes people
have intuitions about that but in their view you know consciousness is actually an embodied experience
so and furthermore in other research in another experiment of this series we found that the more
dualist they are the more likely the stronger their intuitions about Mary so there is very strong
evidence that suggests that the source of this of the of of what you gain in consciousness people
think about that conscious experience as something that is very physical very in very much in the
body in this paper explain exactly how dualism and essentialism conspired to give you this intuition
so how you can be both dualist but also essentialism can make you think about that transformative
experience of being in the body but I think it presents some challenge to this notion that
so you can explain everything that's going on in our into either you assume that the initial
assumption that we can have intuitions about consciousness is false this is one possibility
or if you do assume that we have intuitions about consciousness then what this suggests is the sort
that well at the very least what this suggested that the the reason why we see consciousness
the way we view we do comes from our internal biases there is no need to assume anything about
ontology here so of course I can't tell anything about what ontology is but the psychology of that
gives a very compelling story yeah but interestingly it's only a philosopher that would kind of
ontologize and try to maybe argue like a charm is this that consciousness is something separate from
the body yeah but it has been a very influential argument and one that neuroscientists have been
quite engaged with yeah uh what okay professor is it okay if you go about five minutes over time
or do you I just want to ask you I'm quite curious about this question given you're a cognitive
psychologist uh so psychoanalysis I've been fascinated by for a for a long time in fact but
more from a philosophical angle and in fact I got into it through philosophy and this the late
mario Rudy who was working in an English department in fact so it certainly isn't a science but just
as a cognitive scientist what are your intimations and views on the field of psychoanalysis
um I'm I'm not as educated as I would want to be um there are definitely some very
concrete empirical criticism of Freud that I think are very well placed um about the
falsifiability of his proposal and uh it's empirical adequacy and all that all this criticism
is very well placed but I think it was a genius I think he gave cognitive science two of its most
precious ideas um the first is the idea of the subconscious I mean I don't know the history
of ideas sufficiently to know whether we should really credit him for that but suddenly he got it
right this is certainly the core of everything everything that's interesting about cognition
generally in language specifically happens totally under the hood it's not something that
people capture and he had the stature to have this insight and I think this is very significant
and we owe him a debt of gratitude the other the debt of gratitude that I think is important and
people sometimes look at that this kind of um kind of the they take it against him and I don't
was this notion that thinking about the psyche in physicalist terms so he had this thermodynamic
notion of the psyche um and people say oh yeah you always apply the latest in science to study the
psyche but it is not trivial to think about the psyche as a physical system because we are dualist
so this is the farthest from us to think that one can explain psychological processes in physical
terms but this is exactly the basis of the computational theory of mind the notion that
the reason the thinking is a mechanical process that manipulates this form of representations
and this notion that you can think about the psyche as a physical system is brilliant
not something that's available to us intuitively at all so I think Freud had two very big ideas that
I again it's I leave it to somebody else to make the analysis of where these ideas came from and
how they stayed with us but for nothing else I think that these are really one of the most
important ideas that stay with us these days and the two should be very grateful for them
certainly I mean in line with this book you'd say that at least Freud could go against his human
nature and overcome the blindness to study the psyche as a physical assistant excellent
thank you for that professor Berwin I know that these are highly speculative questions but they
always do fascinate me uh well I'd love to ask what so sorry just one other thing the paper
that you mentioned when we were talking about uh qualia and consciousness what exactly was the
name of the paper it appeared uh in the journal open mind and the name of the paper I'm the author
on that and I should have should have known what is it called if I if I emailed you afterwards
and I can put it in the description down below for people to read I can tell you in a second
I felt look at my references and this one is called the heart problem of consciousness arises
from human psychology excellent I shall find it and put it in the description and it's an open
access so you can read it that is that is lovely yeah so uh professor what other projects are you
working on what other are there any books in the pipeline I'd love to hear give us a bit of a teaser
on what's next uh there's a project on dualism that's coming and and some of uh you know some of
the the obvious um problems of dualism but possibly also some of the um silver lining of
being a dualist and how you live a dualist life so yes how to live a dualist life but it's probably
going to be a self-help book by no I'm joking that's not the intention but yeah absolutely I'm
joking of course but nah thank you so much I'm grateful for your time professor this this means
a lot to me especially given hopefully next year I'll be doing my master's program and then I'm
certainly uh more excited than I could put it in words so thank you thank you so much
pleasure talking to you good luck on your master's I look forward to seeing what you do
