Jacob Bell is a philosopher and writer.
He holds a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy
from the American Public University
and is doing his masters of research in philosophy
at the University of Wales, Trinity St. David.
The working title for his dissertation
is a Phenomenological Analysis
of the Structures of Meaningfulness.
Jacob's primary academic interests
include phenomenology and existentialism.
So Jacob, that's like the formal definition
or the formal bio, let's say.
Would you want to give an introduction yourself, Mayne?
I'll give a less technical introduction and say,
I like thinking about weird things
and philosophy is the perfect discipline
that'll have me to do that.
But yeah, no, I don't have anything else to add.
A Bachelor of Weird Things, that sounds good.
Sounds very much like what we're all interested in, isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, so let's jump into it.
For starters, maybe let's get some definitions out of the way
to lay some groundwork.
So within your fields of interest,
some, let's say, terms would be philosophy of mind,
phenomenology and existentialism.
So maybe you could give us a bit of a elucidation
on what those terms are, how they interconnect
and correlate, but also how they are a part
of a broader philosophical framework or a school of thought.
Yeah, so philosophy of mind,
I guess I understand that as a branch of philosophy
that kind of investigates things like mind and consciousness,
which, I mean, to be honest, is a really bad way
of defining the topic, because you don't get any further
than the phrase itself.
So I guess to go into it a little bit further.
If anybody is familiar with philosophy,
they've probably heard of things like physicalism
and idealism and dualism.
Those are like some, I mean, those are metaphysical theories,
but they're prevalent and they're always being discussed
in philosophy of mind.
So you might find people in philosophy of mind working
on trying to discern whether the mind is a physical thing
or if it's a separate substance
or if maybe it's fundamental,
like maybe a panpsychist sort of take on it.
So those are like some of the more popular topics
that philosophers of mind are working in,
I guess, something maybe a little more specific than that.
You get to think about idea of the perception.
What is what I'm perceiving the real world?
There's a representation that kind of plays
into philosophy of mind and metaphysics more broadly,
which then feeds into ideas like,
is the world a mental construct or is it independent of us
and then you start to get into topics of realism.
And so it all kind of feeds back into each other,
but I think as far as contemporary philosophy goes
or philosophy of mind goes,
really what you're seeing,
or at least what I see 90% of the time
are people trying to struggle with where to place consciousness
as far as in a physical world, in a mental world,
in a dualistic world or as something fundamental.
So one thing I've learned recently being a neophyte
is that it seems that all the concepts of ideas
and philosophy, it never is arbitrary.
It doesn't just come sort of deos,
ex machina, I don't know where.
It does have an history.
And where would you sort of, again,
I propose philosophy of mind,
where would you, is there a starting point
where at one point in the history of human,
let's say, human knowledge,
people start getting interested in this topic,
or has it in some sense been the ultimate question,
time immemorial ever since the dawn of consciousness,
let's say?
Which question specifically you're referring to?
Let's talk about philosophy of mind for now.
Yeah, I mean, I think I came,
I don't know if you say I was gonna,
I wanna say pre-socratics,
but I think maybe shortly after the pre-socratics
with Plato,
because with the pre-socratics,
you see some pretty heavy metaphysical stuff going on,
but it's mostly like, is the world made up,
I mean, democratists with the very early atomic theory,
is everything Adam's been avoiding moving around,
or is everything water, is everything fire?
So you have this idea of like monism in the pre-socratics.
Sorry, maybe because that's the top,
that term is quite a loaded term.
So monism is the idea that,
well, actually I'll let you explain,
Jacob, please, if you could explain what monism is.
Tom, so the term just signifies the idea that everything is
one or everything's made out of one particular type.
There's no duality.
Yeah, and I guess that's just one way of putting it to you,
because I mean, I'm saying things are made out of one type
of stuff, so I'm kind of implying that we're talking
about substance-based,
philosophy, substance-based metaphysics,
where like the pre-socratics talking
about different types of material
that things might be made of.
And then, yeah, I guess that kind of leads
into a little bit of philosophy of mind
when you get to Plato and talking about the ideas
and talking about theory of forms and stuff like that.
And so, yeah, I guess philosophy of mind really came
about around the time of Plato.
I mean, I'm not a great historian of science,
so somebody might be able to correct me on that, but...
Oh, better than me, mate, better than me.
So that's something I've always wondered
where initially the idea came from,
or was it more like the Aristotelian way
where people instead of focusing on philosophy of mind,
humanity or human beings were more focused on
let's say the physical world,
the way a scientist would be.
How do things move, causality?
But I'm coming to realize, perhaps,
that it was the other way around,
even before people were interested in the physical world,
it was more on the world of mental constructs,
even things like ethics or metaphysics.
And it's, maybe we could get into, you know,
fewer, fewer writings that shift
where now it seems people are more physicalists
over, let's say, idealists
and why that change has taken place.
And then in your paper, where you talk about meaning,
sort of the ontology of meaning, one of your papers,
you kind of discuss what the, let's say,
the social consequences of that could be.
But anyway, I don't want to get too carried away.
Okay, now we get to the interesting stuff,
whether the fields that you're interested in,
and this is what really drew me to your work,
that's phenomenology and existentialism,
or the way you put it, weird stuff.
So could you please explain in the field of weird stuff,
what that is, what those two terms mean?
And I guess, look, anyone could Google
what phenomenology or existentialism is,
but maybe personal to you, how do you give it?
And maybe juxtapose it with some other schools of thought
in philosophy and science to explain it, please.
Sure, before I do dive into phenomenology,
I just want to place one little caveat
on what I was just saying with regards to philosophy in mind,
and saying that I was generally speaking
of Western philosophy.
I mean, if we start to look at Eastern philosophy,
I mean, we're going to be able to look back,
way before the pre-sacratic into philosophies
and different things like that to get certain ideas of,
I mean, they had some ideas of idealism
before I think any Westerners really did.
So we could look back in history much further
if we were looking to the East as well.
So I just wanted to make that point.
So I didn't seem ignorant to the other side of things there.
Of course, and I point well taken, point well taken.
Yeah, in fact, maybe now I need to kind of change
what I said before or add on to it,
because certainly in a lot of Eastern philosophy,
consciousness in the mind, let's say, was a big part of,
well, more than philosophical practices,
more like spiritual practices, isn't it?
But now we get to the, this is probably semantics,
like how do we discern spirituality and philosophy?
What's the difference?
But that perhaps the whole other conversation.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, sorry, go ahead.
I was going to say that'd be a big conversation
just in itself.
No, man.
I'm hoping to, in fact, speak to John Mavaki
because he seems like the perfect person
to discuss those nuances and subtleties
between all these terms.
Yeah, but saying that.
So yeah, sorry, existentialism and phenomenology.
So phenomenology, I'll give a very brief,
I guess like formal description of it.
I guess just trying to place it in history a little bit
because it's a relatively, I mean,
when we're talking about philosophy,
it's relatively new.
I mean, early 1900s, late 1800s is when Husserl,
Edmund Husserl was working on publishing
the first formal definition, the descriptions
of what he took phenomenology to be.
So he's considered the founder of phenomenology formally.
Anyway, you can find threads of it
throughout the history of philosophy.
But yeah, so he published in The Logical Investigations
and then I think like then 12 years later in Ideas,
kind of like almost like I got some guidelines
as to what phenomenology is or should be.
And very basically, it's the study of experience
as experience and that doesn't say up a lot,
but it's really about taking your first person perspective
and kind of applying some rigorous analysis
to your experience and trying to figure out
what certain things mean, trying to make sense of things
as you experience them, as opposed to kind of standing
outside of your experience or trying to put the experience
aside to get a more objective view of the world.
So it stands in direct contrast with things like empirical
science.
I mean, you're not going to find an awful lot
of phenomenology there, except in neuroscience.
And we can talk about that later.
I actually made a note because I want to talk about that
a little bit.
Because of phenomenology, we're taking into consideration
our feelings and our moods and our personal values
and things like that as ways of understanding the world,
you could say, whereas as guides to understanding the world.
I mean, just for example, if we're talking about meaning,
which I'm sure we will get around to it later,
but I'll just make a comment here about it.
I mean, if we're talking about meaning in life,
if you take an objective, try to take a scientific
objective approach to that, you're not really going to be
able to say what's meaningful to you because you're going
to be kind of prevented from considering your interests
and your values and some of the things that you're passionate
about, the things that you're interested in in life,
the way you feel about things.
And if you take all of that out of consideration,
I don't know how you would calculate a meaning in life.
Yeah, of course.
So maybe one example I enjoy, I read somewhere,
is to kind of maybe use like an analogy.
It probably, I probably wouldn't even call this an analogy
because it's, in fact, what a phenomenologist would do.
So as a phenomenologist, if I give you a,
and I'm sorry to kind of put you on the spot here,
but as a phenomenologist, if I give you a cup of coffee,
what would you do?
If you're told, let's say by Husserl himself,
a guy comes back from the dead, from Resorex
and tells you that, study this cup of coffee
as a phenomenologist, how would you do that?
What would your process be?
Well, so I guess it depends on whose phenomenology we're using.
So after Husserl-
Spoken like a true philosopher.
After Husserl, you know, kind of formally came out
with the idea and it started getting,
I mean, he got a lot of interest right away.
I mean, it was a really,
it's for such a new and kind of
divergent approach to doing philosophy.
It gained a lot of interest really quickly,
but pretty much everybody who took over the approach
took it over in their own way.
And I don't think we could really say
that anybody had the same sort of phenomenological method.
I mean, Husserl had very specific techniques
that he wanted that he thought we should apply
while we're doing phenomenology, like the echocache,
which is just to like suspend or bracket
what he calls the natural attitude.
And that's just to say like the kind of habitual way
in which we interpret our experience.
He said, you know, let's just like put those aside.
Let's ignore that sort of stuff
and try to just pay attention to the experience
as we're experiencing it and describe it as such.
Now, you get it, right out following that,
you get Meryl Lopanti, a French phenomenologist,
saying, you know, in his practice,
the phenomenology of perception.
One of the most important things we learned
about the phenomenological reduction
who Husserl described it is that
a full reduction is impossible
because we can never get rid of
all of our interpretive strategies.
If we did, we wouldn't be able to make sense
or describe our experience at all.
And he's not the only one that kind of criticized that.
I mean, Heidegger did to a much greater degree.
Heidegger has a very specific concept of phenomenology,
not necessarily what you think phenomenology should study,
but kind of the approach.
He thinks that the approach should be a specific way.
Like we're looking to derive specific truths
about the world and the phenomenon in the world
when we're using phenomenology.
And so he's there, everybody, I mean,
I guess all the phenomenologists are limiting
in their views on what phenomenology should do.
But I do wanna say something about the way
in which Heidegger defines phenomenology
because I think it's a very brilliant description of it.
And so Heidegger, when he's describing phenomenology
and being in time, but also in the lecture course,
given a few years before he's published being in time,
and that lecture course is called
the History of the Concept of Time.
Sorry, just to clarify.
So being in time is Heidegger's Macdemopus, right?
We should probably put that out.
Sorry, I didn't interrupt you, Jacob, keep going, yeah.
No, you're good.
Yeah, being in time is what he's most famous for.
Even though, I mean, he wrote a lot.
He has a lot of books, he has a lot of papers.
His later work differs a little bit from his early work,
but there's also a dispute as to how real the turn is.
The later Heidegger and the early Heidegger, yeah.
Yeah, and I'm not really knowledgeable enough
to comment on how different those two things are.
I'm kind of working my way chronologically
through this moment's work.
But yeah, in being in time,
and his earlier lecture course,
he describes phenomenology by going back to the ways
in which the Greeks use the term phenomenon in logos.
So he's kind of taking apart the term phenomenology
and separating it and looking
to the Greek definitions of this.
And in the book, Heidegger says that, you know,
that the Greeks understood the term phenomenon
as this is gonna sound very obscure and esoteric,
but I'm gonna give hopefully an easier
to understand description afterward.
But he says, phenomenon is that which shows itself
in itself, which is a manifest.
Typical Heidegger.
Yeah, and the term for the Greeks also carried connotation
of like bringing something to light and illuminating.
And then the logos, Heidegger explains,
the Greeks understood by the logos,
something like discoursing,
but not just like, not just dial fuck
and not just a verbal utterance,
but it's more of a discursive communication
that lets something be seen.
And so you could think of the logos as words,
whether utter or written down or what have you,
that point to something, they let something be seen.
It's kind of, it's bringing something to light,
it's bringing the phenomenon to light.
And so we wanna understand this in a less obscure
and difficult way than Heidegger likes to put things.
We can say something like, the logos points
to the phenomenon in such a way
that the phenomenon becomes un-concealed
or the logos allows the phenomenon to come into view
by looking and out of experience
in such a way that it can be seen.
And so really it's almost like your words should connect
with something that can be pointed out in experience
or can be shown in experience.
And so we're not, and he contrasts this
with the idea of free-floating concepts and words and ideas.
And by that, he just means something like,
we don't wanna abstract away so much from experience
that we're just playing language games.
We want our words to be able to meet up with experience
in such a way that if I say something,
so like in some of my papers about meaning
what I'm trying to do,
that I'm trying to point to experience,
I'm trying to point to particular experiences
and particular moments in particular experiences
where maybe someone might find meaning.
So I'm not, I'm just trying to bring something into view
using words and concepts.
I'm glad you said that, Jacob,
because in one of your papers, I forget which one,
you've sort of touched on this,
but a question that came to mind was,
so from the definition you gave,
definition of phenomenology,
how does that differ from, let's say,
the empiricist tradition or the empiricist approach,
which tends to be quite popular these days,
especially in the world of artificial intelligence,
where we think that our epistemology or our knowledge
or our truths of the world is revealed
purely based on empiricism,
which is experiencing measuring things
and that in some sense, the mind is a blank canvas
and the world just gives us information and input.
So from the empirical approach,
how does phenomenology differ?
So phenomenology is gonna differ in the sense that,
okay, so if we think about the empirical approach,
specifically as it pertains to the sciences,
we're trying to get a collection of experiences
that kind of compile and point toward the same
sort of thing in experience.
Now, the major difference I guess is going to be
what it is we're trying to discern in empirical science
as opposed to something like Heidegger's phenomenology
or the way that I just described phenomenology.
With a scientific and empirical approach,
we're usually looking at objects
and we're trying to figure out
what sort of properties these objects have.
And so, I mean, I guess physics or chemistry
is a great example of that.
And we're trying to see maybe what house to entities
interact with each other.
And we're going to perform experiments to do that
and we're gonna try to replicate the experiments.
And we're gonna try to not let our first person
perspective influence exactly what we're investigating.
So, phenomenology is gonna differ from that.
In that we're not collecting data
and we're not measuring stuff.
We're experiencing, we're trying to pay attention
to the experience as it's experienced.
So, you're not gonna measure your experience of meaning,
say you're going to more so,
if you're doing a phenomenology
and you're trying to discern maybe what you find meaningful,
you're going to more so reflect on maybe
the way that you feel
when you were participating in a certain activity.
And from there, you might also start to look
at the structures of the experience,
more so than just the feeling of the experience,
which might be what's involved in this activity
or what's involved in this experience.
What are the things that are essential
to the experience without which I could no longer say
that it was a meaningful experience.
Those are the sorts of things
that sort of questions phenomenology is going to ask
and specifically high digger
because specifically for high digger,
he's wanting to discern the a priori structures
of existence and experience,
which is just to say a priori meaning
always already there.
Like what's necessary?
What are the, what structures are necessary
for this to exist
or for me to have this particular experience?
Yeah, I guess I'll leave it at that for now
because otherwise I'm going to get into a really deep,
or you can ask a clarifying question
because otherwise I'm just going to go on at the end.
No, that was perfect, mate.
I think in many ways you lead me to my next question.
I mean, I thought we were going to discuss
existentialism too because obviously it's kind of
like the precursor or not the precursor,
but it's highly correlated to phenomenology.
But perhaps since we're already on this topic,
in some sense, I kind of regret even asking that question
because I'm coming to realize that maybe it's not fair
to ask questions such as, oh, what's the difference
or what's the stark difference
between phenomenology and science?
Because if you think of a field like let's say psychology
or cognitive science,
those fields have had a massive influence
by thinkers like Merleau Ponty
or Heidegger by phenomenologists.
So, well, the question I was going to ask is,
how does phenomenology, and I was also going to say
existentialism, but we didn't get to that still,
but let's just say, how does phenomenology differ
from a more scientific approach?
But maybe to make things even a bit more interesting,
let's talk about, in fact, how does it relate
to fields like psychology and cognitive science
where in the scientific approach,
what we always try and do is remove the subject,
so remove the subjective experience.
But clearly, there are some fields even within science,
but you can't do that.
You can't remove the subject
from cognitive science or psychology.
So maybe to make things a bit more interesting,
how do they correlate, how do they connect
to phenomenology, those fields I mentioned?
Sure, sure.
So I want to comment on cognitive science
just a little bit first, and then I want to maybe dive
into a little bit of neuroscience
and how phenomenology might be related,
because I actually presented a paper last year
at a philosophy conference hosted by a university
in the Czech Republic on this topic
of phenomenology neuroscience.
But before I get to that, you know,
something that I really appreciate about cognitive science
is that it really embraces the subjective experience.
And like you said, you can't remove that
from cognitive science, cognitive science necessarily.
And I mean, so they're, I think the most prevailing approach
in cognitive science right now is 4E cognitive science,
and that's just the 440s.
I always forget one, but it stands for embeddedness
and embodied, inactive, and I, like I said,
I always forget the fourth one.
I don't know why, but...
I'll leave a little caption on whatever,
just too far, if it was all good, yeah.
Yeah, have somebody place in the comment where I'm from.
Kind of take the video, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's fine.
But a lot of the, so a lot of those ideas really,
I mean, I believe have an inception in phenomenology.
I mean, they're, you know, especially in Heidegger,
with Heidegger's idea of being in the world,
you know, which we'll get to.
But it's just this idea that there's a more holistic structure
to the world and the existence
that we need to take into consideration
when we're trying to understand things about the world
and trying to understand things about ourselves
and maybe the way in which we interact with the environment.
And so, I think phenomenology played at least the role
in trying and getting a lot of those ideas
going for cognitive science.
Now, as far as neuroscience goes,
Anil Seth, I'm sure you've heard of Anil Seth.
Yes, I have, yeah.
He recently wrote a quite a popular science book
right on the brain.
And so he does a lot of work trying to map
the brain correlates of certain experiences.
So he's trying to see like what's going on in the brain
at a given time when someone's having a particular experience.
And he's trying to build that map out.
And you can't build that map
if you don't have good phenomenology.
Because if you think, just think about it,
if we think about it simply,
as far as, okay, let's say brain region X lights up
when I have experience Y.
And let's say we can gather all the data we want
about the brain structure
and we can reproduce it and map it as much as we want.
But if we don't have a good description of the experience,
we're not gonna know what we're mapping
this brain activity to.
And so in order to have good correlative mapping,
we have to have good phenomenology.
We have to have like a good description of the experience.
And we have to have people, the participants in the study
that they're studying,
trying to get this correlative mapping going.
They have to be familiar with the experience,
not only as it is experienced,
but they have to understand what it is
that the neuroscientists are trying to map.
Like what experience do you want me to have?
So then I can tell you what I'm having
and so you can mark down what's going on in my brain
when I'm having that experience.
And so you have to have a whole lot of phenomenology going on.
Not only the participant being able to recognize the experience
and being able to communicate that to the researchers,
but the researchers also have to have
a pretty rich phenomenological description
of what it is they want their participants to experience.
And that way they know precisely when the experience has started
because I mean, there might be like a very important,
as far as neuroscience,
so there might be a very important spike
in a particular brain region
that they are trying to map to a very specific,
maybe milliseconds of an experience.
And if you don't get that right,
it's just not going to be correct.
Your description is going to be wrong
and your correlative mapping isn't going to mean anything
because you might have one side of it,
or you're going to be missing the other side of it.
But also Jacob, what makes phenomenology even beyond, let's say,
that because see what we are talking about here,
it's how can I put this?
So, oh, by the way, so the book Anil said,
the person you were talking about, it's called Being You.
So it's a very, I think it's a neuroscientific approach
to experience, but what that got me thinking
was as you were describing things,
we're thinking of very localized experiences.
So like, here's this pen, it's a black pen.
I'm looking at it.
What's my, to use a term,
philosophers use qualia, let's say,
and which parts of my brain likes it.
But when it comes to phenomenology, of course,
we even go beyond that.
We even go to what you write a lot about,
which is meaning and kind of the questions
that truly make us human in that sense, right?
So, and is that where we could maybe connect that
to fields such as psychology?
So I think, I mean, yeah, we could connect to there,
but I think we could still even bring it back
to neuroscience in the sense of,
so I know there was some research done,
trying to map brain activity and experiences of happiness.
And this particular study didn't even have a description
of what a happy experience might be as experienced.
And so, that was one of the experiments
that I pointed to in my paper where I said,
I mean, they admit that one of the more difficult parts
of what they were trying to do
is the phenomenal, a lot of logical aspect of it.
But at the end of the day, it's like,
I mean, it doesn't really,
that research can't really mean anything
until you have a good description
of what a happy experience is.
And it's very difficult to do
because obviously not everything's gonna make everybody happy.
We're gonna have different,
not necessarily definitions of what happiness is,
although we might have that too,
but different experiences are gonna make me happy
and different experiences are gonna make you happy.
And that gets even more complicated
when we start talking about meaning.
But another good example of this in neuroscience
is the flow experience.
So they're trying to kind of map out
what's going on in the brain
when somebody has an experience of flow.
And not only is flow,
I wouldn't say it's a rare experience
for a lot of people,
but it's also not an everyday sort of experience for people.
And so it can be a little elusive.
And again, so I think when we're talking
about something like that,
we're trying to do some neuroscientific research
about flow and the flow experience,
we need to have good phenomenology
and we need to have good communication
around the experience in order,
I guess really in order to have good research
and to be able to expand our knowledge
of what it is that's going on when we're in flow.
And I'm very critical of science for a lot of reasons,
but I also think it's,
I mean, we need science,
I'm not a science denier of any sort.
And I love seeing good research around these topics.
It's just unfortunate that there's a lot of the research
to just poor research
because they kind of shit on philosophy a lot.
And so I think it's philosophical discipline.
I think from what I read in one of your papers,
you've even used this term,
it seems like you're critical of scientism, isn't it?
It's not science per se,
where scientism is this, like it's an ontology.
The part replaces the whole.
And in fact, I was watching this interview,
sorry, I'm going off on a tangent here,
but that's okay, it's at the conversation.
I was watching an interview and Slavoj Zizek said that,
that the modern problem is,
the ultimate questions,
do we have free will, what is consciousness?
Even questions pertaining to meaning,
we've localized those questions to the scientific domain
where historically,
those things were normally answered by philosophers
and philosophers have the ability
to pull it from different disciplines
and kind of connect them all together,
where science, it's affected by what science is,
doesn't allow that.
So it seems that scientism is the problem.
And okay, I'm thinking how are we gonna do this?
So I wanna get to,
because I think this perfectly connects to your,
not your paper, but the article you wrote on Epoch Magazine,
which was the structure of meaning and experience,
rediscovering that which has been lost, that article.
But we didn't discuss existentialism yet.
So, since we're on the topic of meaning,
maybe we could give like a bit of a prelude
to what existentialism is
and how that pertains to meaning
and then we'll get to your article,
because if not, I feel like we're gonna get carried away.
I also have a few more questions about Heidegger,
but I certainly wanna discuss what you've written.
So Jacob, like maybe we'll start with existentialism
and then we'll move on to your article, if that's all right.
So I understand existentialism as a philosophical study
of the human condition and all of its guts and glory,
because I say that because a lot of existentialism
is around kind of gutsy topics like death
and it can seem kind of dark,
especially when we're talking about things
like anxiety and dread, but it's really,
it's just an attempt to try to understand
the human condition and all of its facets.
I mean, so we have the human as the essential subject
and not just like the biological human
or the physical human, but more than that,
we have the experiencing human.
And so, I mean, we can see already
how it can connect up with phenomenology nicely.
But I mean, the existentialists are gonna ponder questions,
like what does it mean to live and die?
What should I be doing with my life?
Should I act responsibly?
Do I have, what kind of freedom do I have?
Do I have any freedom?
What does death mean?
Is there meaning in life?
Is everything just meaningless?
So, I guess very human questions
that most of us have probably thought about at some point.
And it's approached in a rigorous manner, though.
So I guess that's what makes it,
I feel like thinking about these things in a loose manner.
So it's approaching these very human clashes
in a more rigorous manner.
Yeah, what's interesting is we've got colloquial terms
such as existential dread or existential crisis.
It seems like those terms wouldn't even exist
if not for the existentialists themselves
writing about these topics.
And even with an existentialism,
it's starting from caricature to nature
to the French existentialist or, of course, Heidegger,
which is why, you know,
what probably perhaps what makes philosophy interesting,
you can never say this is what existentialism is, right?
It's the thinkers themselves don't agree with each other.
And in fact, people such as Camus,
who we would think as an existentialist,
rejected that term.
But I think you put it best check.
The way I think about it is that
it's the ultimate human questions,
leaving aside obstruous detached metaphysics
and coming back to our human experience.
And that, speaking about experience,
that leads us to your article.
So I'll reread the title,
The Structure of Meaning and Experience.
By the way, not to fatter you too much,
you are a brilliant writer, mate.
I aspire to write like you one day,
especially on such obstruous topics.
It's well written, it's well written.
Thank you.
The structure of meaning experience,
we discovering that which has been lost.
So obviously I read the article,
but for let's say for anyone who hasn't read it,
maybe give a bit of a summary
of what you were trying to cover
and convey in this article.
Obviously all the links down below the description.
And this one's on Epoch Magazine.
Yeah, so I will preface what I'm going to say
with the very honest answer that,
honest comments that I'm a better writer
than a speaker.
So if you're listening to this
and I sound like I'm all over the place,
I would ask if you read some of my papers and articles,
it might make more sense.
I could be all over the place when I talk.
Okay, so anyway, so in that article,
you know, it was one of the first articles,
I guess not one of the first,
but one of the first that I published
about meaning and meaningfulness.
And I was really trying to work out in that article,
kind of what my own perspective was on it
and how I wanted to communicate
what I was thinking about meaning.
And so I really liked that article for that reason
because I think it's almost like a foundational piece
of writing that shows me the direction that I need to go
and to try to illuminate these ideas a little bit more.
But in general, what I'm doing in the article
is trying to go through and talk about
where we can find meaning and experience as it's experienced.
And so I'm not appealing to analytic arguments
to try to convince you that meaning is real in that article,
which is what a lot of analytical philosophy is.
It's kind of creating a coherent argument
to try to convince or persuade someone
that something is true and they're often very isolated.
I try to take a holistic and phenomenological approach.
And so I'm trying to point to certain experiences
where I think people have found meaning
and where I have personally found meaning
and where people that I've talked to have said,
yeah, I find this really meaningful.
I've been trying to talk about the structures
of that a little bit and also eliminating those structures
also means describing what's necessary in the experience
or what might be necessary in the experience
for it to be a truly meaningful experience.
And I'll leave the introduction to that at that
and then see what questions you might wanna ask.
Sure.
So, you know, meaning seems again,
like one of those terms like consciousness,
which is, it seems to be a bit of a loaded term, isn't it?
So what for you is a meaningful life?
So I like to, so like you said,
it's a meaning is a very obscure and ambiguous term.
And I like to link, I like to link this back to,
was it a priori or a gust, I think it was a gust,
that said something about time.
I know what time is and so somebody asked me what it is.
And then when I'm asked, you know, I really,
I can't figure it out, I can't give a description
or I can't explain what time is.
Or you could say, or you could say meaning is like pornography.
He knew it when you see it.
You know when you see it.
Yeah, I mean, you know, actually,
I think that's a great, a great, a great,
I purposefully did not give an analytic definition
of meaning in that article or really in any paper of,
because I think giving a definition of it
is kind of doing an injustice to it
because it's a sort of thing.
So you have to experience it.
So you know it when you feel it,
you know it when you experience it.
And so that's another reason why,
rather than try to tell people what meaning is,
for me, a meaningful life.
And I will say that I,
relative, not subjective, but relative,
and I think there's a very important difference.
It's gonna be relative to each of our personal existences
and that we find value in the things
that make us feel purpose,
the things that sort of,
the things that like to vitalize us,
give us vitality, give us,
almost as zest, you know, as zest for life.
That I like to point to as indicators of meaning.
For me, a meaningful life is doing philosophy and writing
and having a few close friendships
and having a loving family.
And I think all of these things are important
for a holistic meaning.
Now, in the article that we're talking about right now,
I focused in on one type of meaning
because I think it's the easiest to point to an experience
and that's like a passionate activity.
So I use the artist as an example in that article.
But it could just as well be a scientist,
it could just as well be a philosopher, a writer.
You know, I don't think you can put a limitation
on what sort of activities are meaningful
because that would just be quite absurd
because I'm sure somebody finds something very meaningful
that I would absolutely dread doing.
And actually I know that's the case.
And so it's gonna be relative.
So I can say what's meaningful for me
and I can try to describe what's meaningful
for other people.
Not in the sense that I'm gonna tell you
what you're gonna find meaningful
but in the sense that this person
that has practiced a specific discipline,
a specific art maybe for their entire lives
and it's kind of like what they breathe and live
and it's their guiding passion.
I mean, I think that's a very good indicator
that they're finding something incredibly meaningful
about that endeavor.
And meaning certainly is not the same as happiness.
There's a lot of times where I'm writing
and studying philosophy where I'm not getting
some sort of immediate happy feeling from it
or pleasure out of it.
Sometimes it's very difficult and frustrating
but there's maybe a transcendent value that
I guess to use it, I'm gonna use the phrase
that you used last time we chatted.
It's soul edified, it lifts the spirit
in a way that is distinct from happiness and pleasure.
But it's a passion.
Yeah, I'll just say, I'll leave it at that.
Yeah, because I mean, look, passions, it's an amazing,
I in fact have a question, not pertaining to this article
but one of your other papers where in fact
you've used the word passion extensively,
the title of the papers.
You said that this is gonna be published soon in a,
so sorry, let me read out the title first,
passion as a disclosure of meaningfulness in life.
This hasn't been published yet, isn't it?
You said it's gonna be published in a journal soon.
So that paper is still in review.
I have not gotten a communication as to whether it will be
published or not, the ontology of meaning paper,
that one's gonna be published in
Countess Journal of Philosophy in 2023.
Sure, sure, sure.
But maybe if people are interested,
they could probably tweet at you if you don't mind of course
and if they're interested in reading the paper,
because I don't wanna leave it,
because then I'll publish it,
I'm not gonna share them publicly.
Sure, yeah, someone's interested.
So yeah, I can't really circulate it
until I really have a decision from the journal,
but if anybody's interested in reading it
or looking over it or discussing it,
definitely reach out, I can send a PDF copy.
Yep, great.
All right, so meaning,
this probably leads us to
a bit of a Hadegarian question.
I was gonna discuss Hadegar separately,
but why discuss Hadegar abstractly?
He himself wouldn't like that.
Let's connect it to your work.
You've said that we live in a techno-scientific era
and you said that we are attempting to take a view
from nowhere in the modern world.
And when I read that bit,
I was even trying to connect that
to kind of this modern new age obsession with stoicism,
where it seems that everyone talks a lot about stoicism
being detached from the world.
And I don't know if that tightly correlates
to this idea of the view from nowhere.
Everything is just a cosmic phenomenon.
Nothing really matters in some sense, ultimately.
So I placed this question in two parts, Jacob.
Firstly, ultimately, what was Hadegar struggling with?
What was he trying to figure out in his work
and what were his concerns?
For instance, like in the essay,
a question concerning technology, essays like that.
And the second part of the question is, from his work,
how does that pertain to the question of meaning
and human experience?
So there is very upfront about the question
that he's asking, and it's, what is the meaning of being?
And that's so vague that nobody can get an idea
of what it is until they've read the whole book.
And then maybe you can understand the question after that.
But he's really just asking, in what sense,
in what sense do things exist?
I mean, that's kind of what he's asking.
Maybe an easier way to understand the question.
And so he asks this question,
and he says that we've, the tradition
has really forgotten about being and what being is.
And for Hadegar, and this is gonna kind of
come back around to his approach to phenomenology
as far as the idea that he thinks phenomenology should
discover or disclose the apriori structures of existence.
And so being for Hadegar is synonymous
with the apriori ontological structures of existence.
So the structures of experience and existence
that are necessary for us to be having the experience
that we're having right now.
And this is, so we can contrast this with science,
most certainly, and also traditional philosophy,
because traditional philosophy and science
is kind of working in this subject-object sort of framework,
and they're also working within mostly
a substance-based framework.
So we have a substance, so we have objects,
and objects are made out of a substance.
And what kind of properties does these objects have?
And this is another reason, I mean, and this is direct.
The reason why he was so against Descartes
and had a lot of criticisms of Descartes,
because Descartes is kind of perpetuating
these philosophical assumptions that he thinks
that Hadegar thinks are completely unfounded,
such as, I mean, what is it to be,
like what is the human person,
and Descartes's gonna say this immaterial consciousness,
that's the person.
So we're a substance, where he's bringing us back
to the substance-based sort of metaphysics.
Hadegar basically says, no, this is all wrong.
We need to look at being, and we can't look at being
when we're trying to look at objects and the properties,
because in order for us to even look at objects
in their property, so in a sense,
in order to even have an empirical science
that can try to discern properties
of certain substances and certain objects,
we need all these other things already in place,
and that's what he's pointing to
with the aphriora structures.
And so that's kind of what Hadegar is up to,
in being in time, really.
And he's gonna say that we're sense-making beings.
I mean, we make sense out of all of our experiences,
and he goes through in very complex detail
what these structures are,
and kind of what the holistic structure of them is.
And so we have feeling, I mean, we have a thinless sky,
and that's one of the important things for my work
that I take from Hadegar is this idea that,
and the thinless sky is often translated as attunement.
And the popular translation is translated as state of mind,
but it's a very terrible translation
because Hadegar wanted nothing to do with states of mind.
And so attunement might be a better word for now.
Some people like to use this position,
but it's really just the way you find yourself in the world.
How are you attuned to the world?
And it has connotations of feelings and emotions
and that sort of thing.
And so that's just one of many apriori structures
that Hadegar is gonna talk about being attached.
And how does, okay, so first question is,
we talk about Hadegar's idea that we are being in the world,
and he's trying to make the statement that,
in fact, before we even think of our states of mind,
our conscious experience,
there are all these other structures
that presuppose all of that.
For us to even ask that question,
what is existence, what is consciousness?
There are many other things that come before that.
And is that what he kind of means by,
we are, obviously we're embodied beings,
but we're also in the world amongst other beings.
Yes, so being in the world, and it's all hyphenated.
So if somebody's listening and they haven't seen
the phrase written out in his book,
being hyphened in hyphened the hyphenate world is one.
And it's done that way because what Hadegar's trying
to signify with that is a unitary phenomenon.
He's trying to say, all of this comes together.
It's all codependent, it's an interdependent phenomenon.
We don't first exist and then try to find the world.
And our world doesn't first exist,
and then we kind of come into it.
But there's a interdependence and kind of co-manifestation
of existence and what he means by world.
And that's what being in the world is.
And so it's a holistic and interdependent sort of thing.
So if you look at how that pertains to meaning,
firstly, this is something I've struggled with.
For Hadegar, it seems like there's a world of facts,
but for the world to become true,
for those facts to have a truthfulness,
it requires a Dasein or a human being.
Dasein is the term he uses.
So then would he say that in some sense,
reality truly became reality as we know it now,
only after we came into being, we came to exist
and we were being in the world?
Or is that something he doesn't really talk about too much?
So he doesn't talk about it a whole lot.
There are some very, very difficult passages
that are still disputed today.
And I've had a lot of fun conversations
about these passages because they are very difficult
to try to discern what the heck he was meaning.
He also uses the word world
in three or four different ways in being in time,
but he's very precise about when he uses them
and he even tells you beforehand,
like if it's in quotes, this is what it means.
If it's capitalized, this is what it means.
So he has a good system.
He's not just erratic in throwing these words out there.
He knows what he means by them
and he tries to convey to us what he's meaning by them.
But to get back to your question,
yeah, in a very real way, what Heidegger is saying is,
reality as we know it, the world as we experience it,
the world as we articulate it,
whether that's in, you know, as facts or not,
only has been, it only is when Dazan is.
And the question arises, well,
if all human existence was to kind of fade out overnight
where the world disappeared
or whether there's still the world
or whether there's still the entities,
that sort of thing.
And Heidegger stays true to the phenomenological approach here
and he stays true to it in some other areas as well.
And what I mean by that is,
he doesn't give a definitive answer.
He kind of just says, well, if we're not here,
we don't really know what would be here.
So because phenomenology is looking to experience,
he can't make a phenomenological judgment about that.
And he is honest about that.
And then something that I appreciate about his approach
is that he doesn't overstep the limits of the method
that he's using.
And I mean, philosophy has argued about that forever,
whether the world exists independently or not.
And what Heidegger just says as well,
as far as our experience goes,
and as far as the way we articulate the meaning of being,
being only is while we are.
And it's obscure and it's sometimes frustrating
if you want a concrete answer
as to the independence or not of the world.
But he just kind of then follows up by saying,
well, if we're not here, we're not really gonna know.
And I don't think anybody's had an experience
absent the world.
And so I don't think anybody knows
what the answer to that is.
And so it's, to me, okay, so to me,
I appreciate the enigma, I appreciate the mystery behind it
because if we truly can't know,
maybe we can think through it and have a discourse about it
and it might be a very meaningful sort of thing
to talk about, but because we can't know,
we shouldn't pretend that we know.
Yeah, or, I mean, perhaps it even,
in some sense, Hattaker probably wouldn't even like us
just talking too abstractly about such things,
given that, again, like you said,
he would want us to stick to the phenomenological approach
where we're talking about structures of experience.
And for starters, if there aren't any structures,
there are some conversations we can't have
whereas at one point, it just becomes the term you use,
which I know is by Wittgenstein's language games.
At one point, which is why sometimes I think of
all these pop philosophy or pop science ideas,
like the many worlds theory or brain in a bat or what else?
Do we live in a matrix?
They really seem like futile or even useless efforts
or conversations to have because, again,
it doesn't pertain to a palpable actual experience.
It's just fully abstract.
And again, nothing wrong with abstracts.
Mathematics is fully abstract,
but look at how useful mathematics is.
But I'll get your point.
I think you explained quite well.
So Hattaker's idea of being in the world,
how does that relate to what you've discussed here?
Firstly, meaning and then,
well, perhaps more, more specifically, human meaning.
Sure.
Yeah, and so I will also clarify
since you added that caveat on at the end there,
I really only talked about meaning in relation to,
I have to pretend to humans,
meaning in the lives of humans.
I don't know if I'll ever transcend that
and talk about meaning as such,
but again, maybe that's not a phenomenologically appropriate
topic because I don't know,
outside of my human experience,
I don't know what meaning might be.
But so being in the world,
I think it kind of at least starts to give us,
well, for one, that's gonna be after you are a structure
to having an experience of meaning.
I mean, we're in the world,
not in a sort of container-like way,
like water is in the glass,
but we're the world and us are co-constituted in a sense.
And we have to,
I'm trying to think about how I want to phrase this.
I guess we have to involve ourselves in the world,
like we're always being in the world,
whenever abstracted away from the world
or else we wouldn't be living in,
where it would be an existing being.
So it's not that we're never not being in the world,
but I think it kind of points to this idea
that us in the world are closer than we think
and we're more interconnected than we think.
And if we sort of explore with,
we sort of explore the world
and various involvements that we might have with it,
we might stumble across something
that we find extremely meaningful.
And I think that's really the only way
that we can discover meaning.
I don't think we subjectively create meaning,
but I don't think meaning is also just objectively
out there in the world.
I think it's a relational phenomenon.
So I guess that the concept of being in the world
also points to that idea that it's a interdependent
and relational sort of thing.
And we might also, in the process,
discover a lot of things that we don't like
and that we don't find meaningful
or we find the opposite there that we find meaningless.
But I think that's also just closer
to what we find meaningful
because you don't really know until you have the experience.
You don't really know until you involve yourself
in the activity or what have you.
And so it's an experiential relational thing
and being in the world is kind of just a necessary structure
for us to be able to go out there and try to find meaning.
If we weren't being in the world,
we were not existing.
That's well put.
That is well, I think you hit the nail on the head there.
So being in the world is, in fact,
what's necessary to even discover meaning.
Okay, okay.
Because another thing I realized
was perhaps one of the most important things
Jerome Reiki did
to the contemporary philosophical conversation
is that he started asking the question
from meaning of life to meaning in life.
And Heidegger would probably fall on the latter camp
where what he worries about
or his concerns are meaning in life.
For him, meaning of life is again,
one of those useless questions.
Yeah, and you know, Heidegger uses the term meaning a lot
but he generally, what he means by that
is generally the way in which I just used it,
like the sense that something has,
making sense of something.
So the German term that he uses a lot of sin,
S-I-N-N, and it can be translated as meaning
but it can also be translated as sense.
So Heidegger doesn't really talk about meaning in life
as much as like making sense of things in life
and making sense of the world.
And that's another reason why I thought that
because I think Heidegger gets a lot of things right.
I think he gets a lot of things correct
with his fundamental analysis.
And it's very like the fundamental structures
that he's laying out seem,
something seems true about them.
And so because of that,
and because he doesn't really talk about meaning in life,
I thought his framework would be a really great framework
to take over and to try to talk about meaning
from within that existential framework
because it is phenomenological.
It is an experiential sort of phenomenon, meaning is.
And so almost,
I guess taking what Heidegger has done
and adding something to it,
it's kind of what in a sense I'm doing.
Yeah.
Yeah, like all great thinkers, isn't it?
Because Heidegger himself,
even though he was trying to subvert whole of philosophy,
he still was working off,
like Aristotle or Kant or some great thinkers of the past.
Okay, so this,
I want to read out an excerpt from your essay.
The reason being,
I think the way you've put it here very much pertains to,
so firstly, this is a small statement you've made
in regarding apropos time
and you've discussed how time would differ
for a phenomenologist from, let's say, a scientist.
And then you put and you've written
and you've quoted Heidegger in that statement you've made.
And I think that statement itself
is more of like a sobered example as to,
it probably answers a lot of questions
that we were discussing, for example,
the difference between phenomenology and science
or if there is this stark difference
and then how that relates to meaning and whatnot.
So firstly, I'll read out the statement
and then I'll ask the question.
So here's what you've stated, Jacob.
For Martin Heidegger,
past events are always projected into the future,
while also existing presently as having been.
The future is not later than having been
and having been is not earlier than the present.
What was having been arises simultaneously
with the present and the future
and human being is always towards,
toward itself in anticipation of the possible ways of being.
The Heideggerian concept of time
frees the phenomenologists from thinking
of past, present and future
as sequentially ordered groupings of distinct events.
So saying that, how does a phenomenologist
or a Heideggerian view time and meaning
and how that pertains to a human being
from let's say an analytical philosopher or a scientist?
So a common theme in Heidegger
is this idea of primordial phenomenon and deriving.
You may have to explain that term, primordial phenomenon.
So basically, what he means by that is
the more basic, more fundamental structure,
I guess, what you could say.
And because it's a phenomenological structure,
it's gonna be an experiential thing.
And Heidegger thinks that a lot of the things
that we have theories for now,
were derived from something more basic
that we had an experience.
And time is one of them.
And so like the sort of everyday notion of time that we have,
which I think at the end of that paragraph
that you read, kind of talked about it
as far as like the sequentially ordered groupings of events.
So the idea that there's a future moment,
that's coming into the present
and then it's going to vanish into the past
and be gone forever.
So that's sort of everyday thinking about time and clock time.
Heidegger's gonna refer to as bolder time.
It's a derived mode of time.
It's not the primordial phenomenon of time.
And so he's gonna talk about this more basic idea of time.
And he's gonna call it temporality talk.
If I say time, think about, let's think about
our everyday understanding of time.
And if I say, we can't think about Heidegger's idea of time,
it might just be easier for a sake of conversation.
So temporality is obviously very important.
He wrote a book called being and time.
And so the second division of being and time
really dives into the details of that.
I'm not going to sit here and pretend that I could,
that I know the exact meaning that Heidegger meant
with his concept of time or temporality
because it's very complex, very difficult.
But what I can say is that the basic structure,
the basic operator structures that he lays out
in his existential analysis,
each pertain to a specific aspect of temporality.
So we have understanding as a a priori structure
along with attunement, which I talked about a few moments
a few minutes ago.
And he also has fallenness or discourse.
And basically what Heidegger says
is that those three things come together
to form the structure of disclosiveness,
the way we disclose the world in a basic way.
And each one of those pertains to a certain aspect of time.
And so we have, we're kind of thrown in the world,
we kind of find ourselves in the world
and we have a past that we didn't really choose for ourselves.
And we have the way we find ourselves in the world
within the Skype or attunement,
kind of the way we're currently attuned
and dealing with the world.
And that's kind of going to point toward the present
and then understanding is pointing towards the future
because understanding, and this is not going to be,
it's not a cognitive thing.
I mean, Heidegger will say that because
theories of cognition are going to come after this.
So again, we're talking about the a priori structures
that are required for you to be able to make up
a theory of cognition.
And so he doesn't want to,
he doesn't want people to conflate
what you mean by understanding.
And he gives very specific definitions to all of his terms
and sometimes it's confusing
because we all think we know what we mean by understanding.
So if I could use that.
But through the structure and through understanding,
we find ourselves amongst a whole lot of possibilities
and we're constantly projecting ourselves
toward those possibilities,
whether we know it or not,
whether we're aware of it or not.
And it could be mundane things such as,
if I stand up right now and I go to walk
to fill my water,
I'm going to be using the door handle
and I'm going to be doing a whole lot of things
that I'm not really thinking about doing.
But those are all possible modes of comportment,
possible ways that I can comport myself right now.
So I'm constantly projecting myself into the future.
Now to give like, to try to give a better example
of these three modes come together.
Maybe we could talk about the harvest.
Yeah, I was just going to ask.
So the three modes, okay.
Let's, how about we try to use the example of the artist
to expound on what temporality is
and expound on what hiding means by time.
But then maybe break down,
break down those three modes.
Apropos the example of the artist.
So let's just assume that we're talking about
I'll call them a master artist,
somebody that's practiced for 20 years, 30 years, 40 years,
something they've been doing their whole life.
They've built up certain habits, right?
I mean, you don't get good at something,
you don't learn how to paint,
you don't paint your master,
first time you spent decades of time practicing,
making mistakes, and so on.
During the time that you're practicing something
and you're trying to master something,
you're doing that, I mean, so let's say you're,
somebody's practicing right now,
they're practicing their skill in some art painting.
And in a very real sense,
the future is co-arising.
And the way in which it's co-arising is
they are cultivating an ability to do something.
They're expanding the horizon of possibilities
that they can project themselves upon.
So through the present moment, the future is co-arising.
And let's say after they moved in,
they practiced, now they're the master painter
and they're creating a masterpiece.
In a very real way, their past is co-arising with them
at that moment in the sense that they have these techniques
and they have a habitual way in which they use a brush
to stroke the canvas.
And they wouldn't have that without their past
practice and discipline.
And so the past is with them at every moment,
that's with us at every moment, in the present moment.
And then their future continues to co-arise
because they're one brush stroke, two brush strokes,
it's not their masterpiece yet,
but in the process, the future,
which will be their masterpiece is co-arising,
being made possible through what they're doing right now
and what they're doing right now was only made possible
because of the past, which I'm saying the past,
but I'm also saying it's still with them
because it must be or else they wouldn't be a master.
You can't be a master at something unless you have
gathered up with you,
years and years of practice.
You're bringing all of this together
in the present moment in this one.
Which is why you say that it's not,
in fact, let me read out a small excerpt here.
You say that, during meaningful experience,
this Hedigerian temporality displaces
the vulgar understanding of time
for the latter loses its significance
when human being is immersed in the world
through passionate, skilled and creative activity
or during being with others.
So the point is, to put it very, very colloquially,
you say, I'm in love with a beautiful woman
or when I'm in this, let's say, flow state or whatever,
you lose track of time.
I don't know where time goes and this is the kind of time
that you're saying Hediger is talking about,
not time in a linear sense where it's t equals zero
and then it goes on from there.
And it's hard for us because what's interesting
about what I realized about Hediger is that
once you get it, you get it.
You're like, oh, it's obvious what he's talking about
because it's a part of our experience, isn't it?
But getting it is a hard part because we are so,
we are so trained or we're so,
let's say attuned to thinking a different way.
So, hmm.
Yeah, I think that's the beautiful thing
about good phenomenology is that when you get it,
you get it in a different way than you get
a proposition that you're struggling with.
Maybe you're struggling with this analytic proposition
or this argument and eventually maybe you work it off,
you get it, you understand it
and you're like, okay, cool, I get it.
But with phenomenology, I mean,
a lot of times you do have to struggle with it.
You have to struggle with Hediger.
I struggled with him for a very, very long time
before I understood anything.
But once you get it, like you said,
because it is a part of our experience,
you're not just affected cognitively or intellectually
by the understanding because it's deeper than that,
the understanding, I mean, it feeds back
into Hediger's basic structure that he's talking about.
I mean, you feel it, you feel attuned to it.
You say, oh my goodness, like I can see this in my experience.
You know, like how did I not notice this before?
Because again, he's pointing,
he's trying to point to things in experience
and there's something very powerful about that,
in my opinion, over and above something
that's just propositional that you can't experience
for yourself or you can't notice or reflect on
and say, yes, that is a part of the experience.
And it's not surprising that the existentialist,
Sartre, Dibabua, Kamu,
were all heavily influenced by Hediger
because they were, that was the question
they too were trying to deal with,
the philosophy they were trying to develop,
was it was, well, the word itself is existential.
There probably isn't any other word to describe it.
Fantastic, that was a great explanation,
especially the, I like the analogy of the artist.
In fact, all great, great Hedigerian teachers
or teachers who do teach Hediger,
they, like the person that comes from my mind
is one of my intellectual heroes, Hubert Dreyfus.
It's how beautifully he,
he first of all, he's thinking live,
he's thinking out loud,
but also he always tries to connect it to a phenomena,
to a phenomenon,
something that's palpable in our lives.
How are we going with time, Jacob?
We're about an hour, 20 minutes
into the podcast, into the episode.
Can we do a few more minutes?
So how are you going with time?
I'm good on time.
Either talking to you today
or I'm reading and working on the dissertation.
So I have, as long as you are.
Perfect, I appreciate that, man.
I mean, look, I was thinking,
as we did discuss before we started recording,
I don't think we can go to all the questions,
everything you've written,
especially probably the paper I like the most by you,
the reinstatement of existential meaning
or passion as a disclosure of meaningfulness in life.
That seems a very,
perhaps a very contemporary topic to even talk about
because passion seems to be something we talk about a lot
in our culture these days.
It'd be interesting to think of that
in a phenomenological approach.
However, saying all that,
I would probably leave that to a whole other episode.
So let's get to the one that you said
is a good starting point to your work,
which is your paper,
Ontology of Meaning.
So a lot of questions that I've written down on this.
We touched on a lot of things.
We spoke about phenomenology for sure.
How about we talk about something a bit interesting?
Firstly, like we did with the previous paper,
let's just get what you were trying to convey in the paper.
So what did you mean by Ontology of Meaning?
And after that, I want to talk about authenticity
because it seems like this idea of,
just like there's this cliche corporate words
like bring your authentic self to work
or be authentic online.
And it's perhaps worth diving into what is authenticity
from more of an existential phenomenological approach.
But sorry, I'm getting carried away here.
Before we get there,
your paper, Ontology of Meaning,
what's the paper about?
What were you trying to convey?
And also if you could please,
where can people find the paper,
either now or in the future?
Sure, so that paper will be available
in the first quarter of 2023.
That's what I was told the anticipated publication date is.
Basically, they just have to do some formatting
and just wait for the next issue to be published
and it should be out there
at the Conan Tuss Journal of Philosophy.
So in that paper, it's very apparent.
I think, is it in the title, Ontology of Meaning?
I've written that paper so long
that I sometimes I forget what the heck I...
I think, because the paper,
the paper, in fact,
I made a mistake when I read out the title.
The name of the file was Ontology of Meaning.
However, the title of the paper itself
is Reinstatement of Essential Meaning.
Yes, okay.
So it was originally going to be named
something about Ontology of Meaning.
I was actually playing more into the philosophical tradition
and I wanted with that
with when I was starting the kid's day.
And by that, I just mean,
so kind of the traditional idea of Ontology
is going to be very different
than high-figures kinds of Ontology.
And I won't go into the details of it too much,
but generally in traditional philosophy,
Ontology is almost like,
you can almost take like an inventory of the world.
So you have one category,
broad category, Metaphysics.
And then a step up from that,
maybe you have Ontology,
depending on how you want to define it.
Everybody kind of seems to play with it
a little bit differently.
And in any case,
I'll just move on because I guess,
I fixed the title right before I submitted it
because I was like, man, I don't want,
you know, you start to notice your own mistakes
sometimes as they're happening.
So you're saying that you don't prefer
using the term Ontology
because you don't want to mislead the reader
as to what high-figure means by Ontology.
Is that why you wanted to change the name of the paper?
Yeah, that's ultimately why I did end up changing.
Well, and also because I was kind of thinking about it
in a more traditional sense,
almost like meaning was a specific type of thing,
but it's not a thing, like meaning is not a thing.
Absolutely.
Giving that, I was kind of implying that
with the title, as far as the traditional
understanding of Ontology goes.
And I really did not want to give that impression
or implication that I was trying to call out meaning
as a thing or an entity.
Because I most certainly do not think that,
but in any case, then that paper, I was really trying
I was trying to get across
and how we might be able to begin thinking about meaning
and more importantly,
where we, well, I guess,
less about where we might experience it
and more about how we should be thinking
about meaning if we want to actually talk about it
in a genuine manner.
And I say this because, and I go,
I'm pretty sure that's the essay where I talk a bit
about science and talk a bit about logic
and I try to, I mean, it's really quick.
I didn't have a lot of space to do this,
but I try to point out the reasons why
are the wrong frameworks where we're trying to discover
meaning and talk about meaning.
And why I did this is specifically with scientism,
but with really any reductive,
any scientist that's reductive,
you have this idea that everything can be reduced
down to a certain thing.
So we can reduce things, a physical subject,
things that chemistry or we can reduce things to our biology.
And you pair that reductive approach with scientism
or the idea that we're,
and then just place in physics or chemistry or biology,
you're gonna, there's no word for meaning anymore
in that world, and meaning is considered non-existent.
It's considered unreal, it's considered at best an illusion
or some subjective manifestation made up by our minds
as opposed to a real phenomenon.
And so that paper was really trying to get that idea across
and to try to point to phenomenology
as a legitimate outside logic in science
for understanding the world.
And I argued for soul phenomenology,
like only phenomenology approach,
but phenomenology and other things
because if ultimately, I think,
a holistic approach is the best approach
if you want to understand as much as you can.
And so by placing phenomenology aside,
things like science and logic,
for as tools for understanding ourselves in the world
and reality and by saying ourselves world reality,
really just mean everything.
I just mean that everything, our experience,
the world, the cosmos, you know.
All of being.
Yeah, all of being.
This is, I'm glad we're talking about this.
Perhaps before we get to the, sorry, did I interrupt you,
Jacob?
I think you were not done.
Were you done?
No.
Apologies if I did.
Sometimes the connection, there's a bit of a lag.
Okay, so this is interesting because you've said here,
I wanted to ask from you,
and this is very, very important, I think,
because now, again, going back to a point I made before,
it seems like science has taken the place of philosophy.
And I think that's to our own peril.
And you've said here, science is reductive.
So it attempts to describe meaning, experience,
whatever in a reductive sense.
And then you've said it's trying to take a view from nowhere.
However, this got me thinking,
you made a really interesting point
in your previous article that we discussed.
And I'm going to read out an excerpt
where you've said it, you put it this way.
You've said, so this is, I propose this idea of science
trying to be objective and taking a view from nowhere.
You've commented on something by Ponty, by Molluponty,
where you put differently.
And as Maurice Molluponty made explicit
in his preface to Phenomenology of Perception,
this is really important what you've said here.
The third-person perspective of science
is only made possible through first-person human experience
because we only achieve a third-person perspective
via a collection of first-person human experiences.
The subjective first-person experience then
is something that is both pervasive and inescapable.
So this got me thinking,
is it even possible for science to ever be objective?
Can we have an objective science in the sense of,
can we truly, given that we are designed,
we are being in the world, have a view from nowhere?
Oh, no, I think it's a myth.
I think at best, we can have intersubjective knowledge.
And I think that's what most people,
not that they mean, not that they know that they mean this,
but when most people say objective knowledge,
what they're pointing to is intersubjective knowledge.
Because, yeah, I mean, I don't think there's any way
to get around what Molluponty pointed out
in the preface to his book.
There's no way of getting out of it.
There's no way of getting around it.
That's all we have.
And so, if we're gonna collect up
a bunch of subjective experiences
and call them objective,
what we're really pointing to is intersubjectivity.
So a scientist would probably try to challenge you
on that point, on account of that point, saying that,
oh, no, in the scientific approach,
we have the double-blind study,
or we have rigorous empirical research,
where when you present a paper,
or when you have a hypothesis,
it's picked on by many other individuals,
many other, well, not individuals, let's say experts,
in that field who try and break down your arguments,
break down what one has asserted.
And then why are this excavation,
why are this breaking down or destructuring of a hypothesis,
if that proves the falsity or the truthfulness
of a certain hypothesis?
And as scientists would try to counter you saying that,
eventually, as we keep doing this,
we get to this to put it plainly, view from nowhere
or an objective approach.
So how would you respond to that?
I would, I guess I would respond by asking maybe some,
a little bit of information about each of the experts
in the field that was trying to check over the work
and see if it works or not.
Because I think by doing that,
very quickly you get to the idea that another person,
this is another dozen that has a perspective on the world.
And so we're collecting his perspective and this,
and we're collecting the next expert's perspective on this.
And I guess I would conclude by asking where it is,
because if there is a view, it's a view from somewhere.
A view implies work.
You can't view something without a viewer.
To have a perception there must be something perceiving.
And so I think to further imply perspectives.
And so I think it's not, I mean, I'm just objectivity.
I know some people are opposed here
and they want something more objective,
but I just, there's no reason to believe
that there's anything as such,
because everybody who has ever said that
is saying that from their given perspective.
And so it's almost like a performative contradiction
in a sense, like if you're going to argue for a view
from, you can't actually show the view from nowhere.
And if you, to have a view is to experience some things,
to be an experiencer, then I think it's just,
you get, and so I guess, yeah,
I guess that's, I would just try to respond in that way.
And then if they can back and push back them.
I'm not much of an arguer.
I don't like arguments and things.
A fair enough, but I tend to be quite,
you and I probably are a bit different on that
because I tend to be quite confrontational with these things.
Yeah, because it is interesting
because I even at like leaving maybe at a bit of a higher,
more like a cultural level, we have a lot of these things,
you know, even in politics or whatever people say,
I speak the truth, unbiased facts.
I throw facts at you or what's this by the Ben Shapiro guy,
facts don't care about your feelings,
all these such things.
But it seems like people don't even question the words
they use as in, what do you mean by facts?
What do you mean by truth?
And it even gets the idea of, you know,
what can't try to describe in his critic of pure reason,
there's pneumonia and phenomena.
And there are certain things that we can never experience.
They are more like upper right concepts.
And it does, but then, I don't know,
but then I wonder if like a Heidi Gehran would ask,
oh, in fact, no, the pneumonia itself doesn't exist
without someone being able to view it or perceive it.
Yeah, so that's a good question.
Yeah, I think, so for Heidi Gehran,
there's no two-world model.
I guess I always refer to like some distinction there,
two-world model, because you have like,
yeah, things and they appear a certain way,
but then you also have these things behind them
and that's like something else.
And you can't get to that.
You can't get to that.
So I refer to it as two-world model
because you have the appearance that you can get to
and you have this hidden world that you can't get to.
Yeah.
And Heidi Gehran has the single-world model.
Yeah, he was very much opposed to the Cartesian approach
in that sense, wasn't it?
Okay, here's an interesting one.
You've spoken about authenticity
in your paper, Ontology of Meaning,
oh, sorry, not Ontology of Meaning,
you've spoken about authenticity.
You've spoken about authenticity in the paper,
the re-instatement of Existential Meaning.
I know I read that out a couple of the times,
it's just to clarify what we're referring to.
So when it comes to the topic of authenticity,
it's something we hear very much in,
it's quite pervasive.
We hear it quite a lot in the contemporary online conversations.
As I said, a lot of corporations talk about
bring your authentic self to work.
For a Heidi Gehran or a phenomenologist,
what is authenticity?
And perhaps more importantly,
how is there a distinction between,
let's say Saad's view of authenticity
to what Heidi Gehran talks about?
That is if there is a difference at all.
So Heidi Gehran's understanding of authenticity
is going to be related to, we talk very minimally,
but I guess maybe we talked about possibilities
and we're always projecting ourselves on possibilities.
And so Heidi Gehran thinks that,
okay, so let's talk about authenticity first,
because it'll be easier to get to authenticity
because Heidi Gehran thinks that we're all,
all of us are most of the time living
in an inauthentic manner.
Now, Heidi Gehran doesn't place any judgment
on authenticity or inauthenticity.
He's just kind of saying like,
this is the way I'm describing things
from this phenomenological approach.
So he's not saying that one's good or bad necessarily,
but of course we all have connotations
associated with those terms.
So by living inauthentically,
basically what Heidi Gehran's talking about
is where we're in a fallen mode of being.
And that's always a possibility for us.
And really what that just means is we're absorbed
in Das Man, which can be translated as the anyone
or the they.
And that's just, it could be anyone.
It's kind of like group thought.
You can think about it as like group thought
or group thinking is kind of the way.
So if you come across phrases like,
this is what one does in this formal setting.
Like that's another, if you hear that,
everybody comes into that at some point
where they're going to school or you're going to a restaurant.
There's like, you behave in certain ways
and you don't behave in other ways.
And most of the time, I mean, a lot of times that's good.
I mean, we have to have these cultural structures in place
or else things would just be chaotic and hectic
and nobody would get along at all.
And everything would be in this.
So it's a lot of the time, it's not bad to be inauthentic.
But if you're just always inauthentic,
then what you do and the possibilities
that you project yourself upon
and the understanding that you have of yourself in the world
is given over to you from the day, from the group thought.
You're not taking anything up as your own.
You're not reflecting on things from your own experience.
You're accepting what they say
and you're doing as they do.
And if you're doing as they do
and you're accepting what they say,
that's why it's called sometimes translated as the anyone
because it could be anyone, you could be anyone.
I mean, you are anyone at that point.
There's really no individuation between you and someone else
if you're both functioning in that sort of mode all the time.
And so that's just, I guess, a very crude way
to describe inauthenticity.
And so to project yourself authentically
to, I guess, even become aware of your authentic possibilities,
you have to, in a sense, distance yourself
from the world of the day, from the anyone.
You have to sort of quiet the group thought
in the group chatter.
And High Digger says that, he says one way of doing that is by,
is through, I mean, actually it's,
so this is where his concept of angst and anxiety comes into play
because he says during these experiences of intense angst
and anxiety, you almost come into contact
with and experience nothingness in a sense.
And this is more akin to, I think,
what maybe what we would call it in contemporary,
like severe depression rather than just anxiety.
And so if you think about the severely depressed,
they're almost, in a sense, living in a different world
in the sense that they're not making connections
in practical references as they would in their everyday life.
Like things don't necessarily, things kind of like start,
they begin to fail to make sense.
And it's difficult for you to do very basic,
practical everyday things if you're severely depressed.
And somebody, anybody who's had these experiences
can probably relate.
I've had these experiences throughout my life.
And the reason why this is,
why this might get you toward authenticity is because
during those experiences, the world is quiet
in the sense that you're not just running from one thing
into the next, into the next, into the next
as the public interpretation would happen.
Or you're not just doing as one does,
you're probably just sitting in a room by yourself
and not knowing what to do or what to think.
And so that's one way that Heidegger will say,
you can distance yourself from public opinion
and public chatter and public interpretation
and understanding if you experience this.
And I guess on the other, the next step of that is
realizing or coming to terms with your own death.
And kind of reflecting upon your own death.
Because Heidegger says that that's the only truly,
that's the only truly self-owned possibility
in the sense that it's your possibility
and it's no one else, it's nobody can die for you.
I mean, if they die, you don't die.
So they're technically not dying for you.
Nobody can take over your death.
When you die, if you were, you have to die the death
or you're not dead.
And Heidegger talks about this as the,
he talks about death as the impossibility
or the possibility of the impossibility of existence.
Again, because he's staying true
to the phenomenological method.
So the possibility of the impossibility of existence.
Because Heidegger is not gonna say
what he thinks happens after death
because he hasn't experienced it
and it's not a phenomenological,
it's not a thing to talk about.
And so he says that it's possible that when we die,
maybe we won't exist.
And that's kind of where he leaves it.
But by coming to terms with this
and the way that Heidegger describes,
which is essentially, it's my death and it's my own
and it's nobody else's death.
That's the first glimpse of what he's going to say,
what he's gonna term authenticity
because it's my own possibility.
Okay, well, this is my own possibility.
Maybe I have other possibilities that are my own,
not anybody else's.
Maybe what might those possibilities be?
And then maybe you can start to think about
how you want to live your life
rather than how they want you to live your life.
And you can begin to construct an existence,
the way that you would like,
as opposed to the way that they would like.
And through doing that,
you begin to reveal authentic possibilities for yourself.
They can project yourself upon,
whether it's taking up a certain discipline
or for me, it was doing philosophy.
I actually started my formal education in a different field
and really looked philosophy,
but everybody said that's what I should not be doing
in a formal setting.
I should get educated so I can make money.
And so, and I did listen to what they said
for a very long time and then eventually I said,
you know what, I'm just gonna do this.
I can't stop reading this.
I can't stop thinking about this.
I'm obsessed with philosophy.
I don't know if I can force myself to go to school
for anything else, so I'm just gonna do it.
And so, I guess I like using that example
because it was very obvious to me
that I was being directed by popular opinion
and what they think I should be doing.
And then when I took over my existence as my own
and whatnot, then I started to
reveal these authentic possibilities for my existence.
And so really what authenticity for Heidegger means
is importing yourself in a way
that is unique to your own existence
and in such a way that you've chosen those possibilities.
You've taken them over as you're on your take.
And so responsibility comes in here
because if you're just doing whatever you want on a whim,
that's not a very great way to live either.
You might think you're being authentic,
but you really don't have a self at that point.
I mean, you're not cultivating anything.
In any real sense.
And so maybe you're doing what you want to do,
but you're not manifesting an authentic self
in the way that Heidegger would say
that you need to if you're gonna be authentic.
However, does Heidegger place any moral judgments
on the concept of authenticity itself
for a design or a human being?
In contrast, let's say someone like Sarth,
who does seem to, he calls it bad faith to be inauthentic,
who does seem to play some kind of moral judgment
despite him not being a fan of moralism
into authentic experience.
And I guess I'm trying to ask is there even a difference
between Heidegger's version
and Sarth's version of authenticity?
I'm not incredibly familiar with Sarth's version.
I feel like if I don't want to say anything that,
yeah, I guess I just,
I guess I want to refrain from commenting
because I don't know enough to say
whether or not they could basically be considered the same.
The only thing that I will say is that,
I know Sarth did misinterpret Heidegger on a few things.
And one of those things was the way
in which Heidegger was using the term as essential.
And if we're talking about existential possibilities
and how important existential possibilities are
for Heidegger's idea of authenticity
and if Sarth did misinterpret Heidegger on that point,
then I would think there would be a difference
and maybe an important distinction
to make between the two concepts of authenticity,
but I don't know for certain.
But does Heidegger himself place
any kind of qualitative differences?
I don't want to use the word moral.
Let's say qualitative difference
between being authentic and inauthentic.
No, no, he doesn't.
And I think the reason is because we,
even if we're aware of our possibility
for authenticity and even if we're living an authentic life
most of the time, we're still participating
in cultural structures that would be considered inauthentics
by Heidegger's thought on pretty much an everyday basis.
And it's not a bad thing to be doing.
It's necessary.
We're taught when we're children
to look both ways when we cross the road.
What one does before they cross the road.
Yeah.
So even these very mundane things
that you wouldn't really think about
in this philosophical capacity would be lumped into this idea
of things, it's all term inauthenticity this way.
Things that we've taken over from history
and culture and society
as far as ways to act and ways to think about things.
And it's not a bad thing.
I mean, I don't, I think we should all still look both ways
before we cross the road.
Yeah.
That's what's prescribed.
Yeah, another great example of Hubert Raphis.
I believe it's Hubert Raphis, pretty sure it's him.
He uses on the phenomenon is when you get into an elevator
the distance you stand from other people
and he says that that can culturally differ in fact.
So when you get into an elevator
some people don't mind being a bit too close to each other
whereas perhaps in Western countries
we would prefer having a bit of space
and we wouldn't want to be too close to another person
whereas I remember growing up in Sri Lanka
if you even take public transport
the other guy is just breathing down your neck
right next to you.
You wouldn't even see that here in Australia for instance.
Yeah, and again, those just because we're a part
of certain kinds of cultural practices does not make,
that is yes, inauthentic, but I wouldn't,
how would I say that makes you a morally inferior person?
Well, he doesn't make moral claims for starters
but he wouldn't even try to place any kind of
qualitative judgment on it, isn't he?
Yeah, yeah, so sometimes there's,
I mean, the terms are so, they're translated
as authenticity and authenticity so much
that I think it would be difficult to get away
from that particular translation of them
but another possible translation of the term
that he uses in German for authenticity,
I mean, you could translate it as oneness or,
so it could be like something that you chose
like in a self-owned manner or something like that.
And so like inauthenticity, you know, might be just,
it's a thing that you're doing that you didn't really,
you weren't the original agent to prescribe that
or something, you know, I mean, it's kind of difficult
to talk about without just using the terms
that are always used in the translations
but I feel like in the original language,
it wouldn't have such heavy connotations as it does
in Western culture as far as like acting authentically
as something you must do all the time
and you must always avoid it.
Yeah, and the problem is again with authenticity
or even passion, which we can get to,
hopefully in the next conversation I check it,
is that it's a colloquialism, it's used
so it's pervasive colloquially and it comes
with a lot of baggage, so it's a bit hard to,
here's where I really wish that I learned,
I could speak German.
In fact, I'm trying to learn French
to read some of the French philosophers
but maybe one day in life, who knows, maybe even German.
Oh, yeah, mate, so look, that was fantastic.
I am really feeling refreshed
and I would even say to a certain extent,
I think I'm in the flow state right now,
so I'm just really, really feeling it.
I don't think we'll have time to go through all the paper
and in fact, just to give it the time that it deserves,
I wanna probably have a separate episode on that.
We're coming to the two-hour mark
or we've even crossed two hours now.
Maybe to kind of, as like a conclusive statement,
more of just practical advice.
As someone who studies philosophy, as a writer,
I would ask you a two-part question.
What advice would you have for people like myself,
in your fights, or even just people
trying to get into philosophy
on how to study philosophy?
And secondly, what advice would you have
on writing philosophy?
So as far as studying philosophy goes,
it's always a good idea to have an understanding
of the history of philosophy.
That way, you kind of, so getting an idea of the history,
if you reflect on that sort of study,
you start to come to certain realizations
as far as maybe how one idea inspired another idea.
And you also get an idea of what's been said already.
So, okay, so when you get into philosophy,
sometimes it happens where you think
you have a really cool novel idea
based on something you've read,
but then you realize that somebody else also said that
like a thousand years ago.
And so, the thing of the history is good for that reason too.
So you're not just spending time reiterating something
that somebody's already done a thousand or 2,000 years ago.
It also gives you an idea that nothing is absolute
in the sense that, I mean, you can see how much has changed
over the centuries of philosophical thought
and I think that's good for the ego,
just to get a given understanding
that they didn't have the absolute truth.
I'm not gonna get the absolute truth,
but we can think about these things
and still maybe discern partial truths
or something like that.
I always like to have that in mind
when I'm writing things or thinking about things.
So any more, like when it comes to your process
of reading, writing, what's the,
how does it look like on a day-to-day basis?
Consistency is, I think, what has helped me above all else.
Like just reading a little bit every day
or studying a little bit every day when you can't,
like even if it's 20 minutes.
So like the first thing,
a lot of times the first thing I do in the morning
is I listen to a lecture or I listen to part of an audio book
or a podcast, you know, where they're discussing certain things.
Because that just really gets my mind going right away
as far as thinking about these things.
And the reason why I choose, sometimes I'm too tired,
like for the first hour that I wake up
that I can't really force myself to read,
but I can listen to something.
I can get my coffee.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, you can,
I can listen and drink coffee.
It's hard for me to read and make my coffee.
So I think repetition or consistency
and just persevering, like you think you don't understand
some of the things, like don't just stop reading it,
just read it.
Even if you don't understand it, just read it
because you might start to understand
bits of it after you're finished.
And even if you don't,
things might start to make sense maybe months later
or something like that.
That's the experience I had with high degree in time.
I read it once and came away from it saying,
dude, I don't understand literally anything this guy said.
But I feel like there's something really important here.
And so I really dove into secondary sources and lectures
and going through the book multiple times after that.
And so I would say just read a little bit every day
and make notes right in the margins of your book.
If you have a physical book,
don't try to keep your book super perfect and neat.
Just start writing stuff down and highlighting stuff.
If you have a question about something you read
and it seems like it's a good question,
write the question next to the paragraph in the book.
I just doing small things like that
has helped me a whole lot.
Highlighting things you think are important.
And then highlighting things in a different color
that you just don't understand.
You know, because you can go back through
and you can, it has to be an active process, I guess.
Maybe that's what I'm trying to get around to.
It involves an active process.
You're not just sitting there and taking in words
that you're seeing with your eyes.
It's an involved process of writing
and thinking and reflecting.
And don't be concerned with reading too quickly
or saying, it's taking me forever to get to the 10 pages,
but it's gonna take me a year to read being in time.
Just give it the time.
It will be quicker and easier to read.
And I just like to take the approach
of giving things the time that they ask.
They're gonna ask you for a certain amount of time
and just give it to them.
So do you normally pick a thinker
and then study all of that thinker's work,
the whole over of the thinker's work?
Or do you rather pick, let's say,
a fundamental philosophical text
like it could be critique of pure reason
or some of Plato's Republic, whatever it may be,
and then focus on the text itself?
Or are you more thinker focused?
So really, I'm more thinker focused now
than I have ever been, but previous to this,
I almost always say I was thinking just broadly.
Let's just say I was thinking about topics
and philosophy of mine.
And maybe I got intrigued by physicalism.
Well, then I would go through and I would try to find
what the history of physicalism was
and what the major thinkers were in kind of read along
the concept or the theory from a variety of perspectives.
And then I really immerse myself in it
and try to think from that perspective.
And sometimes you do have to spend a lot of time
to get to the added areas
or to get attuned to that kind of motive thought
so that you have to spend more time.
But then after that, I would read the opposite view.
Whatever the opposite view was,
not necessarily just arguments against
whatever position it is,
but what's like a contrasting theory or idea.
And then I would dive into that.
And so I did that.
Honestly, that's what most of my undergrad time doing
was just like kind of juxtaposing theories and concepts
with contrasting theories.
And just trying to get a really holistic view
of like why people think things.
I don't have very strong opinions personally.
It's easier for me to do that sort of study.
I'm just, I'm always very skeptical of everything,
but also myself at the same time and try to say,
I mean, I can appreciate ideas that maybe I disagree with.
And it'd be very difficult to say anything absolutely.
I could-
Well, it's interesting though,
I hear a typical trope by more public intellectuals
is be skeptical, be open-minded, be critical,
be objective, be rational,
we hear all these terms thrown around quite a lot, isn't it?
But it's also sometimes I think,
I'm not trying to pick on a particular public intellectual,
like someone like Steven Pinko or Sam Harris
who constantly to almost like ad nauseam,
talk about rationality and reason
and being open-minded and whatnot.
They also don't seem to get it that in fact, firstly,
being skeptical, being critical is,
it's a really difficult thing to do.
It's in fact quite unnerving.
It leaves one in this state of angst
and there's no stability in one's life.
And it's, if you truly authentically do it
in a very genuine, sincere way,
it can leave one unraveled, uprooted, you know?
It's not an easy thing to do.
No wonder you see, it's like what Dostoevsky said,
it seems that men with large hearts and deep minds
seem to be the most miserable.
And I think he says that in common punishment,
I'm paraphrasing him.
And then also comes the other thing where even these,
again, what should I call them?
New Age Atheists, not New Age Atheists,
like the New Atheists, so again, public intellectuals,
they, for me, all of their skepticism,
it's not skeptical enough.
They still are very much a domain,
their own domain of reason or whatever.
It seems like they haven't explored many other areas
that probably, then probably would even unravel them
because all of their work would also then deconstruct
and break down.
And that's funny, because that's when you were talking
about specifically proud of,
I know you didn't want to pick on anybody,
but when you brought up Sam Harris, you know,
I just thought, yeah, he's always talking about
people should be skeptical,
but I don't think he's skeptical about his own thoughts at all.
But just that, yeah, it's not for,
he doesn't portray that, he doesn't give that impression.
He never, he hasn't questioned himself enough to,
for me to say, yeah, he's skeptical.
I don't think he's very skeptical at all.
Yeah, because it seems that, again,
I don't know why, I guess this is a very arbitrary
and just big Sam Harris, but even Sam Harris,
he has his foundational like axioms he works of,
but within those axioms, he will question,
he'll be critical, but he never tries to break down
those axioms themselves, which I feel,
which is why I admire an intellectual like Heidegger,
which is what Heidegger was trying to do.
And that's, yeah, I guess all I would say,
Jacob, especially, thanks a lot, man.
I truly am grateful.
As I said, I'm a complete amateur,
so it means a lot that you shared your work with me,
even the stuff that you haven't publicly published
for me to go through and study.
I haven't read the whole of being in time yet.
Slowly working my way through it, you know,
plotting along, one could say,
but it's a worthwhile journey.
It's also something I've realized, I do it now more as,
in some sense, it's like a moral responsibility
that I'm obliged to do this,
that I should make time for it.
And that means spending a lot of time in solitude,
not really getting out, but the point I was trying to make
is I think you're a great thinker,
you're a fantastic writer.
We didn't really get much into the writing,
hopefully in the next episode,
but I can't thank you enough, Jacob, it means a lot.
You're a good bloke and I'm looking forward to the work
you do in the future, more and more of what you write.
And when you do write the,
when your being in time comes out,
let's have another episode and talk about your magnum opus.
That's fair, sure, certainly, yeah, I really appreciate it.
Thanks for having me on and chatting.
And I'll just reiterate something I said earlier,
if you guys want to read any of the papers
and I can't find them or can't get ahold of them,
feel free to contact me and they'll be happy to be over.
And again, I'm a better writer than I am a speaker, so.
Oh, no, man, you did great, trust me.
I am not good at neither,
so you actually just got one thing to get out of the writing.
But not just, Jacob, just on that note though,
you said that your website was still under construction.
So if I do leave a link to the website,
it's probably not going to load,
but is the domain going to be the same one
or are you going to change it completely?
The domain will stay the same.
Yeah, the website is under maintenance right now.
I'm kind of revamping it to,
I'm trying to provide resources and information
about phenomenology and existentialism
and specifically meaning and meaningfulness
and just trying to provide a little bit of direction
for people that are looking to read more about the stuff
and study it and yeah.
So I can't say how soon it will be finished,
but I would say it's not going to be
more than maybe three weeks or four weeks from now.
Fantastic, yeah, I'll try to get this up as soon as possible.
In any case, I shall leave a link to your Twitter account
or Twitter profile,
and then if people do want to get in touch with you,
they could contact you there, correct?
Yep, certainly, yeah, and I think I might even have a link
to my website on,
if you don't put it on here or whatever,
people can find it, I think on my Twitter.
Perfect, thanks mate, cheers.
I shall stop recording now, take care.
