And that really, this is the question
that I want to start off with at a high level.
The reason being, I've realized if anyone's
going to ask for me from now onwards,
what is philosophy of science?
Or can I have a bit of a brief introduction?
I just tell them to read chapter one of the Knowledge
Machine, because one of my favorite chapters
where you go through the history of, well, really,
20th century science, and this great method debate.
So I'd love for you to, Michael,
maybe like expand and lay down.
We've probably done this many times in previous broadcasts,
so I apologize if I got to repeat yourself.
The debate between Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn
and what's this ongoing great method debate
in the philosophy of science.
You know, I think it all began when a lot of intellectuals
in the 20th century were looking at the mess
that the human race had made of, or at least the kind of the
European part of the human race had made of the world.
And this is actually particularly
after the First World War, that's why I'm emphasizing Europe.
And decided that what they need to do
is to rebuild everything on rational principles.
And at that time, that really meant scientific principles
for them.
And so this question came out, what are scientific principles?
What is it to go about, for example,
constituting a state scientifically
or drawing up a moral code scientifically?
And those are deep, complicated questions
that I don't have answers to and I wasn't writing about in my book.
But of course, it turned all of these philosophers
into philosophers of science.
They had to say, here is the right way
to go about gaining knowledge, the scientific way,
as opposed to the other way.
So they wanted to be able to write down, in effect,
some rules for inquiry, not necessarily
a complete guide to inquiry, but some kind of set of rules
that was distinctive enough to separate science
from all the rest.
And what I call the great method debate
begins there with the attempt to say
what the scientific method is in a way that differentiates it
from all other forms of inquiry.
And after the early difficulties in doing that,
that turned into a big debate about whether there even
was a scientific method.
And you can see one way to look at Papa's and Coon's work
is this, that Papa was someone who thought he knew
what the scientific method was.
And he is a paradigm of one of these thinkers
who wanted to make the world scientific.
And he did write on politics as much as he did on science.
But anyway, so he's someone who believes
there's a scientific method, and he can tell you what it is,
and that the right sort of critical rational scientific mind
is the one that applies this method.
Probably more than anyone else in the history of,
at least in the history of 20th century philosophy
of science, Thomas Coon is identified
as someone who undercut Papa's project.
But Coon is not a negative philosophy.
He has his own actually quite sophisticated story
about how science works.
But it's really deeply different from the standard method
story.
And in fact, it's a story in which
scientists don't come out looking
like these kind of critical rationalists,
but something rather different.
And of course, we can talk a little bit more
about that in a moment, but rather than diving into it,
I just really want to stress this contrast
between, on the one hand, this single scientific method
that's the epitome of critical inquiry with Papa.
And then with Coon, you have there's
a distinctive social organization in science.
But it actually involves many different methods
at different times, so there's not one unchanging method.
And furthermore, that setup is almost, you might say,
well, if not irrationalist, then there's
many elements to it that seem quite at odds with Papa's
very heroic view of scientific inquiry
as I say, the apex of rationality.
Yeah, I mean, after all, Papa was also
a political philosopher, right?
I mean, I've read his book, The Open Society,
and it's enemies of, anyway, the book on totalitarianism.
And he even calls Plato the person who
started all of totalitarianism.
It's quite interesting.
So Professor Streamins, if you could start with Papa,
and then, of course, the unfortifiability principle.
Now, anyone could, I don't think it's that hard,
even for a layperson like myself,
to just Google what it means and get
a very elementary understanding.
So perhaps you could firstly just explain
what the Karl Popperian unfortifiability principle is.
But then also, as you've done in the book, rather well,
maybe lay down some of your criticisms,
criticisms of it just for the audience.
Yeah, sure.
So Papa thought that really the heart of the scientific method
was this very simple idea that if a theory makes
a false prediction, it has to be wrong somehow.
And Papa thought that at the core of the scientific inquiry
was the systematic elimination of all of the false theories.
And notionally, of course, you could imagine one day
having eliminated them all and just having
one true theory remaining, although as Papa
was understood as well as anyone,
that was not a realistic prospect.
But he thought we could at least think of ourselves
as making progress by eliminating the false theories.
So the thing that makes that, oh, go ahead.
No, I was just going to ask, please continue.
I'm not going to follow up on that, but keep going, yeah.
OK, so the thing that makes that, though,
now turning to where he begins to run into difficulties.
And he had plenty of things to say about these difficulties,
not as if this is some sort of one-shot undermining
in his view.
But it's really difficult when a theory does
make a false prediction to figure out
whether it was really the theory's fault or not.
Science is such a complicated thing.
And in particular, the kinds of measurement apparatus
that are used to make observations in cutting-edge science
are often very complicated, fragile things that only
work when conditions are exactly right.
99.9% of the time, when you get a false prediction,
it's not really the theory's fault at all.
It's just that something went wrong with apparatus.
Or maybe you made a false assumption
when you were making your calculations.
Or maybe even, and this does happen,
there's an error in the software that you're
using to analyze your results.
And so it's not really the theory's fault or not,
and it would be a terrible mistake to throw away the theory
just because you got this false prediction.
So if you're going to capture the spirit of Papa's proposal,
you have to figure out some way of deciding when it's OK
to just say, oh, something went wrong with the apparatus.
And when you should say, Arno, this time it's the theory's fault.
And so we've falsified the theory, as he says.
We can throw away the theory.
Sometimes, of course, you can just
see that something went wrong with the apparatus.
Like, you know, it's smoking, making,
attracting.
But often, in many cases in the history of science,
we have results that were anomalous and looked
like they cross problems with theories.
And we will never know what went wrong,
because it's just too late to go back and check.
I'm sure we'll probably end up talking about some examples
later on.
But this Papa really never fully satisfactorily
answered this question of when it's OK to blame the apparatus
or other assumptions and when you should blame the theory.
I think he had an interesting substantive things to say,
but he didn't succeed in writing down what he was really
after, which was a kind of a systematic calculus,
if you like, for making these decisions.
Something that took these decisions out
of the hands of scientists who might be indulging
in motivated reasoning, you know,
trying to see their own theory in a good light
and just sort of said, no, you must follow this logic.
And this logic says your theory is wrong.
Yeah, because I haven't read his book,
where he introduced a principle, what's
it called, the logic of science, I believe.
But I don't think of scientific discovery, that's it.
Yeah, I haven't read that book, although my understanding,
again, at a very elementary level,
is that it seems that Papa really
wanted some kind of a priori principle or even theory
of science that allows scientists to do science.
And then what you would argue for, and many others,
would be that, oh, well, unfortunately,
for better or worse, let's say, we haven't found that.
Yeah.
And so what you, in fact, have is, you know,
I kind of made it all sound more like a philosophical argument.
But the fact of science, as you have real arguments
over these things, should whether probably
the result is just an artifact of some problem
with the measuring apparatus or the theory really
is in trouble.
In fact, that's almost more normal than any other state
of affairs.
So some typically scientists who perform the experiment
will trust the apparatus more than the scientists
sort of a few labs over who weren't there to kind of see
it all operating and so on.
And, you know, in the end, if scientists
keep going for long enough, there
does seem to be a kind of a consensus that forms.
The experiments get done enough times,
they're enough different people.
It's not as if we're just totally at sea,
but it doesn't have this simple, crisp, objective,
algorithmic feel to it that Papa was really reaching for.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I guess that leads us to, I don't know if I should call
it the antithesis, but at least let's say,
well, juxtapose Thomas Kuhn's theory, the paradigm shift,
the term that he popularized, with the Popperian principle.
Yeah, so the structures of scientific revolutions,
perhaps my favorite book on philosophy of science,
yours is a healthy contender.
And so in contrast to Karl Popper, Professor Ravens,
how does Thomas Kuhn differ?
Because he came after Popper, isn't that right, Sam?
And what were his ideas?
Yeah.
So Papa wrote his book in the 1930s,
and Kuhn wrote his book in the 1960s to give you some sense.
So Popper is, in a way, essentially into war,
I suppose we would now say, and Kuhn is very much post-war.
And Popper was still firing on all cylinders by then,
but he wasn't presenting whole new ideas.
Well, he was entitled to have a break.
So Kuhn's idea is actually, it doesn't dispense
with the idea of a scientific method,
as I was saying earlier, but rather the idea
is that at any particular time period,
a science, say like particle physics or molecular genetics
or economics, maybe microeconomics,
will have a particular method, a particular set of rules
for doing science, and actually a rather comprehensive set
of rules for doing science.
But that these methods are not fixed for all time.
In fact, they change from time to time
in dramatic episodes called scientific revolutions,
or the phrase that Kuhn famously popularized for this
is our paradigm shift.
And the thing, the paradigm here,
is this kind of big method for doing science.
And when it shifts, that means the old paradigm
has crumbled, and a new one comes along and replaces it.
So whereas Papa and the sort of classic,
the classic searches for a scientific method,
we're looking for a single rule that is valid for all time.
As you said, hopefully our priority,
one that we can just know is right without, with certainty.
Kuhn thought these methods only last for a while,
and then their scientists actually pushed them
to the point where all of their flaws are exposed,
because they're actually, they're very rich,
but they're also kind of limited.
They have a lot of assumptions built in,
and inevitably some of those assumptions
will turn out to be wrong.
And so scientists pushed them to their breaking point.
And in effect, they destroy their own methods
by exposing the faulty assumptions or whatever.
And then some new method has to come along
and supplant the old method.
A new paradigm comes along and supplants the old paradigm.
That's a paradigm shift.
That's a scientific revolution.
Then you have a whole new methodological complex
governing what scientists do
in whatever area of science it is.
So in this way of paradigm shifting, would it be,
because it's not fair to say like, for instance,
from the Newtonian worldview of classical mechanics,
I'd say, to now with quantum theory, quantum mechanics,
is that really a paradigm shift,
or is a paradigm shift something where we have an epochal,
something like from Aristotelian science or physics
to what we have in modern science?
Because the reality is we still,
despite living now in the paradigm,
let's say, of quantum theory and quantum mechanics,
we still subscribe to certain Newtonian principles,
for sure, right?
And it's not like we've completely dismissed that.
So how did, yeah, perhaps maybe flesh out a bit more
what really is a paradigm shift.
Yeah, well, I think that the change that is most central
and to a paradigm shift, although it's not the only change,
is a change in a kind of a whole theoretical conception
of how the world works.
So although on the superficially quantum mechanics
or equally Einstein's general theory of relativity,
so that the kind of the successor theory
to Newton's work on gravitation in particular,
although that preserves a lot of what Newton said
in the sense of making the same predictions,
the theoretical underpinnings look really different.
So I'll do it with gravity.
In Newton, there's this force that objects
with mass exert on one another, they pull one another,
and that's gravity and it causes them to accelerate
and has spelled out by Newton's second law.
But in Einstein's theory that replaced Newton's theory,
there's no force directly between objects like that.
Instead, objects impart this twist or curvature to space-time,
and then other objects are trying to travel
through that space-time, but because it's twisty,
they themselves take a curvy path,
which is just the path of, say, a body like the Earth
or between the sun.
Anyway, I probably shouldn't try to explain general,
I'd rather hear you put it, but the point is it's a really,
it's even though it makes a lot of the same predictions
as Newton's theory, which it had better do
because Newton's theory made so many correct predictions,
it's a really different way of thinking
about what's going on, and that's kind of at the core
of what makes it a new paradigm.
But it also suggests all of these new experiments
that just wouldn't make sense in Newton's theory.
So an example of that would be looking for the existence
of gravitational waves, Einstein's theory predicts,
because mass actually has an impact on space-time itself.
When you have, especially very dramatic events
like two colliding black holes,
where actually cause space-time itself to shiver,
like throwing a rock into a pool,
you get these waves that ripple outwards.
So you should be able to detect those
if you build a sensitive enough apparatus,
which physicists finally succeeded in doing
in about eight years ago.
I mean, they've been building it for about 50 years,
but it finally detected gravitational waves in 2015.
So you get all of these new ideas
about what you might do with science,
and that's characteristic of a paradigm shift.
It's not just a set of new theoretical ideas,
but all of these new ideas for actually doing science,
new kinds of experiments or observations
you could perform.
So that's what makes that shift from,
oh, you mentioned quantum mechanics,
and I kind of subtly changed the example just to gravity,
because it's, I think, a bit more straightforward.
Yeah, the question stands, yeah.
But the idea is it's the new paradigm managers
to do on the surface superficially
in terms of prediction and so on,
a lot of what the old paradigm did,
but it gives you a whole new picture
of the way the universe is working
that makes sense of those predictions.
Yeah, in fact.
Your method for doing science suggests
all of these new experiments you might do and so on.
Yeah, I was thinking of more of a contemporary example of this,
and I realized, I'm reading this book also by Tim Modellin,
the philosopher of science on quantum non-locality,
and there's an interesting kind of story of Einstein,
because John Bell, he mathematically proved quantum non-locality,
I believe in the 80s or 90s,
and then Tim Modellin, he's like one of his,
John Bell is like one of his heroes,
and then I believe in the Nobel Prize in Physics
was awarded to the laureates
who proved quantum non-locality,
it's mouthful, experimentally,
and then in the book he talks about how Einstein
didn't want to accept this idea of non-locality
because his theory was in fact local,
and he called it a spooky action at a distance,
but then of course now that we have mathematical proof
and empirical evidence, let's say,
which kind of sticks to your own rule of explanation,
it seems like we're kind of going through that paradigm shift
where, well, I guess physics isn't local anymore
in the way we thought,
and I find that endlessly fascinating
how it just completely shifts not only our theories,
but just even at a very essential level
how we view the world and experience the world.
Yeah, that's a great example of, again,
of a paradigm shift where you get this new kind of
fundamental, theoretical apparatus of quantum mechanics,
and that makes these weird predictions about non-locality,
and so it suggests this,
all of these scientific experiments you might do
that wouldn't have made any sense in Newtonian physics,
and in particular those Nobel Prize winning experiments
that really established that the predictions
of the theory really were accurate.
