Hey everyone, welcome to my February 2023 book haul video. This is a new series that I started
which is very casual, completely unscripted where I just go through the books that I've bought
for the month. I tend to do a book haul every single month and I thought, hey, why not share
what I'm buying? Hopefully it adds as an impetus or some sort of inspiration for you to read some
of these books and delve into some of these thinkers. I certainly love watching other people's
book haul videos. It's something I get a lot of just, it's kind of like eating fast food for me,
just pure stimulation and pleasure from looking at all the books that people buy because I happen
to be a bibliophile and fanatical one, in fact. And you know, apart from that, I'll probably
will discuss why I chose to buy this particular book in this point in my life, what's the reason
that I'm interested in this particular book or this thinker and whatnot. But again, it's nothing
planned, it's nothing scripted, it's just me, stream of consciousness just talking, that's it.
Without further ado, let's get started. So the first book is Phenomenology, The Basics by
Dan Zahavi, I believe that's how you pronounce his name. I literally found this book over at it.
I kind of went through this before, I think I got a PDF or something, but I did refer to this a
couple of times when I was writing a few essays. And obviously Phenomenology, a topic that I'm
deeply interested in, I think I'm essentially a phenomenologist and many other things, but that's
one thing I am for sure. And though it's funny, I bought this book because I'm currently writing an
essay that I started writing out of sheer annoyance at James Lindsay, this guy is kind of like right
wing anti woke person who said that all phenomenology is so he said that all leftism is just an
is a byproduct. Oh, leftism is inspired by this philosophical phenomenology, which simply asserts
that subjectivity is truth. And I saw that and I thought that is completely not true. That is
just that is that's a that's fake news. And I could really annoyed me, you can probably see even now,
I read this tweet like months ago, but even now I got totally annoyed by that because it's a complete
caricature and mischaracterization of what phenomenology is. And therefore I started writing
this essay called what phenomenology is not. So I want to kind of try to understand phenomenology
by what what it isn't. I feel like it's funny. I think the more I've started to delve into
philosophy and theory, I've realized that sometimes the best way to grok a concept and understand a
concept is by stating what it isn't, instead of stating what it is. In some sense, even at least
for me, it kind of sits better in my mind. So I bought this book, I'm certainly going to get to
this soon. And the reason is because I want to hopefully publish that publish that essay,
perhaps in about two months, because I'm working on another one right now, got too many, too many
essays pulling me from all sides. And you know, I'm really not getting anything done,
unfortunately. That's just something that I tend to worry about quite a lot.
Ah, the pleasures. So that's why I bought this book. It's in fact to write an essay. I want to get
through all the basics as the name suggests. And my next book is an event perhaps a biography of
Jacques Darida by Peter Salomon, a Salomon, sorry, not not Salomon, Peter Salomon. And
this was recommended by R.C. Walden, if I could find the video where he did recommend the book.
So I think it was called R.C. Walden, Continental Philosophy or something. Let me see if I could
find the video. So I love watching R.C. Robin, that's his name, Robin's videos.
David, you have five interesting philosophy books, Continental Edition,
and he recommended the book. I'm pretty sure he recommended this book.
Yes, and even perhaps. So I kind of want to get into Darida and kind of post structuralist
way of thinking. I really at the moment just have like a very, very extremely peripheral,
almost caricatured version of what post structuralism is. And I thought something,
something I really enjoy is, you know, as Nietzsche said, all philosophy is a philosopher's
biography is even before delving into the philosopher, just sorry, the philosophy,
trying getting an idea from where the philosopher's coming from, which is rather
antithetical to what Heidegger said about Aristotle, that he was just someone who was born,
philosophers and died. No, I actually am interested in the philosopher. I don't know why, but
that's who I am. I generally am interested in the thinker and the background as to what,
the background in which the philosophy sits. So not just the thinker itself,
but even the context, the historical context, the culture period, all of that.
So yeah, I'm kind of getting into this. I probably will get down with this first before
getting into this because this is a small, well, I'm assuming it's a bit of a lie to read compared
to like reading theory, say, because it's a biography. But anyway, that's that. The next one
is was a gift. It was Far From the Madden Crowd by Thomas Hardy. I don't own any books by Thomas,
I think at least I don't think I do. And I kind of want to read Thomas Hardy, just like a light
read. I love reading philosophy, but at the same time, I really do want to read a lot more fiction.
But man, I'm just such a theory nerd, you know, I can't help myself. I probably read like one
work. I probably like read like one novel, but even that, like if I read Dostoevsky, for instance,
I want to read it from like a philosophical lens. I can't just read it as a book or as a work of fiction
because I'm such a theory nerd. But nonetheless, this is a book was recommended by a few friends.
I hope that it was quite good. And I hope that it kind of goes into
as the what's this called bibliography state, so vividly portraying the
superstitions and traditions of a small, rural community far from the madden crowd
shows the precarious position of a woman in a man's world. So it certainly seems interesting.
And then this book. Now, The Ethics of Ambiguity by Simone de Beauvoir. Of course, everyone knows
who Simone de Beauvoir is, at least anyone who's marginally interested in philosophy.
Simone de Beauvoir, of course, is known for her magnum opus, the second sex, but
a lot of YouTubers, in fact, philosophy YouTubers that I deeply respect, have recommended this
book because at least from my understanding, I think Simone de Beauvoir has a much more
reasonable, let's say, or I haven't got the word for it, but let's just say
realistic and take that word with a grain of salt. I don't know if that's a proper word.
Realistic, let's say like encapsulation of reality, if that makes sense, or what life is
for a human being, for a design. Because you know, Jean-Paul Sartre, he kind of
has this idea of like the transcendent consciousness that is free-floating,
consciousness everywhere. But given that Simone de Beauvoir was a woman in a time where I believe
when she was writing, women couldn't even work without getting permission from men or something.
But even in France, it was a very progressive country for the time. Nonetheless,
she lived in a deeply patriarchal system. Therefore, her understanding,
her understanding of what it means to exist in the world, especially being a woman,
I think is a lot more realistic because she talks about this kind of contradiction between
being a free being, but also the fact that we are, in fact, in a structure, in a society,
in a historical period, we also have this kind of, there's a word by
po-to-lik, there's a term by po-to-lik. Let me try to look it up because I just referred to it.
It's in this, oh, I think it was masculinity and nothingness. Yes, so in this essay I did quote
po-to-lik. Let me see if I could find it. Man is essentially finite freedom. This idea of finite
freedom, that doesn't mean we're not free, but our freedom comes within a certain structure that,
in some sense, makes the freedom infinity. It's not like this free-floating Sartrean consciousness
that we just can do whatever we want. Perhaps Sartre wrote from a position of privilege,
being a man in France in his time. Simone de Beauvoir had a different experience being a woman.
This book beautifully captures that ambiguity to existence, this kind of almost antagonism
of what it means to be human, and then, of course, the ethical and moral implications that come from
it. So I'm really keen to get into this. This is probably going to go right to the top of my list
of books to read. Perhaps once I'm done with this one, because I'm writing an essay, I'll probably
get on this. So suddenly excited to read The Ethics of Pembergute by Simone de Beauvoir.
And then comes the next one. So it's This Big Boy, Less Than Nothing by my hero,
Slavoj D탑ek. This is a book that I will jump into this year for sure. The reason being,
this year I kind of set myself a goal in terms of my education and my studying
in philosophy. It was to deeply study two of, well, I would say the two main thinkers that
have influenced my life to this moment in the deepest possible way. Portolek and, of course,
Slavoj D탑ek. So studying these two thinkers, of course, means studying all the other thinkers
that influenced them. So it's a huge project that I've set for myself. And I want to embark on it.
And I'm kind of already embarked on it, let's say. And that means going through essentially
the magnum opuses. So for Portolek it would be, I probably would be systematic theology,
the monograph. It's got three volumes. And I own it too. I just am slowly getting through that.
But then for Slavoj D탑ek, a lot of people who read D탑ek quite deeply recommend this book
and the parallax view. So this is his book on Hegel. Hegel and the shadow of dialectical
materialism. So this is certainly something I'm going to jump into soon because I won't
get a better understanding of Hegel. I don't know. It's funny. I just had a conversation with
P.F. Young, a great guy, Paul. And I realized that I was trying to explain to him the Hegelian
triad. And I think I totally butchered it. I wasn't even sure if I should take that bit out
because I didn't want to misrepresent Hegel. But I just thought, hey, look, it's a conversation.
We were just chatting. It was really casual. So if I'm just spewing bullshit,
someone will correct me and if I'm not, I'll hopefully correct myself sometime in the future
when I have a better understanding of Hegel. So definitely I'm going to work on this. In fact,
if it's possible, it's a big boy. I might even do a lecture series on this book
if it's within my capacity because, man, it's a lot to get through. The next one is
Religion and Nothingness by Nishitani, Keiji Nishitani. Of course, a book that
John Oveiki has recommended many times. In fact, in his latest lecture series, which is
what was it? After Socrates, is it? Oveiki. Yes, in his lecture series,
I think in episode five, he states that this was in the top five books that he's read.
And John Oveiki is also someone I really like. I really enjoy listening to his work.
Despite interestingly, I think theoretically, his point of views or his understanding of reality
is a lot more different to the other thinker that I would consider myself a Zhezhekian.
So, Zhezhek and John Oveiki probably have this fundamental conflict in their theories.
It's interesting just to go for a bit of a tangent here. I think a lot of the modern debate
between different intellectuals is kind of between Freud, and then there's Jung, and then there's
Lacan. And I think it's between these three thinkers. So, everyone influenced by Freud,
Jung, Lacan, they go their own way and create their own philosophies. And that's where the conflict
lies. So, John Oveiki would probably be more of a union, less than a Freudian, and then
Zhezhek would be more of a Freudian and Lacanian. So, or Lacanian. So, that's where the conflict lies.
Nonetheless, just thinking out loud here. The next book is Capital by Thomas Piketty.
I listened to a recent episode on Pillspawd. I love this channel so much. I don't know the
guy's real name. I don't think he probably goes by his pseudonym online, Pillspawd. And they
had this episode where they talk about, it's called the idea of communism. It's very interesting. It
was in fact done on a, I believe, an event that Alan Baizho and a few other thinkers, you know,
mainstream leftists, or the popular leftist intellectuals of our time, got together and
discussed the idea of communism. So, it's important to understand here. It's the word idea. That's
the concept of communism. It's not about the practical implementations. Different thing.
And they did mention this book. Not Pillspawd, but another guest on the podcast did mention
this book, Capital by Thomas Piketty. And I know it's another big one. I don't know if I'll get
into it this year. Hopefully. Definitely, I want to first get through the next book on Hegel.
But maybe after that, I'll get into this book. And the reason I like it is because,
as much as I love philosophy and concepts, I also do look for, you know, practical material
implementations of these concepts. It's something, you know, I think, as a person who's politically
involved has to think about, it can't all be philosophizing at one point. It has to be
implementation. This is perhaps my engineering side coming in. And they discussed that Thomas Piketty
just gives some very tangible, practical solutions as to how we can live in a post-capitalist
society. As to how we can implement new systems that make society more egalitarian and ensure
that there's less suffering in this world. And it's a new way of thinking about capital,
as the name suggests, in the 21st century, because we do live in a post-capitalist society.
And I think society is, you know, I mean, over here, I'm a complete jirkeen. I think the only
universal is conflict. I think the only universal is antagonism. So in some sense, in a very
Nietzschean way, society is about constantly recreating ourselves and then broader society.
There never is the good old days, nor will there ever be the utopia that some people might aspire
to have. Therefore, there never is the end of history. That never happens, as Francis Fukuyama
suggested. At least that's my current understanding. And that's it. Those are the books. I hope you all
enjoyed this book haul. Sorry if I'm blabbering. I kind of did that intentionally because, well,
this is not a scripted thing. It's just me thinking out loud here. And if there are any other books,
that you think are, let's say, tangentially related to these books that I discussed, please do leave
them down in the comment section. And I'll be keen to check them out and perhaps even end up buying
them. But thanks for watching. I'll see you in the next one, not only the next book haul, but even
in the next video, which probably, well, I've got one on my mother world, the software engineering
world where I'm doing on effective Java, which I shall record soon. And then the other one is a,
I'm excited for this, actually, a Twitter space that I'll be hosting, not hosting, sorry, I'll be a
guest in with my brother, you and go, who I'm hoping to have on the podcast soon because this guy,
alone to death, but also the smart bloke. So it would be interesting to have a conversation
with him. Cool. See you in the next one. Take care. Cheers.
