Hey everyone, welcome to this reading of my essay, Masculinity and Nothingness.
So since the topic of masculinity has been on the news with the rise of controversial
figures like Andrew Tay, I decided to write this essay on masculinity from an existentialist
perspective, particularly inspired by the work of John Posatra and Martin Heidegger.
So without further ado, let's get started, Masculinity and Nothingness.
Do you become a man instead of being born one?
Because we have, for millennia, made moral, aesthetic, religious demands on the world,
looked upon it with blind desire, passion or fear, and abandoned ourselves to the bad
habits of illogical thinking.
This world has gradually become so marvelously variegated, frightful, meaningful, soulful.
It is a quiet color, but we have been the colorists, favorite nature, human or too human.
You are condemned to be a man, not because we live amidst a so-called masculinity crisis
where young men are purposeless and lost.
These are secondary concerns.
Instead it's because you're thrown into this world with circumstances you never chose.
You're born into a specific time, family, culture, gender and body that you never asked
for.
You have no idea why you are here, but still expected to follow arbitrary customs, social
conventions, with ties of kinship, duty and so on.
As the song Riders on the Storm goes, into this world we are thrown like a dog without
a bone.
If you momentarily pause and think of the uncanny nature of existence and your position
in an ostensibly meaningless universe where you nevertheless seek meaning, you discover
life is downright absurd.
Accordingly grasping this absurdity is a starting point to realizing that masculinity, as defined
by society, does not exist.
Therefore what Simone de Beauvoir said about women also applies to men albeit differently.
One is not born but rather becomes a woman, a second sex.
Respective of your biological sex, what you think of as a real man that is how you should
conduct yourself both socially and privately is a sociohistorical construct where you become
a man instead of being born one.
Since man lacks any masculine essence, you are free.
And man's freedom amongst his throneness is the actual crisis.
To understand throneness, a concept introduced by Martin Heidegger as Guofenheim, lets exemplify
using the body which inescapably constitutes one's being.
As Jean-Paul Sartre argued, you are a transcendent consciousness that allows you to transcend
a subjective body and experience freedom, a tearing away from oneself, a rashmaswa.
So perhaps you've had the bizarre experience one goes through in life, apropos one's body.
You may stand naked in front of a mirror and see that you, whatever you or I mean, Heidegger
calls it a Dasein, Dasein, their being.
Dasein's being is always at issue for it and its very being as having to take a stand
upon that issue by living its life in one way or another.
The Cambridge Heidegger lexicon.
Have a body that seems alien, which you may not even like and yet you as a self cannot
be in this world without it.
In fact, it's impossible to imagine what it's like to live without a body.
For a moment, leave aside the vain attributes, e.g. fatness, scrawniness, stretch marks,
pimples, etc. and look at your body phenomenologically as part of things themselves, meaning back
to the ways that things of the world are actually given an experience.
Then you realize, as elucidated by Maurice Molopointe, the body is something that's
a factical part of you.
It's endowed to you automatically as a brute fact of your existence.
Although at first glance your body looks like any other object in the world, if you keep
staring at that mirror, you'll realize this body of yours isn't merely a set of properties
and mechanisms, rather it's what allows you to exist.
In fact, when you act in the world by going for a walk, let's say, and duck a protruding
tree branch, you never experience the body as a thing utilized to duck that branch.
Instead, as you're engaged in the act, the body disappears, and your intentionality,
not to let that branch touch you, constitutes your experience.
Paradoxically, the disappearance of the body is what allows your intent to actualize.
The body also allows you to make sense of the world and how the broader ecological context
you're immersed within is structured.
Like in our example, that of an unpredictable environment where tree branches are jutting
out.
One ought to realize that the body isn't a mere vessel to carry our conscious experience
around the world, but rather it's a part of us innately.
Of course, such a prosaic experience doesn't necessarily lead to the aforementioned incongruity
of the body-feeling alien, as your body seems to be doing what it's supposed to do by following
your commands, so to speak.
Nonetheless, it's indicative of how you're thrown into your body, and that it isn't something
you can dispose of by uploading your consciousness to a computer or some such nonsense.
However, something saliently particular to the body you'll see on that mirror is your
penis, the phallic, fleshy, hairy bulge between your legs that St. Augustine says God gave
us as punishment for original sin, because as most men know, it doesn't work when you
want it to, think of a one-night stand, and works when you don't want it to, think of
a random erection in public.
Your penis is the quintessential indicator of the bizarreness of life, as it shows the
antagonism between your freedom as a conscious and transcendent human being, while also having
your existence physically embodied with biological drives such as an unfitted libido, in our case.
When wanting to duck that branch, your body follows your intentionality, but rarely does
a man control his sexual drives, or lack thereof.
As Haruki Murakami writes, the penis is a strange organ that has a mind of its own and
thinks thoughts not shared by my brain, Kafka on the show, and Augustine knows this best
because he really couldn't keep it in his pants back in the 4th century.
So your penis is illustrative of the real masculinity crisis, because it shows the paradox of existence.
Considering that, unlike objects, e.g. trees, chairs, iPhones, etc., that are being in the
world, onsua, a mode of existence that is static, unconscious, and simply is, you are
infinite freedom, a being for itself, posua, that is a conscious being aware of their own
consciousness, but is also incomplete, ambiguous, and non-determined.
This lacking of a predetermined essence forces man to create himself out of nothingness,
and man is nothing when the nothingness is primarily realized to us through negation,
that is, when a person's absence is accurately apprehended.
The most vivid example he, Sartre, provides to illustrate this pre-reflective negation
as the apprehension of Peir's absence from a café.
Sartre describes Peir's absence as pervading the whole café.
The café is cast in the metaphorical shade of Peir, not being there at the time he had
been expected.
This experience depends on human expectations, of course.
Sartre argues that if, by contrast, we imagine or reflect that someone else is not present,
say the Duke of Wellington, an elephant, etc., these abstract negative facts are not existentially
given in the same manner as our pre-reflective encounter with Peir's absence.
They're not given as an objective fact, as a component of the real.
Inomenologically speaking, the nothingness of Peir is a reality.
In your experience, his palpable lack is salient about everything else, in this hypothetical
café.
Therefore, it gives non-being an ontological place.
Everything that's already at being in the café, from the other patrons, baristas, waiters,
the furniture, etc., ceases to exist and your attention goes solely to the absence of Peir.
This pre-reflective negative apprehension penetrates you, but you don't directly intend
not to see Peir, but rather you dramatically encounter the non-being of Peir, or as Sartre
writes, Peir absent haunts this café, being a nothingness.
In that sense, the fact of your pre-reflective negation, apropos Peir, also applies to you
because let's say if Peir showed up and you were absent, then he would encounter your
non-being because you're a Dazain, much like him.
So what makes your being stand out is not any grounded positive affirmation, i.e. reputation,
personality, psychological type, and so on, but everything you're not.
The ambiguity of your existence, you are what you are, and you're not what you are, is the
Sartre and nothingness.
It imbues the tension between your being in itself and being for itself.
That is between you being a biological, psychological, and socio-historical creature, and your self-perception
as negating those observable or descriptive properties of your being in support of an aspirational
or ideal view of yourself that's learning, growing, philosophizing, etc.
In that vein, your starting point to being you is by declaring I am not that thing, which
perhaps is why your starting point to being a man is by declaring I reject masculinity.
For that reason, your nothingness condemns you to be free, because if you're nothing,
you only exist in this world qua infinite possibilities, presenting themselves to you.
Similar to standing on the edge of a cliff and knowing very well you have the freedom
to jump, nonetheless, you must choose from these possibilities every conscious moment
of your life.
Therefore, you're constantly recreating yourself through action by projecting yourself
onto the world, which is a task that leaves one perturbed.
Fegregarde describes as angst as the dizziness of freedom.
Your masculinity has no essential reality.
It doesn't objectively exist, and the existence of a man precedes the essence of his masculinity.
That said, your body, particularly the penis, is still a reminder that while you're completely
aware of your freedom, you nonetheless throne into a life of finitude that constrains this
freedom of your consciousness.
Though you're not trapped in it, thinking so is a piezolanumist response to life.
As Portillic writes, man is essentially finite freedom.
Freedom not in the sense of indeterminacy, but in the sense of being able to determine
himself through decision in the center of his being.
Man as finite freedom is free within the contingencies of his finitude, the courage to be.
The contradiction between freedom and throneness is irreconcilable.
Nor is it a mere duality one can be indifferent towards, but a fact of life to struggle with,
violently.
No synthesis between these conflicting truths lead to sublimated wholeness, or some higher
comforting truth.
Instead, the truth lies in the sheer antagonism itself, and it's this violent friction that
leads to what Gabriel Marcel calls the homoverto, the traveler, where man is never a destination,
but he is an unresolved contradictory and itenderant being.
We can never own anything, and we never truly settle anywhere, even if we stay in one place
all our lives, at the existentialist café.
Being thrown into the aforementioned paradox puts us in the unknown, and sometimes even
the uncanny.
Or specifically, for Marcel it leads to the mystery of existence.
One will never make sense of this mystery, yet it ought to be faced valiantly.
It isn't a mere speculative problem that's solvable a-personally at a distance, but it
becomes a mystery only because, above all, we are involved in the mystery as it's particular
to us and cannot be tackled by anybody at all, but rather it reveals itself for nobody
but me.
Facing everything delineated above requires courage, which a man should aspire to embody.
Paul Tillich writes on courage pertaining to anxiety stating, courage does not remove
anxiety.
Since anxiety is existential, it cannot be removed.
But courage takes the anxiety of non-being into itself.
Courage is self-affirmation, in spite of, namely, in spite of non-being.
He who acts courageously takes in his self-affirmation the anxiety of non-being upon himself, the
courage to be.
Similarly, your courage shouldn't remove the paradox and mystery of existence, but
take an opponent yourself assumed fully, and then you act in spite of and through it with
the awareness that only you can affirm yourself, only you can act in this particular instance.
Therefore, to do away with preconceived notions of masculinity is this supreme act of courage
for a man.
If you haven't experienced any of this phenomena illuminated above, you're distracting yourself
and being a coward.
If you're listening to misogynists like Andrew Tate, so-called men's podcasts like Fresh
and Fit, or even more positive figures like Jordan Peterson, you have no existential vitality,
no awareness of life, and your will to live is weakened.
Thereby, you refuse to take responsibility to face reality and have outsourced your living
to the other.
You have become a sheep refusing to think critically, you are a slave that needs a master
commanding you how to live.
Sathra calls such instances bad faith, mv svoa, denying our inherent freedom.
We know we're radically free, but we repudiate the responsibility of their freedom by conforming
to the other.
In our case, that's masculinity, or what a real man should be, similar to how a Parisian
waiter plays a performative role.
Let us consider this waiter in the café.
His movement is quick and forward, a little too precise, a little too rapid.
He comes towards the patrons with a step, a little too quick.
He bends forward a little too eagerly.
His voice, his eyes express an interest, a little too solicitous for the order of the
customer.
All his behavior seems to us a gain.
He applies himself to training his movements as if they were mechanisms, the one regulating
the other.
His gestures and even his voice seem to be mechanisms.
He gives himself the quickness and pettiless rapidity of things.
He is plain.
He is amusing himself.
But what is he playing?
We need not watch long before we can explain it.
He is playing at being a waiter in a café.
There are indeed many precautions to impress a man in what he is, as if we lived in perpetual
fear, that he might escape from it, that he might break away and suddenly elude his condition,
being a nothingness.
This is no different to the performative role a businessman trying to sell you financial
freedom plays.
He speaks and dresses a certain way and asks questions not to understand or engage in dialogue,
but to sustain his performance of being a competent and astute person.
Much like the waiter, every action by the businessman is contrived.
He follows a prefabricated narrative given to him by society.
He is an actor following a script, performing for the public.
Of course, being a man is also a performance you put on.
That said, bad faith isn't about lies, self-deception or inauthenticity.
As intimated in this essay, you don't have an authentic self.
So there's no use trying to be your true self.
And concomitantly, you cannot deceive a self that doesn't exist.
Satra also doesn't believe one can escape bad faith entirely, because it's omnipresent.
And we all inescapably play a role, as Shakespeare writes, all the worlds a stage, and all men
and women merely players, as you like it.
Does this mean you're in a hopeless situation where you'll always be a puppet of society?
Yes.
And given you're free, in typical Camusian fashion, you can still choose to embrace the
absurdity of your existence and find courage in hopelessness.
While you will succumb to bad faith, you can fight your cowardly demise for eternity.
You can orient yourself towards courage, taking radical responsibility and refusing to take
comfort in false masculinity.
You can create your subjective ideal of what being a man entails that solely appeases you
alone.
Indeed, it's unsurprising that Satra ends his magnum opus by writing, Man is a useless
passion, being a nothingness.
But perhaps his life showed that he tried to make himself worthy of his condition, and
so should you.
But on your own account, after all, Satra is just another dead philosopher.
Whatever the case may be, this is the reality you're born into, so do with it as you may.
Frankly, I choose courage, because all the ideals expounded by the phenomenologists and
existentialists I tackled in this essay make life the ultimate adventure worth living for,
if one doesn't shy away from them.
Coda.
The themes of exploding this essay certainly aren't specific to men.
If you're human, they apply to you, bar none.
However, I've intentionally used a language that'll direct this essay towards men, who
are told they're in a crisis in the current socio-cultural and historical position.
Therefore, this crisis ought to be aptly named the human crisis instead of the masculine
adjective, although that would generalize the situation all too much, making it an abstract
theory which the existentialists would detest.
In any case, replacing the terms man and masculine with woman and feminine, respectively, wouldn't
change the underlying message of this piece.
