Hey everyone, welcome to yet another episode of the NRLN podcast.
I shall continue what I've been doing in the previous episodes where I read out these guiding
axioms that I laid down for my newsletter, The Unhappy Man, and in case you didn't watch the
previous episodes to repeat the same old introduction, sort of ad nauseam, I laid down
seven axioms for my writing for the newsletter and in the middle of it I realized, oh wow,
what I'm writing here, it's not just for the newsletter, in fact it's sort of a framework for
all of my creative work and this podcast certainly is a part of what I consider to be my creative
work so it just makes sense to read out these axioms so that, you know, since the podcast just
started and if you're a new variable listener, whatever you may be, you'll see where I'm coming at
when I'm trying to produce content for the podcast, not just my monologues or my pieces,
even the interviews I hope to do through the axioms that I've been laying down.
And today's axiom is axiom number three. If you did miss the other two, please go and watch them.
It's part of the playlist, it's all on the YouTube channel on Spotify.
But without further ado, let's get started. The guiding axiom number three for the unhappy man,
for the inner realm podcast, for all of my creative work is, and this is very, very important,
I wrote this with a lot of passion, I would say. It's something that's very, very close to my heart.
Never mistake cynicism for wisdom.
In Dostoevsky's Kraman punishment, Raskolnikov has a point when he says,
pain and suffering are always inevitable.
For a large intelligence and a deep heart, the really great men must, I think, have a great sadness
on earth. Perhaps it's true that men of higher intellectual acuity are more aware of the world's
tragedy and folly. So their contempt for the deluded masses who are lost in superficial vanity
and worldly self-indulgence probably has some warrant. But I wonder if those ancient critiques
with their eruditeness and polemical virtuosity tend to fall in love with their own ingenious.
In truth, the highbrows rarely believe about themselves what Socrates declared of himself.
I neither know nor think I know. Most casual, critical philosophizing is merely one's
cynicism being projected onto the world masquerading as wisdom.
The only thing worse than a cynic is an accompanying sharp intellect to tantalize
a cynicism. For instance, if we take happiness, something elusive for us humans, such a person
refuses to believe that someone could be genuinely happy in this world, and is dismissive or even
hates anyone trying to do so. Let's see a man who's sincerely endeavoring to make something of
himself as merely a show, one puts on to please the cultural overlords,
pusillanimously and slavishly living by an emasculating moral duty. For the cynic,
the ordinary person, playing his part as a steadfast citizen, fulfilling his responsibilities
towards his family, paying his dues to the divine, without overtly theologizing God,
and maybe even volunteering at a homeless shelter once in a while is all but puppetry.
The cynic sneers at all of this effort and says it's all futile and only for the credulous.
They are in utter disbelief of sincerity and anyone striving towards the good. In their
enlightenment state, they think of themselves as being beyond the trivialities of ordinary life and
basic morality, despite being willing to even suffer for their cynical ideologies.
But the irony is that a cynic is critical of everything and anything but their hubristic
cynicism. The cynical attitude of the heart always comes first and the rationalization second.
Whenever I encounter a cynic, which sometimes is someone I meet within my own soul, I'm reminded
of what G.K. Chesterton wrote about the new rebel in orthodoxy. But the new rebel is a skeptic
and will not entirely trust anything. He has no loyalty, therefore he can never be really a
revolutionist. And the fact that he doubts everything really gets in his way when he wants
to denounce anything. For all denunciation implies a moral doctrine of some kind,
and the modern revolutionist doubts not only the institution he denounces, but the doctrine by
which he denounces it. Thus he writes one book complaining that imperial oppression insults
the purity of women and then he writes another book about the sex problem in which he insults it
himself. He curses a sultan because christian girls lose their virginity and then curses
Mrs. Grandi because they kept it. As a politician, he would cry out that war is a waste of life and
then as a philosopher that all of life is a waste of time. A russian pessimist will denounce a policeman
for killing a peasant and then proved by the highest philosophical principles that the peasant
ought to have killed himself. A man denounces marriage as a lie and then denounces aristocratic
profligates for treating it as a lie. He calls a flag a bubble and then blames the oppressors of
poland or island because they take away that bubble. The man of this school goes first to a
political meeting where he complains that savages are treated as if they were beasts, then he takes
his hat and umbrella and goes on to a scientific meeting where he proves that they practically
are beasts. In short, the modern revolutionist being an infinite skeptic is always engaged
in undermining his own minds. In his book on politics, he attacks men for trampling on morality.
In his book on ethics, he attacks morality for trampling on men. Therefore, the modern man
in revolt has practically become useless for all purposes of revolt. A rebelling against
everything, he has lost a right to rebel against anything. So before I do read out my commentary
on that paragraph, the good thing about doing a podcast is I can sort of impromptuly add notes
and ancillary points to reading the essay. So think of this as more of a footnote. A lot of people
think of Chesterton as being a typical orthodox conservative kind of thinker and theologian,
but I wouldn't necessarily simplify him to that level. I think he's a much deeper,
profound thinker than merely someone defending the orthodoxy. So in that spirit,
I read him and in that spirit, I wrote this little bit as a commentary on what I just read.
To explicate his sentiments, Chesterton writes not of his averseness or disdain of the
revolutionary, but of the rebel who's a cynic, where his ideological affiliations merely a projection
of an essential spiritual attitude. And the problem with the cynicism is that it becomes a lazy way
to opt out of life. Echoing a more contemporary religious thinker, Jordan Pearson's sentiments,
we're met with an ultimate outlook on life. Either everything wonders matters, which comes
with the concomitant and crushing burden of responsibility. The striving man chooses his
path and recognizes that his striving, no matter how arduous and demanding, is meaningful and necessary.
Or the other is nothing matters, therefore one refuses to partake in life.
This man is super-seriously contemptuous of the striving man and his so-called higher virtues,
which is too simple and naive. It's only a matter of time when such a person's cynicism
becomes resentment and they've created hell for themselves. He'd say better to be a king in hell
than a slave in heaven. Funnily enough, I've begun to notice the latter type in the more cerebral
intellectual types. But that's a whole other conversation. In any case, existential apathy
and resignation cannot be a mere negation because being, which we all in escapably are,
requires the void to be filled with something meaningful.
Free will itself is mostly a curse, as one does not look into the niche in abyss.
But the infinite boundlessness of one's possibilities, which Kierkegaard called
the dizziness of freedom that everyone confronts in life when we are met with freedom's
actuality as the possibility of possibility. This is why the philosophers try to convince
themselves that men are not free. Most of us are petrified of truly being free.
I do believe that. Having said that, I'm not as optimistic as Peterson or any other run-of-the-mill
conservative. Unequivocally adopting responsibility, much like the striving man Ipsofacto, cannot be
the antidote to rescue one from the gazing abyss or the dizziness imbued by the endless possibility
of possibility. I could see how most of us modern humans could be a Joseph K. or a Gregor Samsa
stuck in a Kafkaesque nightmare, lost in triviality and vanity, doing meaningless alienating work,
knowing very well our life entails nothingness, but refusing to unshackle ourselves from the
ideological chains as freedom hurts. Kafka himself wrote, I'm in chains, don't touch my chains.
Yeah, that paragraph clearly is my Marxist side. I think the conservatives are way too optimistic
and to some sense even naive about this question of meaning. In any case, the final paragraph.
Ergo, in typical absurdist fashion, I go even a step further from my previous claim of humans being
lousy at being happy to conclude that we're equally or even lousier at finding meaning,
despite being the only beings in the universe that yearns for it desperately. The predominant
ideologies and modes of being prescribed to us by the wisest of men, stoicism, revolt or rebellion,
adopting responsibility, piety, cosmic resignation, sartrean, radical freedom, the postmodern notion
of existence, perceived essence, etc. are inadequate for the human heart. While there are
pronounced ways to be unhappy, miserable, loveless and meaningless in life, there's no ideal
predestined way to be happy, content and living meaningfully. In that case, I have no choice but
to be wholeheartedly happy for the happiness of another, even though it may seem ludicrous to me.
I ought to never assume someone's happiness is a sign of inauthenticity or God forbid naivety.
And indeed, this means never to mistake my cynicism for wisdom. And in this podcast,
I shall always strive to never, ever make that mistake. Thanks for watching. Cheers.
