Hey everyone, welcome to yet another episode of the NRLM podcast and today
I'll be reading out guiding axiom number four that I wrote for my newsletter, The Unhappy Man.
And in case you haven't been following these axioms that I've been
animerating in the past couple episodes, essentially there were seven axioms I
laid down for my newsletter, The Unhappy Man, as I did mention before. And I
realized, wow, by me writing and thinking clearly, these axioms that I'm laying
down really are a framework for all of my creative work. And that obviously includes
this podcast and whatever, interviews, scripts, I don't know,
dispositions, whatever I do on this podcast, I'm hoping to do it via these
axioms, via this framework. And I certainly don't want it to be
something that confines me or something that sort of, let's say, that doesn't
allow me to, that shackles me. I'd rather hope that it's a good place to start
from, and then open up into somewhere because I mean, I need some kind of stable
footing. And that's why I thought it's wise and prudent, especially given my
nature to get lost in obscure thoughts and sometimes nonsense. It's healthy to
have some axioms, especially at a respectful reader or a listener in this
case. So axiom number four, five, and six, I don't want to just do what I have
been doing in the previous episodes, or the previous axioms that I've been
reading out, where I've mostly been just reading it out of the essay I've
written. Rather, I want to maybe pause in the middle, have a bit of commentary,
expand as, you know, the good thing about a podcast is it allows me to do that.
And I think the reason for that is because I realized, you know, laying down
these axioms, because I wasn't writing a lot at that time, it took me a bit of
time to be about three to four months, not because they're deep and profound or
dense in any way. In my opinion, they're pretty superficial, not too deep
thinking. However, well, the reason it took a long time is because I just had
other commitments. I couldn't write that much. However, what I was trying to make
was that in those few months itself, I've been reflecting a lot on kind of a
revelation, let's say, that I had in the past two years or so. It wasn't a
sudden thing. It wasn't one event. It was a gradual change I had in my thinking.
Both existentially, theologically, and as a result of that, perhaps,
philosophically. And these three axioms, so four, five, six, that I'm going to cover
for today and then five and six in future episodes, they're really important for me.
They are important in the sense that they're very existentially put into the
current place I'm in life. And I'm trying to deeply read thinkers such as
Slavoj Žižek, Hortelik, and Nietzsche of Coz, and recently even the theologian Peter
Rollins. These thinkers have had an unbelievable impact on how I viewed
everything, especially Christianity, given that I'm a Christian. And therefore,
because in many ways my identity comes from that relationship I have with
Christianity and Christ, when my Christian beliefs are subverted, I myself am subverted.
So these these axioms are important for me, four, five, and six, and I hope to
carry on this podcast in the spirit of these axioms as I've said many times before.
Anyway, that's enough of a introduction or prelude. I shall get started. Today is
guiding axiom number four. It's called on writing, or in this case on podcasting,
without lies, machinations, and bullshit. And of course, since I didn't mention in that
unnecessarily long introduction, the link to the original article or essay is down
in the description along with the other guiding axioms too. It's infinitely easier to know of a
lie than what is true. Existentially, a lie is not a mere untrue, but an utterance of non-being.
I got this term from Paul Tillich, by the way. And to be aware of non-being is more than the
conceptual theoretical understanding of a philosophical concept. Once it's felt spiritually,
the anxiety it imbues can leave one perturbed and unhinged. Such as why Paul Tillich states,
anxiety is the existential awareness of non-being, the courage to be, page 35.
The anxiety Tillich writes of is not the medicalized kind a psychiatrist would prescribe a drug to
or a new age self-help guru would try to solve with a mindfulness course. It's inescapably
a part of our being. In fact, Tillich says that this anxiety is ontological. As he continues
on the courage to be page 36, perhaps I should not keep reading out the page numbers because
that's kind of annoying, isn't it? I'll just say the name of the book and obviously in the
original article that I'll link below, you'll see all the sources and pages and whatnot.
So getting back to this, existential in this sentence means that it is not the abstract
knowledge of non-being which produces anxiety, but the awareness that non-being is a part of
one's own being. Anxiety is finitude, experienced as one's own finitude. This is the natural
anxiety of man as man and in some way of all living beings, it is the anxiety of non-being,
the awareness of one's finitude as finitude. So in this play of words that Tillich is doing here,
what I understood it to be as that what we talk of anxiety angst or the idea of finitude, it is
it is ontic in nature. It is the starting point. It isn't, in that sense, perhaps he gets it from
psychoanalysis where, you know, I think the Freudian notion is, I mean, no way an expert
in psychoanalysis, but my very superficial reading is that being born into this world itself is
traumatic. It's trauma. We're born with trauma and our embellishment into being is a traumatic event
which is why, you know, it goes on to the rest of psychoanalysis, repression, whatnot, hysteria.
Therefore, I see anxiety in the same way. I see it as not something to be killed,
despite, due to our own peril in my opinion, we've overtly medicalized it, but that's a whole
other topic and in fact, it's a podcast that I'm going to do soon. I'm currently writing the script
because it's a sensitive topic for many people. I want to be punctilious and I would say more
respectful as to how I do it. Getting back to the essay, despite being encompassing non-being
and the impossibility of a jettisoning existential anxiety, lying exacerbates the looming threat
of non-being and make one's constitutive ontic anxiety pathological. You're aware of that's
actuality. That at one arbitrary point in life, everything culminates in a nothingness.
Despite you not knowing what this nothing truly entails, you have intimations of its eminence
and yet you can cope with death. But if you lie and deceive in your finite existence, not only does
death verge upon you insufferably, but your life becomes so agonizingly hellish that you'd wish
you were dead already. This means we identify a lie or truth best not by the cognizance of
correspondence or objective facts, the way a theoretician or a scientist would do with a given
problem, but primarily by being attentive to one's inner thoughts, emotions and psychic states when
ushering or writing something. In that vein, metaphysically speaking, if the universe is made
up of facts, the trueness or falseness of a fact necessitates a human being who are designed to use
how to give into terminology to come to being. Case in point, Martin Luther, the father of the
Protestant Reformation, was a little known priest in 1517. This was until he famously hammered his
95 pieces onto the doors of Old Saints Church in the border town of Wittenberg, Saxony, modern-day
Germany, subsequently stirring up a storm across a whole of Europe and eventually every corner of
the world. His list began the ongoing dissension between the hegemony of the Roman Catholic Church
and its opponents, colloquially known as the Protestants, and secularly precipitated leftism.
This is true, I believe that Martin Luther was pretty much the first leftist. I'll start that
sentence from the top, and secularly precipitated leftism, anti-statism and modernity as a whole.
One could argue that many momentous historical revolutions and social movements,
from the French Revolution to the civil rights movement, could be pointed to this ostensibly
simple act by Luther, which he intended only to start an academic debate.
At the time, the absolute theocratic authority of the Church led to Luther's excommunication
by Pope Leo X, and he was called to the diet of worms, a formal deliberative assembly,
and demanded to recant his heretical statements over risk being burnt at the stake. In his
intransigency, notwithstanding the risk of dying a brutal death, he famously responded,
my conscience is captive to the word of God, thus I cannot and will not recant,
because acting against one's conscience is neither safe nor sound. Here I stand, I can do no other,
God help me. Since we live in secular times and are detached from a pre-reform society,
we can't understand the significance of Luther's actions. No reading of history will
help us realize the radical change he set forth in humanity. However, we all have our own
distinctive moments of here I stand, I can do no other. Luther believed to have found
metaphysical truths about being, of course, perhaps I will not, perhaps if I rewrote this,
I would probably have not put the word metaphysical in there, because after reading Heidegger,
I'm beginning to question the whole project of metaphysics itself, so I don't know if
Luther really was talking about metaphysical truths in that sense, so I would just leave it as
Luther believed to have found truths about being. Okay, back to the essay. But all he had to stand
by was his conscience, not an objective theory of any kind. His only way to discern truth from
untruth was solely himself. If he recanted his statements, he would be telling the greatest
of lies by defining his conscience. This he couldn't live with, which is why he can do no other.
You and I have very little in common with Luther except for this phenomenon of being,
creatures with an inescapable, idiosyncratic conscience.
Leaving aside obstruous metaphysics and ontology, in our daily lives, in certain immediate
particularities, we find truths above truth, but ourselves and conceivably the largest structural
whole of reality itself. So we ought to pay attention to our lives with the utmost rigor.
A lie is more than asserting an unfactual statement, because it's not withstanding
machinations to obfuscate and masquerade lies as truth, even if we convince everyone to accept
a lie as being true, when one lies, one knows. And to make matters worse, we are also self-deceiving.
We must stop fooling ourselves into thinking that our emphatical will is the will to an
unprejudiced truth, far from it. Kierkegaard, in his oblique characteristic Mao, was a
philosopher who expounded best on finite man's susceptibility to self-deception.
For instance, he was highly skeptical of Aristotelian virtue ethics and moral philosophy.
A Kierkegaardian would find living man as solely a rational creature of moral reasoning to be
unduly naive about the human capacity for radical evil.
Despite at times its spuriousness and unreliability, the findings of psychoanalysis tell us that we
cannot acontextually and abstractly follow an objective morality. Even when we think we are
doing so, it could be self-deception. Comprehending this datum doesn't necessarily require reading
the labyrinth of existentialism and moral philosophy, although we all ought to. Rather,
being attentive to ourselves will suffice. Recall the last time you unequivocally knew
you were doing something wrong, not new in the sense of knowing some historical fact or political
theory that it would regurgitate to sound smart, but you felt a pang of profound guilt and visceral
disgust towards yourself for a certain act. Amidst the moment, you hated who you were and couldn't
relieve your conscience of this psychospiritual distress. At such times, most of us who would
justify our subjective shortcomings that are supposed to be on par with our personal telos
would conjure up any reason to tell ourselves we are not at fault, our intent was good or there
was no real harm done, etc. And who could blame us? Life is hard and occasionally, perhaps always,
out of pure pragmatism similar to cypher in the matrix, we choose to live in convenient lies
as ignorance is bliss for most of us. In many ways, Nietzsche completed Kedricat's
essentialism by hammering home the point that even our conscious decisions and social structures
we're put in, for example, the revealed scientific institutions aren't oriented towards uppercase
T truth. Nietzsche writes, even scientific inquiry itself, our science indeed, what does
all scientific inquiry in general mean, considered as a symptom of life? What is the point of all
that science and even more serious, where did it come from? What about that? Is scientific scholarship
perhaps only a fear and an excuse in the face of pessimism? A delicate self-defense against
the truth? And speaking morally, sometimes like cowardice and falsehood, speaking un morally,
a clever trick. Oh Socrates, Socrates, was that perhaps your secret or your secretive
ironness? Was that perhaps your irony? Gosh, I can never get over and not ever fall in love with
Nietzsche's prose. It's just bizarre. I can't believe he writes like that. So what does it mean
to be an authentic and truthful writer in this utter confusion of existence? It's someone who
doesn't write bullshit. Unlike a liar who might at least have the pretense of being concerned for
the truth, Harry G. Frankfurt expounds that bullshit is speech or writing by a bullshit artist
without any regard for truth at all. Instead, he is predominantly aiming to be solely persuasive
and change a listener or reader without convincing someone that something is true.
It's even done unconsciously as Frankfurt elucidates in his paper. Our natures are indeed
elusively insubstantial, notoriously less stable and less inherent than the natures of other things.
And in so far as this is the case, sincerity itself is bullshit. Ergo, we ought to never confuse
our sensible authenticity in speaking or writing as being truthful. Sincerity itself could be a tool
used for deception. One can never truly know if one is being truthful. Much like love,
truth is an article of faith. One falls into it and thereafter decides to pursue it. Pause,
just a point here. When I mean one falls into it, I certainly don't mean it's a complete arbitrary
chaotic random event. You know, finding truth or falling in love. For both to happen, to find
truth and even to fall in love, I believe we have to, as a subject, orient ourselves towards
the fall, so to speak. And I'm going to write about this in the future. Once we fall, we have to
decide to be fallen. Therefore, it's not a mere chaotic irrational event completely out of our
control. We not very much, or ultimately perhaps, but in many ways we do have control at least
as to how we orient ourselves and as to how we are ready to find love or find truth.
Alright, back to the essay. Essentially speaking, which is the only way one ought to speak about
such matters, this is why truth is an orientation, as I had said before. The intent of an individual
and a state of being one chooses to embody rather than a destination, set of facts or propositions.
In that sense, one could make an unfactual statement due to their ignorance, but still not
be a liar, or bush it up, as he is still aiming at being a seeker of truth, notwithstanding
his proclivity to be fallible due to the sheer fact of being human. Of course, an outside observer
cannot empirically verify this, it's entirely left to one's conscience, so perhaps one should
be petrified of lying and striving to be an arbiter of truth. Sojournetsen was right when he wrote,
the simple step of a courageous individual is not to take part in the lie. Subjectivity is truth.
And this leads to one of the most contentious statements of this essay.
While I'll strive for objectivity, pause. I had to pause there and think, because I don't even
know what I mean as strive for objectivity, what that means. Perhaps the more apt term is
while I'll strive for a trans subjectivity, a common subjectivity, if that makes any sense at all,
because I'm commonly believed that we have no way of knowing what's objectively true.
It's something that just doesn't comprehend. It's not something that I can resonate with,
objective truth in that sense. All right, back to the essay. I don't want to over complicate this,
just want to, at least in some sense, stick to the essay.
I'll start again on that. I kind of screwed up that sentence.
So subjectivity is truth. And this leads to one of the most contentious statements of this essay.
While I'll strive for objectivity, I need to realize that for the type of being we are,
that is human and not God, subjectivity is true. In his trenchant critique of German
idealism and ardent emphasis on existence to be with an inwardness over abstract theorizing,
yet again, it was Kerkregat who expounds, and even introduced to the western mind, perhaps,
the notion of truth that matters above all other truths is the subjective one.
Sarat, of course, appropriated this project for a secular world with this atheistic
existentialism of radical freedom. I'm more a Kerkregadian than a Saratrian, as I'm a religious
Nietzschean. That is to say, God does not exist objectively, but purely subjectively. And what
matters is not the afterlife, but the present one. Therefore, I'll write through the lens of
subjective truth and be primarily concerned with subjectivity. Kerkregat writes in concluding
unscientific postscript, Christianity protests against every form of objectivity. He desires
that the subject should be infinitely concerned about himself. It is with subjectivity that
Christianity is concerned, and it is only in subjectively that its truth exists. If it exists
at all, objectively, Christianity has absolutely no existence. If the truth happens to be only in
a single subject, it exists in him alone. And there is greater Christian joy in heaven over
this one individual than over universal history or the system. I like that last bit because he's
sort of mocking Hegel there. For him, God is a subject and therefore requires a subject-to-subject
relation. Of course, I'm not sure if that's true. I know, I thought that was the case when I wrote it,
but after reading Paul Tillich, who was also influenced by Kerkregat, I'm not sure if Kerkregat
believed God was just a subject or if God transcends the object-subject binary. Tillich thinks
that certainly to be the case, he believes God does transcend that binary, and so do I.
So I need to take that sentence with a grain of salt because I'm not sure if that's true.
Back to the essay. This is why old religious scripture discloses truth, not systems to us
subjects. Similarly, this idea could be secularly reappropriated for our ordinary life,
which entails being subjective and dealing with other subjects, and unsurprisingly when people
are treated any differently, it infuriates them. For instance, a feminist has right to say the
objectification of women is wrong, but ironically, this so-called objectification is a subjective
passion of, let's say, male chauvinism. So nonetheless, it's a subject-to-subject relation.
We cannot escape subjectivity. Perhaps if I wrote purely about the objective natural sciences,
this statement might not wholly apply. That too is questionable since it's us who do the science.
In any case, since the unhappy man is about the individual, there's no decoupling or universalizing
the human experience from it. And subjectivity is what it ultimately means to be a human being,
banan. Such as why Sartre rightly argued against Freud's empirical psychoanalysis
that attempts to schematize a human mind via a collection of observations. For Sartre,
the psyche is irreducible. Ergo, I am deeply skeptical of psychometrics that attempts to
prescribe identities to individuals through its lust for categorizing, for example,
gender differences. A cognitive scientist could study the qualia, qualities of the world as perceived
and experienced by us, of a human subject experiencing the color red, a footy game,
or Tchaikovsky's piano concerto number one, Opus 23, and analyze the subject's brain waves,
heart rate, facial expressions, etc. And convince himself he has an empirical objective,
even ontological understanding of a person. But it'll be a great act of self-deception
and scientific malady to presume he precisely knows what an individual, or the subject he's
studying in particular, is experiencing in a way that his findings could replace the actual human
being. A psychometrition could categorize human beings into the taxonomy of personality traits
such as the big five at infinitum, but never settle on what the actual existence of an individual
entails, which is why those traits are an ever-growing enumeration. And of course, no Shakespearean
sonnet, no matter how breathtakingly poetic, will truly capture what it means for you and me
to fall in love. In essence, every human being is the eternal distinction in reality, because
the individual who has become is to be and is becoming will have a life no one or thing ever will.
In that sense, the only verity we can be sure of is that we are all eternally lonely in this world.
The synagogue for writing on human experience is the epistemic humility to know that I will invariably
fail at tapping into a person's subjective truth, and will only be able to delineate my subjectivity,
at least that which is effable. Therefore, I write at the risk of being utterly nonsensical,
and to be an authentic writer is to accept that writing will never fully encompass
existence, specifically that of a soul reader. In that vein, to write well is to know the limits of writing.
