Hey everyone, welcome to yet another episode of the inner realm podcast. It's been a while. Yes,
indeed. I took a small break from podcasting and sort of focused a bit more on computer science and
software engineering type content, which I shall be uploading on the YouTube channel too. But I'm
happy and excited to get back on the podcast again. I have some great conversations lined up,
but also on top of that, some of my own pieces that I'm putting together, I propose
Heidegger and phenomenology. So clearly, please give me a bit of time and a bit of grace because
obviously it's not easy stuff to comprehend, man. I'll tell you that. Heidegger is most certainly
dense and it's hard to really get him. However, today I'll be focusing on something I started
a couple of months ago, reading out these guiding axioms from my newsletter. So I've already laid
down seven axioms. I've been writing a bit on the background and I've been, I want to read all of
them out in this podcast because something I realized was, oh, these, these guiding axioms that
I'm laying down for the newsletter, the unhappy man newsletter, by the way, if I didn't already
mentioned that links down below in the description if you want to subscribe to it. And in any case,
these axioms are essentially a, an heralding framework for all of my, let's say creative work.
Any content I produce on the podcast or anything that I write, I want to ensure that I do it within
the, I don't want to say bounce because that sounds restrictive, but at least these axioms will be
sort of a framework for me to work through. And it also helps lay down my thoughts as to
why the bloody hell do I do any of this in the first place? To be fair, I haven't got an answer
to that yet. Well, that's a whole other conversation, but today's guiding axiom number two is only
gold can patronize. And the previous axiom I covered was restrain the urge to overcome
unhappiness with ideological prescription. If you haven't listened to watch that episode already,
I'll leave a link to that in the description down below too. But today it's guiding axiom,
guiding axiom. I, for some reason, I, I keep saying guardians of the galaxy or like,
guardian axiom. It's odd. Guiding axiom number two is only gold can patronize.
So I've said here, the following is a second guiding axiom for this newsletter.
Yeah, happy man. It's one of the many that I hope to share in the upcoming weeks. I wrote this a
while back, so I've already shared these. As I'm writing these, it's dawn on me that these aren't
a mere helm solely for writing, but rather I seem to be setting up a framework for all of my creative
life itself. As I said before, so thank you. And yes, I mean that sincerely. Thank you for letting
me be self-indulgent in this manner. It is, I've always thought a lot of what I do is rather
self-indulgent, but I take no shame in the matter. There's nothing wrong with a bit of,
a bit of good nature, self-indulgence, self-indulgence or egoism, let's say.
Okay, let's get started. I feel a deep love for Jesus Christ. Does anyone that dares to call
himself Gordon Connard, it ought to be Christ? But he also exasperates me by saying things like this.
And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children
or lands, for my namesake, shall receive a hundredfold and inherit eternal life.
Matthew, 1929. I can only imagine the overweening goal at hubris one has to make such supercilious
proclamations. If anyone else made such demands of me, I tell them to go take a hike. And that's
me being polite to keep this newsletter decent. Pause. What I meant to really say there was,
I tell them to fuck off. I don't know why I was censoring myself there. Most contemporary
theologians tend to eschew Christianity and present a tepid, mellowed down version of it
for a more emasculated audience. But Jesus meant what he explicitly stated. And there's no getting
around it with hermeneutical trickery. In that sense, I'm a Christian not for its reasonableness,
but instead for its sheer radicalism and scandalous unreasonableness. Perhaps it's the
audacity for Jesus to casually patronize the masses that truly makes him Gordon Connard.
I doubt even the most egomaniacal narcissists think of themselves as humanity's savior.
I'm not anyone's savior. Hang out for that. The burden of such a responsibility would be
too unbearable. I'm happy to leave that with Christ. Therefore, I will not patronize and
talk down to anyone. Presumably, only the Son of God can do that. So, I won't molecule the reader
with superfluous, so I won't molecule the reader or listener in this case, with superfluous caveats
and footnotes. If what I write isn't clear, then it's either my fault for being an inept writer
and I need to improve my craft or you need to educate yourself and learn to wrestle with a
given piece to extract its meaning. I suspect that the former will be the case most of the time.
Besides, reading should not be treated as a leisurely activity one engages into past one's time.
I point that the commitment towards lucidity lies within both parties. If we repudiate
this responsibility without inability to struggle with the peace of creation anymore,
artistic, philosophical or otherwise, we're forever trapped in the banality of modern life.
Perhaps, it's similar to what David Foster Wallace observed about popular
entertainment, which has capitulated to a lust for immediacy and constant sensuousness.
Christly put, for us post-industrial modernists, art has no qualitative value over yet another
commercial action flick, fast food or pornography. Is this the post-modern curse?
So, modern art has to be dumbed down to attract the masses. Nothing is more patronizing and
insulting to the human spirit than this. It's not egalitarianism, but a peculiar form of
aristocratic bigotry. For Wallace, the arts, especially literature, can bring unspeakable
depth and meaning to our lives, but it requires toil. It should never be treated as a distraction
but rather as something that accentuates and reveals all of life itself. For instance, I thought
eminent artists and philosophers intentionally obfuscated their work for pretentiousness and
elitism. Well, there certainly are cases where this is true. Vanity takes many forms. The more
I've labored at reading and immersing myself in art and philosophy, I've concluded that it's mostly
my ignorance and complacency. It rarely was the piece of work, but my indolent unwillingness to
persevere through. In that spirit, I will not treat any of my readers or listeners as lost sheep in
need of a good, sagacious shepherd. Besides, apart from the reasons mentioned above, it's also because
I must admit, in all candor, I'm starting this newsletter or podcast primarily for a selfish
reason. It's a forum for me about everyone else to seek truth, if such a thing exists and it's
even knowable to us. Then you may ask why I share my writings publicly. Partially, it's for criticism
and feedback so that I can update my perspectives, a contrived form of collective cognition and
decision making, so to speak. It may be pomp and vanity too, but predominantly because I profoundly
resonate with an adage, apocryphally attributed to Carl R. Rogers, Carl Rogers, the American
humanist psychologist. What is most personal is most universal. I think the essence of this
sentiment, it caused that unforgettable line from Schindler's List taken from the Talmud,
he who saves one life, saves the world entire. Of course, I'm not at least consciously
in the world saving business, but it rings true that the individual struggle is the human struggle.
The individual questions are instantiations of the seeking human heart. For one to suffer is for
many to suffer and to love another is to love humanity and entire. Perhaps, God has no other
option than to create us in his own image, so that as that's what being human ontologically means,
where a locus of divine paradoxes, or as Justice F.C. wrote, the awful thing is that beauty is
mysterious as well as terrible. God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield
is the heart of man. If he weren't created in his image, then he wouldn't be human beings,
but some other thing. Such claims can never be proven intellectually, but only be made
realize to run through life alone. You may never entirely comprehend what it feels like
when I say I'm in pain or agony, nor can you ever take my place and feel it for me,
but you still know what I mean when I say I'm hurting. While we undoubtedly have our subjective
individual experience that can never be generalized, represented as a mere categorical abstraction,
that to my great annoyance, modern psychology tends to do, we also have a trans-subjective
common human experience. And writing with the exception of music, I find, is the most beautiful
way of tapping into our shared realm, such as why I believe only God can patronize,
and I will never patronize ever in this podcast. At least, that is what I'm striving to do. Thanks
for watching.
