Simon, you claim that philosophy does not begin in an experience of wonder as ancient tradition
contends, but rather, I think, with the indeterminate but palpable sense that something desired has not
been fulfilled, that a fantastic effort has failed. Philosophy begins in disappointment. It's one of
your famous lines, I think. Firstly, would you want to comment on this excerpt, but also,
perhaps, elucidate on what you mean by philosophy begins in disappointment?
Why is the world wonderful or is the world disappointing?
More the latter, isn't it?
Oh, right. If philosophy is thinking, is it time in thought, then we have to begin from
disappointment, it seems to me. It's a good way of making a contrast with a view which is
it's just a popular view, the idea of wonder, because it sounds cool, but if you look at the
sources for it, it's a view that Aristotle ascribes to those people that came way before him,
the physiologi, philosophers of nature. He thought they experienced wonder in relationship to
nature, but Aristotle doesn't claim that he experienced his wonder. It's a view that was
already out of fashion by the time of the fifth century BC. The idea there is that the modern
world is most certainly an experience of disappointment, and that's where you have to begin.
It's not where you end, so people often get, are you the disappointment guy? No,
philosophy begins in disappointment, it doesn't end in disappointment. Well, that's where it begins.
I don't say as much these days as I used to, but I still think it's right.
Yeah, indeed. Do you think that there's a very apocal way of thinking, I guess, but
that in terms of times when philosophy becomes most pertinent, for instance,
Jacques, who you've written polemics with, he claims that now we live in this time where these
grand metaphysical questions are coming back into our culture, kind of like the time that,
let's say, the German idealist went through, or do you think that there are these periods in human
history where philosophy becomes most pertinent, or that it's more ahistorical or acontextual as to
how philosophical development or progress, if you could call that, takes place?
Good question, very difficult question to answer. It's hard to find progress in philosophy,
the questions that we're asking are the same questions that the Plato and Aristotle asked,
so we don't have answers for them, so you might want to say philosophy is a series of perennial
questions without answers, and that's a good way of thinking about it. Philosophy is a movement
into perplexity about basic issues, and sophistry or ideology always claims to have an answer.
This is what this means, this is this, and so on and so forth, so if you claim to know, then you are
selling something, you're selling snake oil or whatever it might be, so one way of looking
is that philosophy really exhibits their progress over thousands of years, and then it's also where
do you even say it begins? Does it begin with the Greeks? Does it begin with? I think you lost
you there for a bit, Simon. Yeah, I think that was at my end, that something happens in this building
I'm in, that only happens during business hours, but normally by this time it's pretty, so anyway,
but I've got another Wi-Fi. Oh, great, right now, that's all fine. After doing podcasts for almost
two years with people all over the world, I'm kind of used to this now, so it's totally fine.
So we might get another breakage like that. Anyway, I was saying, so philosophy exhibits
no progress on fundamental issues, we could say, and then it's a question of opinion really, I mean
it's anybody that claims to have some special insight into this is lying. There does seem to be a
connection between, I mean, philosophy seems to be particularly creative at sudden critical
points in history, so we can think about, you know, the 13th century and the rise of scholasticism
and that, which comes out of that, that confluence of thinking in the Arabic world,
Greek thinking in the Arabic world, and then that finding its feet in Paris and Bologna and the
beginnings of universities and that, or you could say the 17th century, the rise of the scientific
view of things, which is also a period of intense conflicts, war, and we could, if we look at the
20th century, there's no doubt that, I mean, the first and second world wars were not great,
but they did provide stimulus for philosophical thinking, and which itself is quite interesting,
first world war, you get Wittgenstein, Rosenzweig, Lukacs, Heidegger for sure, and the second world
war really produces generations of philosophers that are really, you know, doing high-level
interesting work. Where are we now? I don't know, I think there's a renewed interest in philosophy,
and, you know, I've been trying to help that along in my little way over the years, but it's,
and in many ways the, in a way, the internet has been kind to philosophy in the way that it's been
unkind to the novel, which was the, you know, that was the cultural form that dominated the world
that I grew up in, people read novels, now they watch Netflix series, and maybe they've got some
space for short form, you know, short form blogs and articles and things like that, ideas which are
more easily digested, so perhaps it's a, it's a good time for philosophy, but it's not a good time
institutionally, and philosophy is, you know, there are two different views of philosophy, one view is
that, you know, philosophy is just thinking, and it can take place anywhere, and philosophy should
be in the streets, and that's fine, and that goes all the way back to the cynics, and, you know,
thinking in public in ancient Greece, often without clothes on, masturbating and living in
barrels and doing crazy things, another view is that philosophy is something which has always
required an institutional framework, and that's, you know, that's what the academy was for Plato,
the Lyceum for Aristotle, and so on and so forth, so the institutional framework for the last
couple of hundred years has been the university, and is interesting philosophy coming out of
universities at this point, I don't think so, I really don't, there's a lot of smart people, but
not really much happening, so that would be one kind of half answer to that difficult question.
