And I know you don't like compliments, but I'm an evil guy, so I'm going to compliment
you.
My favorite theories of love ever since I started reading philosophy was Alain Bajos,
and then it was Todd McGavin's.
And now I'd unequivocally say it's yours, the way you've articulated it in your book.
It is, I don't even know where else to go from there, as in the way you laid down the
entirety of love around like loss and this dying and negativity.
But just again, I know you've spoken about this in a couple of places, but yeah, through
your framework of let's say, or worldview of depressive realism and negative philosophy,
what is love?
Thank you.
So love is comprehended in everything else from the negative perspective as the based
on negativity, trauma, love, lack and all of those who love as dramatic and at the same
time impossible in its nature, love as suicidal, self-destructive and the very connection between
others.
What structures the bond, the romantic bond, love relationship is the rupture between us,
which destroys us at the same time and creates the connection.
So when you reach the core of love, it hurts and you die.
And maybe the other person also dies.
And the healthy relationship was considered the healthy relationship in psychotherapeutic
society.
I think it's just concealing enough, this painful, impossible core of love for us not to notice
it.
But I'm sure people know that healthy relationship, they're very boring and they don't feel like
love.
That's the problem.
Like you can have it.
It's not a problem to have a healthy relationship, it's just super boring and it's not love.
What we call love, unfortunately, is just a very cruel joke.
It's when you're dying into it, when you encounter the impossibility of it, it's the only way
to feel it, which is super horrifying, especially for the Valentine's Day and the revelation.
The isolation also doesn't help.
The other is the one who hurts and we only feel them in a way, I think, that they hurt
us.
The other is the one that hurts in us.
The isolation would be also not the protection from it, maybe protection, but also a certain
type of social bond that also hurts the other hurt.
You can constitute relation with them by isolating yourself from them and being isolated, it's
still the condition that hurts because you're isolated precisely.
You also feel the bond with the other through pain.
The attachment theory, which gives the hope of healthy relationship, of healthy attachment type.
I think that in each principle, it's like we hope that the healthy one doesn't hurt.
It's the best one.
And I think that it hurts, but when you just reduce it, conceal it enough.
The pain, when it starts to be boring, then it's just possible to bearable, but it just
doesn't feel that there is a connection anymore.
It's presently bearable because it's not the attachment that might be concealed.
Yeah.
So Peter Rollins, I didn't mention him too.
He too really influenced my thinking on the idea of love around loss.
So for him, he articulates this quite well in the previous conversations we had.
He said that, which I love this.
He says communion is building a community around a shared loss.
And well, I'll just put it this way.
What are your just intimations on that idea that loving is kind of feeling this loss,
ontological loss within us?
And yeah, does that sit along with your philosophy too?
Or would you radicalize that even further?
Yeah, Peter Rollins distinguishes, which is great between community and communion.
Community would be more a conventional way of people getting together because they share
something, like they share enemies or a certain goal, a certain identification,
they have something in common.
He doesn't like it and he suggests what he creates is communion.
When people share nothing, loss, luck, and this would be authentic relation.
I would radicalize it.
I think in a way that presents itself as this is a proper way of how things supposed to be.
And I would think of trying to think of a therapy as the communion instead of treatment,
instead of fixing someone, instead of hierarchy of bringing to a certain healthier
conditional improvement, like the communion, sharing nothing.
There still has hope to it that this is a happy thing, the way it's supposed to be,
if one thinks about love in these terms.
It gives the hope that there is a way, what we have to do and that it brings harmony
something, that there is a luck and we need to connect through this luck.
And then it's going to be authentic, equalized with a harmonious, happy relationship.
To be honest, I don't think there is happy.
Like this is harmonious relationship.
I think it's also one of the ways, one of the illusions, how we would like, we would like
to hope that it exists, but it doesn't.
And still talking about how it should be done, it's still trying.
We are connecting, I think, ontologically through it.
There is no other ways to connect.
It's not what we have to do.
It's like maybe comforting illusion in a way.
It's like training a cat who are impossible to train to sit, for example.
And telling the cat to sit when the cat is already sitting.
You know, it sits, it starts to sit.
You tell it to sit and you have illusion that the cat obeys,
where it's just your operation upon the cat to comfort you.
This is a similar thing with what we have to do with love.
It's already there in a horrifying way.
There is nothing you can do or you have to do to make it better or to do it properly.
It's not the problem.
It's just different comprehension, maybe.
Either you discuss love and trying to figure out the correct form of love that would bring
happiness, won't hurt anyone or hurt less, or you just horrified of love.
That's what I'm rather young.
It's presence in inevitable nature and a horror of it without trying to anymore escaping into
how to fix something or what's the correct form of attachment.
Just horrified without escaping from it.
And I'm not saying that this is how the proper way to think about it is the certain state of
my existence.
Yeah, I do like what Jojak says.
I think in one of his, it's probably in a documentary, in one of the Pervod's guides
documentaries, he says that love is a disaster, it's a catastrophe.
But then there's also when I'm not in love, I'm sad.
So it's like, whereas you're saying both when you're in love and not in love,
you're going to be sad, you're going to be irregardless.
Just face the catastrophe, so to speak.
Yeah, so I think that the, and Kierkegaard, one who knew that you both get married and
don't get married, you regret.
We have the hope for being saved.
Simone de Boire talks about women who treat men as the form of salvation,
the most immediate one.
When you're alone, you're expecting for men to save you.
And one, this disillusion once you're in a relationship, because it's, you're in a
relationship, but no one is saving you.
Encounter the horror of being in a relationship, being disillusioned in this salvation.
It's not heaven.
Didn't work.
So you, once you are not in a relationship, you expect to get rid of the horror of being
alone while you're in a relationship.
And in relationship, the other way around, you expect to be saved of the horror of
relationship, ending relationship, or proceeding to find someone else better,
something like it.
But it's the horror every time.
It just, for a while, you remember the previous horror, the previous type of horror.
And you think that this is improvement.
It helps you to hold on for a while.
Then you forget about it.
It's like encounter a horror of this situation, of relationship, for example.
And then you're hoping for opposite salvation in the end of relationship.
It just never comes.
So it's both horror of, when we are in relationship, we get dressed from the
previous type of horror and then the dialectics forever.
Or you just get adapted to a certain type of horror.
Being alone or being with someone, the tolerable horror.
And you settle.
