Hey everyone, welcome to yet another episode of the Interrelant Podcast.
I've got to say, I'm in a really good mood today because I just sat for the AWS developer
associate examination and passed it.
So I'm feeling good.
It's always a good feeling to, you know, work towards something and then kind of achieve
it and well, I guess now what?
Back to the meaninglessness of life.
In any case, this is kind of an interesting episode because the previous episode I did
a few weeks ago was my first ever book review.
And I think this is going to be the first ever article, article or let's say essay commentary.
And it's going to be on the piece that David Dunyong, I really hope I pronounce your surname
right.
David, apologies.
I mean, no disrespect.
It's going to be on the polemical piece that David wrote on Jordan Peterson.
And frankly, from everything I've read on Jordan Peterson, you know, I think today this
is the best criticism I've read of him in a very deep sense, not in like a superficial,
you know, I don't know, the kind of the what like corporate media does, sort of dismissive
calling him a French far right, whatever.
But I really thought David's criticism was very apt to the current situation, but also
just philosophical.
It was quite deep and he made a lot of sense.
And he's a great writer.
I only hope to write like David one day.
Now I've got to say, of course, as I said, this piece is a polemic and like myself, unlike
myself, David is very, very critical of Peterson and doesn't like him at all.
I personally do like Jordan Peterson quite a lot.
I've been influenced by him, especially I'd say when I was about 20, 21, this is like
around 2016, I started watching his lectures early on and I really enjoyed his lectures.
I still very much enjoy the lectures he did on psychologists, like for example, I think
my best learning on John P.J. was through Jordan Peterson.
I'd even say Jordan Peterson was the person who introduced me to Heidegger a couple of
years ago, even though, you know, Peterson doesn't really go into Heidegger's philosophy
kind of, he lectures on him through like a psychological lens.
In any case, the point that I make is that I really like Jordan Peterson.
And that's exactly the reason I think it's important for me to make this episode and
record this and I'm now getting to more as to why that is later on.
So firstly, I want to put a quick caveat as I tend to do with these episodes.
I will truly try and keep away from the day-to-day politics or contemporary issues Peterson gets
himself involved in.
He tends to do that from time to time.
I think he kind of likes it.
Let's be honest, he likes the attention, you know, I mean, I love the doc, but he loves
the attention he gets, but rather in David's paper, I'm going to focus on the philosophical
critiques.
Oh, I didn't mention this.
By the way, how I came across this was actually through David's YouTube channel, Theory and
Philosophy, which I'd say now at this point in my life is my greatest source of learning
when it comes to philosophy and theory, especially being a software engineer, having no background
in arts or the humanities.
I studied computer science.
I didn't even know how to study or learn about all these different theories and philosophies
because I never had any proper formal academic training, even though I deeply love the humanities.
I really appreciate it.
It means a lot to me.
I spend so much of my time trying to understand it and, you know, read philosophy and literature
and all of that.
So I'd say this point in my life without a question, man, David's YouTube channel is
one of my greatest sources of learning.
It's a great resource, really, to go through, virtually any book, I'll go through some of
the stuff he did later on.
Recently I went through his Kant, a critic of pure recent series.
My favorite banan was the one he did on Hannah Arendt.
My God, such a good series, David, really, you just have an amazing ability, you're so
eloquent.
Also, I like that you speak with no pretension, which I appreciate as a layperson or as a
neophyte.
So, sorry, I'm kind of all over the place, but in the preamble, I want to say, as I said,
I try to stick to more of the philosophical critiques, more of the ideological critiques
and not get too enravelled in the kind of day-to-day fleeting politics, let's say.
And, of course, as I said, I'm a big fan of Peterson.
I also like some of the figures in the Intellectual Dark Web, and that begs the question, why should
we be skeptical and question these public intellectuals, people like Sam Harris, Jordan
Peterson, Brett Weinstein, Harvey Weinstein, oh God, Harvey Weinstein.
That's funny, what's Brett's brother's name, Eric Weinstein, we should definitely question
Harvey Weinstein.
Ah, right, that was, that was, I swear, that was an intentional, that was just a mistake.
In any case, all these people in the Intellectual Dark Web, why we should question them, and
I think the reason is because, firstly, whenever, personally, whenever I feel that the narratives
that people give out to the world, or the philosophies people propagate and advocate
for, let's say, when they're too coherent, when they're too, let's say, when they're
too much of like a salvation, when they're too redemptive, or when they're too, this
is it, we've got the absolute philosophy, we've got the absolute ideology to make something
work, I generally take a step back and I become a bit skeptical, because for me, you know,
in many ways I'm an absurdist, so there really isn't the kind of coherence that a lot of
the people in the Intellectual Dark Web would like to portray.
And it's actually a point David gets to in his article, which is what I really liked.
So I think whenever we feel like we're getting easy, easy answers, easy solutions, or not
even easy really, but the kind of solutions that seem straightforward without any deeper
introspection and deeper inspection into it, I think we should be skeptical of those kind
of solutions.
And I would say, speaking personally, around two or three years ago, when I really started
to like Jordan Peterson, I realized that I was liking him a bit too much, almost to
the level of obsequiousness.
And that was definitely unhealthy, because I realized, wow, I can't even read an honest
criticism of his work without taking it personally, as if he's some of my personal savior or
whatever.
And, and that's when I truly wanted to only again, treat Jordan Peterson as a person who
influences me, but not as the only point of influence or like this kind of he's in Christ
to put it in a dramatic way.
And that's when I started questioning him a bit more and looking for points of view that
differ from him points of view that, you know, he's completely a versatile, let's say, and
I realized, oh, wow, I actually completely disagree or predominantly with most of his
points.
I disagree with his politics and even his underlying philosophy, despite, and his interesting thing,
despite truly starting to admire and like him as a person, as an individual, as a teacher
and as a psychologist, like I still find his work on psychology to be brilliant.
I think he's a great psychologist, even though I think he's got his politics and his philosophy
and I see a lot of loopholes with his worldview.
And as a person, you know, I've got to say, again, one, one never, one never knows, especially
with public figures, how they portray themselves in public, you know, that kind of distinction
between the private life and the person, between the personal life and the public life.
Peterson looks like a genuine person to me.
He looks sincere and I'm, you know, speaking purely personally, I'm the kind of person
that appreciates family and having a good relationship with your significant other,
your wife, your spouse, whatever, your children, and I find that he's got that kind of relationship
and it seems just that that true love of a family and I appreciate anyone who can foster
that and who can have that in life because that certainly takes work.
So yeah, those are the points of the preamble and that, of course, leads me to this point
and I wasn't even going to put this part in the episode, but I realized that actually
maybe it's something I should talk about before I get to the article itself.
I still don't know if David Steeleman or Strowman, Peterson's arguments.
I don't know if he mischaracterized him and whether he, how he portrayed Peterson's
oppositions to Bill C-16, got to keep in mind David too is a philosophy student.
I think he's doing a PhD in philosophy.
Anyway, he's an art student.
So, you know, I don't want to make an argument from authority, but I do think someone who's
taken the time to go and study theory and go and study philosophy in academia.
I sell whole academia in high regard, contrary to most people on the internet.
And I would say a person like that probably has a better understanding of some of the
intricacies of these debates when it comes to free speech, pronouns, all the different
fragments that are connected in the whole Bill C-16 controversy.
So I didn't get the impression that David was trying to mischaracterize Peterson, but
also that's the one reason for that is because sometimes Peterson himself isn't coherent
with what his arguments are in his opposition to Bill C-16.
He will say it's a purely free speech issue, but then you can see from some of the interviews,
which is the interview that I'm going to play right now, that it's no, no, it's not just
a free speech issue.
He's got an issue with the gender identification too.
So without me putting words in his mouth, let's listen to this short clip that I found
on Majid Nawaz's show where, I mean, this was in 2018, so a bit after the whole controversy
broke out.
And I think this is the most, this is the shortest clip I could find where Peterson lays
down his points, kind of enumerates all his points as to why he opposes Bill C-16.
So let's take a look.
Bill C-16 purported to do nothing but extend human rights provisions to an excluded group,
let's say, to the transgender and non-gender binary types.
And that was the federal legislation.
It also made it a hate crime to discriminate or harass, essentially.
So now then the question is, well, what exactly do you mean by discriminate or harass?
And why exactly is that a hate crime under the criminal code?
Well, there was an answer to that.
The answer was, well, this bill will be interpreted in light of the policies generated by the
Ontario Human Rights Commission, very large set of policies.
Now the Ontario Human Rights Commission is a radically leftist organization.
I think it's the most dangerous organization in Canada, although you could debate that.
Of course, I've got to make a comment.
So I'm going to make comments in the middle of what he's saying.
I mean, if you want to watch the whole thing without me interrupting, just go and watch
the original video.
But you see, this is another thing what Peter said, as much as I like him, you know, when
he makes a statement, such a blatant statement that the Ontario Human Rights Commission is
the most dangerous organization in all of Canada.
That's where, you know, touching on my earlier point, one should take a step back and, oh,
is it really?
Like, what does he mean by that?
The most dangerous, that's quite a leap to call an organization the most dangerous organization
in all of Canada.
This is where I think we should pause the video because it's normally on YouTube that
he's popular and actually think and not let him, when I mean him, I mean, Peterson or
anyone for that matter do the thinking for us.
So back to the video.
Debate that and they said all sorts of policies about how this legislation was going to be
interpreted and the federal government linked to their website to state that Bill C16 would
be interpreted in light of those guidelines.
So I went and read all the policies.
Well one of the policies was that if you didn't use the preferred pronouns of a given group
that you could be charged essentially with a hate crime.
And I thought, no.
Which given group is that?
You mean talking about transgender people?
Yeah.
And so there's all these pronouns that have come up.
There's 70 different sets of pronouns approximately to hypothetically describe people who don't
fit anywhere on the gender spectrum, which is also something that I don't really understand.
I don't understand that conceptually.
We'll come to that.
But I just want to hear the story of this bill first.
Well, okay.
So now a person is compelled under Canadian law to use the pronoun of another individual's
choice by on pain of law.
And I thought, well no, that's not acceptable.
It's one thing to put limits on what a person can't say, like say with hate speech laws,
which I also don't agree with by the way.
But that's a different argument.
I think it's a narrower argument.
But to compel me to use a certain content when I'm formulating my thoughts or my actions
under threat of legislative action, I thought, no, what's happened there is the government
has introduced compelled speech legislation into the private sphere.
It's never happened in the history of English common law.
And so I said, there's no way I'm abiding by that.
I don't care what your damn rationale is.
We're compassionate.
It's like, no, you're not.
No, you're not.
You're playing this radical collectivist left wing game.
You're trying to gain linguistic supremacy in the area of public discourse.
You're doing that using compassion as a guise and you're pulling the wool over people's
eyes and you're not going to do it with me.
If I was sitting here in front of you as a transgendered male to female or female to
male and we began the conversation at the beginning of the conversation you stumbled
and called me he or she and I was perhaps identifying the other way around.
And then if I'd said to you, please, I'd rather go by she.
How would you respond to that on a personal level?
Well, it would depend on the situation.
But the way I have responded to that because I've had a number of conversations with transgendered
individuals is that I use whatever pronoun seems to go along with the persona that they're
projecting publicly.
It's the simplest thing to do.
Now, if we were if you would respect their choice on an individual level.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but with a with a with a more contentious pronouns, G insurer and
that sort of thing, that's a whole different issue.
Because the question there is, well, exactly what is it that you're doing when you're
asking me to use those words?
Like are you are you compelling me to play your particular ideological game?
Or is this actually a matter of some personal identity that's important to you?
And those things are not obvious.
And so in a situation like that, the first thing I'd have to do is to try to figure out
just exactly what was going on in the situation and that's not simple.
And so there would be no foregone conclusion that I would address you by the pronouns
of your choice.
The first thing I'd want to find out is, is that just a narcissistic power play?
Because that's actually the most likely outcome.
I don't know if that's the most likely outcome.
And, you know, Peterson does make a good point.
Like, again, there are manipulative, almost psychopathic narcissists in this world who
want to manipulate people and play power games.
So that certainly is the case.
But again, this is, OK, so I've got a few points to make on what Peterson just said.
On what Majid Nawaz said about on a personal level, that's an important word he's
personal. I think a lot of this comes down to that.
It comes down to those interpersonal relations and how we treat each other.
We can't bureaucratize it, even though I feel like
modern society is trying to, in many ways,
everything is everything is abstracted out into the into the ether, into the bureaucracy,
you know, into like the Kafkaist bureaucracy, and then even things that are so intimate
and so personal, modernity is bureaucratizing it.
And it's kind of unfortunate because a lot of this, which should be dealt at an
individual level is trying to be dealt with with laws and policies, which,
frankly, I don't think works.
I don't firstly, it's not authentic.
And secondly, this practically, I think it fails.
And then on the point Peterson makes about what kind of game you're playing.
So you can clearly see that for him, it's not just a free speech issue,
a gender issue, just play a factor.
And he also is particularly averse to people who are gender fluid or people who are
non-binary, you can see that he doesn't, he doesn't click for him.
He can't comprehend what that means.
And, you know, fair enough, I mean,
to a certain extent, I never really had a problem with the whole gender fluid thing.
I always felt deep down in a very visceral sense that, yeah, gender certainly doesn't
seem something that's binary.
It doesn't seem like something that's fixed.
In fact, I don't think human nature is fixed.
I think human nature is way more dynamic than we think.
It's a lot more deeper than what,
you know, in modernity, the post enlightenment era, we would like to put
everything in comfortable boxes.
It's a human nature is a lot more deeper than that, in my opinion.
And David kind of touches on that in his article, too.
But also his thing about, see, this is where, again, I don't know whether
Peterson does a good job and how he articulates his points.
Because it seems a bit vitriolic or it seems a bit hateful the way he
talks about non-binary people.
Again, you know, these are just I'm just touching on my intuitions.
I'm not saying this is exactly what he's saying, not at all.
You know, when he says are non-binary people playing some kind of
narcissistic power player or trying to manipulate other people.
Personally, for my experience,
I've actually I've only really got one non-binary friend, because all of my
other friends are transgender, which means all the other friends in the LGBTQ community,
I mean, which means, you know, they still identify just by the opposite gender,
not the one that was assigned it.
But then, you know, that's that's fine.
And some of them, one of them, actually, I don't even know until she told me.
In any case, the non-binary people, yeah, it is a bit odd.
I'm going to be totally honest, referring someone as they.
But this person that I do know, in no way did I get the impression that this person
was playing some kind of game or this person was trying to manipulate me to,
you know, as Peterson says, is trying to control my linguistic territory.
I didn't get that impression at all.
And if I did, I wouldn't be that person's friend.
I wouldn't associate that person simple as that.
And I think person genuinely didn't feel like a man or a woman or felt non-binary,
whatever that means.
I don't know what that means, because I don't feel like that.
And that's something we've got to learn about.
Even he, you know, about life itself, that in some sense, you know,
this is apocryphally attributed to character God.
But, you know, when you label me, you negate me, I think it comes
from this character God's idea that in many ways, that deep
inanness, that subjectivity of being human,
that it can never be quantified.
It can never be properly betrayed or abstracted out from the individual.
No one will ever know what it feels like to be me.
Nor will I ever know what it feels like to be some other specific individual,
not an abstract humanity, no, no, no, a specific individual.
And that's for me, you know, my thinking has been heavily influenced
by character God in that way.
And, you know, far enough, Peterson, too, you know, talks a lot about character God.
So saying all that with that long preamble, good Lord, it's 20 minutes already.
And I haven't even got to David's article yet.
Let's discuss David's piece.
The article is titled
Jordan Peterson and the flow of scientific inquiry,
a critical evaluation of Peterson's use of science and philosophy
in his conquest against social justice by David Gagnon.
Again, I'm so sorry if I got to say
him wrong, David, I truly mean no disrespect.
So the article starts off by two quotes by Baudrillard and Nietzsche.
And I also want to say
I only knew of Baudrillard as his name in the French intellectual circles.
It's because of David that I've actually truly kind of
delved into his work a bit more and started to understand him.
So again, as I said, David's YouTube channel has had a YouTube channel,
has had what kind of speak?
David's YouTube channel has had a massive influence
on me in the past year or so.
So I'm truly grateful for that, David.
OK, back to the article.
If all enigmas are resolved, the stars go out.
If everything's secret is returned to the visible,
if all illusion is returned to transparent,
then heaven becomes become indifferent to the earth.
Jean Baudrillard, what is the purpose?
And worst still, what is the origin of all science?
What is scientific method, perhaps no more than fear
of and flight from pessimism, a cycle of defense against truth?
Or to put it in moral terms, is it something like cowardice and insincerity?
To put it immorally, is it a form of cunning?
Oh, Socrates Socrates, was that perhaps your secret?
Oh, mysterious ironies versus perhaps your irony?
Fredric Nietzsche.
David starts off the article saying,
this article argues that Peterson's challenge to postmodern port
as an anti-scientific doctrine is perplexing,
given the general general lack of consensus between his views
and those of the greater scientific community.
The article presents different theoretical frameworks attesting
to the reality of gender non-conforming identities,
as well as to the consequences of denying these identities.
And argues that rather than challenging oppressive systems of governance,
Peterson's project actually mirrors them.
So pretty much the article breaks down
JB's project into three broad conceptual domains.
The three of them are the first one's arguments about postmodernism.
So Peterson's averseness against postmodernism and how he portrays postmodernism.
And of course, the most interesting part, in my opinion, that I had,
I learned a lot from this part, really, the part where David touches
on the scientific discourse, truth and objectivity.
Brilliant, brilliant section of the article.
And the other part is the more of the political part, let's say,
on gender identity.
Now, I'll focus on the latter.
Sorry, I'll focus on the former,
the arguments about postmodernism and the scientific discourse, truth and
objectivity parts over the latter, which is the gender identity part, simply because
for me, I don't know if I'm speaking from a position of privilege here,
but I didn't really care too much about the whole gender identity issue,
because it didn't really personally affect me.
And even in this article, that was the part that I sort of
I did read it a couple of times for this video, but just skimmed over.
It didn't really speak to me in a deeper sense.
But certainly, the poems David make are quite interesting, especially when he
speaks of Judith Butler and Baudrillard.
I'm going to get to that part a bit later,
but I do recommend reading the whole thing, of course, because unlike a book,
this is an article, so you could just read it in one sitting.
David David states,
this article presents counter arguments and evidence that destabilized the
facile deployment of a scientific rationality by Peterson and his allies,
and therefore calls into question many of his central claims.
This paper moves through each of these domains
methodically, beginning with his juxtaposition of postmodernism with
neo-Marxism, all the while claiming to be a faithful reader to Frederick Nietzsche.
That point there, all the while claiming to be a faithful reader to Frederick
Nietzsche is an important one, because
maybe I'll get to that later on in detail, but
if someone
listens to Peterson's lectures and then gets this impression of who Nietzsche is
and then actually reads Nietzsche,
in my opinion, at least, it's a completely different.
So the contradiction is very evident,
because the actual Nietzsche is very much different to the kind of Nietzsche
Peterson portrays, in my opinion.
So that's an important one.
And I thought that was a good point, David, raised in this article.
This is something I started feeling
about two years ago when I actually started reading Nietzsche's work,
especially the gay science
and the anger and evil.
So
anyway, that's an interesting thing to think about.
Of course, I also found there's a problem with
Peterson's sort of prima facie associating postmodernism with totalitarianism.
And I think David, again, brings this point to Salience, too.
And furthermore, the kind of the
incommensurability between neo-Marxism, which is a metanarrative and postmodernism.
You know, David asks, is it true that postmodernism is merely a clever Marxist
side of hand seeking like its Marxist predecessor to undermine the West?
Well, again, if you listen to
Peterson, that's the impression you get.
But if you do a bit more excavating into, let's say, the over of postmodern
philosophy and literature, which is
virtually an impossible task, because there's so much.
You might get a different impression.
But even if you read the, let's say, the well known postmodernist or the kind
of postmodernist Peterson talks about like Derrida and Foucault,
you'd find that, oh, actually, no, you know, it's not easy to just pinpoint them
as Marxist. I mean, Foucault was an anarchist, for God's sake.
And then.
This is again is a good point I've spoken about as before in my previous episodes.
And David certainly puts in a much more
articulate and eloquent manner than I have ever done.
Scientific rationality is fragile and we can't
unequivocally place faith on the science.
I'm pretty in quotes because the science is a very
determined with a lot of baggage, the science.
We can't put this kind of faith of science being universal,
a historical, a cultural.
And most certainly when we take the scientific
constitution, we can't derive social values from it.
That's a good point David makes using Baudrillard.
And I was thinking about this recently.
The intellectual dark web, Peterson, all these, I mean, I know the intellectual
dark web doesn't really exist anymore, but people, you know, from that elk
would agree with this statement, I think, especially with what happened with covid
because most of most of them were involved with all these controversies
regarding the lockdowns as in the midst of covid, the lockdowns, the vaccinations.
And they would agree that science isn't this
entity, let's say, that you could just detach or science isn't this thing that
can just plainly be detached from the rest of society.
And from our, from our, let's say, our perspectives.
I don't know if anything really
being a human being, you know, this is again, Nietzsche's perspectivism.
Being a human being, I don't know if you can really
detach anything from a perspective.
So from a from the context, from a social context.
And this, again, is something I've truly begun to appreciate about postmodernist
that kind of skepticism, even though I understand that can easily become
a cynicism.
And that certainly isn't what I'm trying to do here,
even though maybe sometimes in this article, David has become a bit cynical,
but that's fine.
You know, we all can become,
life is tough, being cynical sometimes is warranted.
So the section that we're going to get to right now is the
incommensurability of Marxism and postmodernism.
The point David makes is simply it's wrong to claim postmodernists are
Marxists in disguise.
It's too simplistic and it's a lazy argument.
And David pointed out in this article,
Clare Hemmings problem problematizes this approach to postmodernism and Marxism
by emphasizing some of the most significant
differences between the two theoretical frameworks.
She writes that postmodernism's attention to complexity of meaning and
interpretation distracted us from the most substantive concerns with inequality,
experience, political economy and justice that Marxism attains to.
Hemmings extends this analysis by suggesting that without a Marxist or
other tangible approach to critical theory,
we remain powerless to alter the pernicious
power relations or poststructuralist tactics can cleverly identify,
but spectacularly fail to transform.
Hemmings's point stresses the lack of consistency between Marxist and poststructuralists theories,
demonstrating their fundamental incongruency in the domain of political action.
With the former emphasizing a radical transformation of capitalism into a
socialist system and the latter belonging to the domain of theory interested in the
immaterial conditions of signification.
What I got from this parallel was, you know, in a very colloquial sense, let's say,
Marxism is predominantly a call to political and social action.
You know, that's what the communist manifesto is pretty much is,
even though I'm not reducing Marxism just to the communist manifesto, certainly not.
But it seems clear to me, at least, as a, again, a layperson on your side,
that Marxism is clearly a call to action.
Anyone who, in my opinion, is a Marxist is sort of
is a concomitantly an activist.
There's no,
in my opinion, these come together,
the couple, let's say, whereas postmodernism and poststructuralism is very much
a theory, it's against what Clare Hemings writes about,
identifies here of it being
the importance of context, the depths and layers of meaning, all of that.
So it's breaking down language.
So it is different.
One can't just, again, as I said, prima facie attribute a postmodernist to also be
a Marxist or put it in a Petersonian way to say that postmodernism is a slight
of hand for Marxism.
And then David writes on Jean Baudrillard.
Jean Baudrillard referred to by some as the high priest of postmodernism is one
such figure that greatly disturbs Peterson's conflation of Marxist and postmodern theories.
In the mirror of production, Baudrillard vehemently challenges Marxism asking,
are we quite simply within a mode of production at all?
And have we ever been in one?
Baudrillard extends this question by turning his critical gaze back on Marxism,
suggesting that Marxism is predicated on the fundamentally, this is an important
point, on the fundamentally Eurocentric tenants of Productivism,
scientism and historicism, and that it homogenizes
earlier societies under the light of the present structure of the capitalist economy.
Therefore, silencing specific socio-historical contexts,
projecting onto them the spectral light of political economy.
Oh, that was a bit dense.
This book marked a fundamental turning point
in Baudrillard's work as he grew wary of the possibility that Marxism could
actually provide the blueprints for an effective mode of societal change.
I would say as much as as much as as much of an anti-capitalist that I've become,
and especially in the past, say, years, so I've truly seen a lot of loopholes
and a lot of problems with modernity and capitalism.
The reason I'm still not a Marxist or I probably will never be one is because
of this coin David makes, but only Baudrillard makes, that
they're too materialistic.
For me, Marxism is too, it's too contemporary in that sense.
It's too ephemeral.
It doesn't look into the deeper realities of society and being human.
And again, it's too.
It's too, let's say, you know, I mean, there's even a term called scientific.
Is it called scientific socialism or scientific utopianism?
So a lot of it's heavily influenced by this post enlightenment kind of thought.
And it it tends to ignore so much.
And I want to mean it, I should say it's this is both capitalism and Marxism
tends to ignore human psychology, culture, sociology.
Therefore, Baudrillard makes a brilliant, perspicacious point here that
shouldn't shouldn't we be a bit critical of these
prescriptions we are making on society.
And we're saying that this will work.
And then David makes a comment on Foucault
in the order of things he systematically, when you mean he is Michel Foucault,
in the order of things he systematically avoids discussing Marxism.
In terms of economic theory in favor of many other liberal approaches to economics
indicative of the work of Adam Smith and Francois Canet.
Foucault does this because as he makes
abundantly clear, he believes that Marxism exists in 19th century thought
like a fish in water, that that is, it is unable to breathe anywhere else.
Foucault might the point that I was trying to make before in a much better way.
This is exactly what I was trying to say.
This sentiment resonates in harmony with the overarching themes
of his work, because he refuses to acknowledge that societal ills or power
can be reduced to a single structural locus.
What I read this point for a moment, I thought this was Peterson writing because
Peterson has made strikingly similar points to that which Foucault makes,
especially when he speaks of ideology, that the fragment can replace the whole,
that ideology only sees part of the picture.
So in that sense, Peterson would 100 percent agree with Foucault here.
Well, not 100 percent, because, you know, nothing works in absolutes.
But the point I'm trying to make is that
good heavens, Peterson certainly has made very similar points.
And back to what David's saying,
thus Foucault is highly skeptical of the possibility of a meaningful societal
revolution, because without a comprehensive evaluation of the plethora
of institutions that govern our daily lives, we risk perpetuating the same
oppressive schema.
And here, David makes a really interesting point.
He says, the thinkers that Peterson cites as
representatives of postmodern movement, Michel Foucault and Jacques Dorida,
were greatly indebted to the Western philosophical and literary canons,
with some commentators even labeling them neocontents.
Peterson's reduction of these thinkers to philosophical aberrations
detached from Western civilization, illuminates his obliviousness to said canon.
Great point by David here, a very important one in this article, because
this conversation Peterson had with Camille Parglayer perfectly illustrates
what David's saying here, because you can clearly see
both of them, Parglayer and Peterson, are being very dismissive of these
French intellectuals, saying that they didn't read the classics, that they weren't
well read in the Western canon, they were uneducated.
But good heavens, I mean,
maybe this is just my own ignorance and my lack of,
let's say, proper academic training.
But when I read some of, you know, I've only mostly read Sartre and Foucault.
I don't get the impression at all that
they're uneducated or that they haven't read enough Western philosophy, because
they seem deeply well read scholars.
And I don't think in any way one could say that their aberrations to Western
philosophy, in many ways,
as David points out, they seem to be continuing on.
I'm not saying it's just them, but they seem to be continuing on the Kantian project.
You know, all the way from Kant to Heidegger to whatever is going to come up now.
And I don't think the aberrations in that in that case.
And this conversation Peterson had with Pogliac just demonstrate,
I wouldn't say, like, I think the point David makes, he eliminates his own obliviousness
to said canon, that might be a bit unfair, but it just
demonstrate that deep visceral hatred
Peterson has for these French intellectuals by being sort of casually dismissive of them.
And then we get to another
very important point, and especially a point that I really enjoyed.
Not point a part of the essay that I really enjoyed, especially given my recent
let's call it an amulement with Hannah Arendt's work.
It's the section Peterson, Aaron and totalitarianism.
Peterson doesn't seem to mention Hannah Arendt much in his work.
Yes, he just speak a lot about totalitarianism for sure.
I mean,
maps of meaning was pretty much all about Peterson trying to understand,
you know, not the Nazis and totalitarianism and tyranny and all of that.
But rarely does he mention Hannah Arendt, which is quite surprising, as David points out.
He says, what is particularly striking is that Peterson makes no significant use
of Hannah Arendt, the think of fascism and totalitarianism by excellence.
I agree.
He just mentioned her briefly, however, suggesting that her seminal text, a text,
the banality of evil,
would have better been more appropriately titled The Evil of Banality.
In fact, let me find that quote so that, you know, we don't want to
give the impression that David's quoting Peterson out of context here.
It's 269.
I could quickly find the quote because I was going through this few days ago.
Peterson writes, nonetheless,
we are more than we see
and are more trouble than we imagine when undisciplined and unrealized.
The banality of evil, Hannah Arendt's
famous phrase applied to the often unprecessing Nazi personality,
is more accurately the evil of banality.
Our petty weaknesses accumulate and multiply and become the great evils of state.
As our technological power expands,
the danger we pose increases and the consequences of our voluntary stupidity
multiply is increasingly necessary that we set ourselves, not others, right.
And that we learn explicitly what that means.
Yes. So again, this is Peterson from 1999,
and he still very much talks and writes in similar prose and similar themes.
So again, the part I'm trying to make is David
had hasn't misquoted him in any way or quoted him out of context.
The absence of Aaron's work in Peterson's exploration of these themes is suspicious
and signals that his understanding of totalitarianism is missing integral
philosophical insight, perhaps true.
This is particularly true of the lineage he
traces between nihilism and the development of totalitarianism.
So another bit of an experiment I did was I went on incognito.
I had to and I googled
just plainly Jordan Peterson and Hannah Aaron.
And I wanted to see if there was anything that involved
Peterson talking about Hannah Aaron, and I couldn't find anything not in his
writing, not in his lectures. So if it is right here, in fact,
the only thing I found was this reddit thread of another person asking
on the Jordan Peterson subreddit, is anyone here familiar with Hannah Aaron?
Because both Peterson and Hannah Aaron seem to be
in the deepest possible way trying to understand totalitarianism.
Maybe Peterson, more from a psychological perspective, and Hannah Aaron,
more from a sociological and philosophical perspective.
But I would certainly imagine Peterson bringing up in more of his lectures.
So that is the point to keep in mind.
And just a completely ancillary point here.
I think what really turned me to Hannah Aaron's work again was David for sure.
But in particular, it was this series David did.
Hannah Aaron's The Origins of Totalitarianism.
In fact, I ordered the book and it's on its way.
I thought Amazon Prime was much faster,
but they're taking like weeks to build the book.
Doesn't matter.
But I want to this is going to be the next book that I read.
It's on my list because
this series David did, it was amazing.
I learned so much and I had to I had to read the book.
There was no question about it because
David converted me into an erudite, erudite.
Anyway,
and this leads to an interesting point, interesting
two, two, two views here, isn't it?
There's the Hannah Aaron view of the strong man, Nazi personality.
And then there's a Peterson view of the of our individual moral failings
that that causes nihilism and that causes the state to become corrupt.
So
how do we reconcile these two views?
I don't know.
I don't think David is set in the article, but he does point out some
contradictory points between Hannah Aaron's views,
where she took a much more critical philosophical lens and viewed what happened
in the 20th century and then Pearson's views that he portrays more in detail in
maps of meaning. Here's what David writes.
This idea of of of indifference and
apathy that Peterson says is what causes totalitarianism versus,
let's say,
taking upon responsibility, being the ubermensch or a saviour sometimes
and understanding that we play a role in the
in the birth or the imbuement of totalitarian
totalitarian states or personality or individuals or tyrants.
So David writes, sorry, I was very
inarticulate and trying to make that point.
I'm still learning apologies.
But David writes, as Hannah Aaron argues in the origins of totalitarianism,
that what is hard to pronounce?
It's kind of a mouthful.
Indifference to public affairs and new
gravity on political issues are in themselves no sufficient cause for the
rise of totalitarian movements.
According to Aaron, it is the strong man rather than the indifferent public that
has historically led to the rise of totalitarian regimes.
As she explains, competitive and hostile attitudes are very useful for those forms
of dictatorship in which a strong man takes upon himself the troublesome
responsibility for the conduct of public affairs and hardly conforms to traditional
or typical definitions of nihilism.
This is the point.
This is the point.
This is an important point because clearly,
Peterson talks a lot about taking upon
carrying your own yoke to put it in Christian parlance or taking upon the world's
burdens onto oneself and then sort of being a saviour.
That in in in contrast to, let's say, apathy or indifference.
Now, Aaron says, actually, no, indifference and apathy isn't the reason that
totalitarianism permeates and rises.
It's rather it's this strong man, Nietzschean, ubermunch kind of personality.
I don't know what to make of it.
Firstly, I haven't read this book, even though I listen to David's lecture.
So I want to first read the book.
Maybe then I have a better idea.
But it certainly is something to think about, because I certainly
I most most definitely can see how
that idea of I think Nietzsche calls it injecting meaning into one's veins,
where that idea of being this
hyper disciplined, sort of aesthetic
individual who takes upon responsibility and
and has orders, hyper conscientious, how that can very easily become a peculiar kind
of hubristic, almost narcissistic
way to become a strong man and then an eventual tyrant or totalitarian, at least
psychologically, I can see how that can manifest in someone in like a sort of
like a psychic state.
And I would even say, maybe I've even seen that in some people.
Maybe even myself, who knows?
But
Hannah Aaron's point, it should be taken to heart.
It's a good point.
And David just laid out well here.
And then he gets to an interesting point here on essentialism, this idea that there
are essential, essential, there's an essential nature to being human, which to
some extent, I still believe I'm not a complete, in that sense, anti-essentialist.
But David writes,
Aaron's description of the strong man has founded upon the belief in a kind of
human nature, which would be subject to the same laws of growth as that of the
individual shares a strong affinity with Peterson's persistent reliance on
essentialist positions as illustrated in statements about
essential female and masculine pathologies.
Aaron elaborates on these essentialist
beliefs as irrelevant since Western philosophy and religion has been defining
and redefining it for more than 3,000 years.
Now, while it's true, this idea of redefining and defining, I would say,
and again, this is completely an intuition.
I have no firstly
verbal majority, but also real,
let's say, sociological and anthropological
evidence to back up this claim.
But I do feel intuitively when I look at many cultures and when I even just read
about cultures and even experience some cultures, there always seems to be
this kind of masculine and feminine, not and again, it's not a male-female thing,
because a man could be feminine and masculine both and the other way around.
So it's not really
a biological distinction, even though the biological distinction exists.
What I'm trying to say is this idea of the
of kind of an essential feminine and masculine spirit, let's say.
It does seem I don't know if it's fair to say that that doesn't exist at all,
because one could see it in so many different cultures all across the world.
And if something is that common, isn't that maybe pointing towards some kind
of deep truth? Who knows?
But again,
the point, David's the more deeper point David's trying to make here is that
that that attitude of essentialism could lead to
this totalitarian kind of mindset where you say, this is the way things should be
done, this absolutist,
almost despotic attitude that this is the way this should be done.
So that certainly begs the question.
And David doesn't really point this out in the article, but this is exactly what
I was thinking while I was reading it is,
is how do we properly take Peterson's,
this adopt responsibility or personal responsibility mantra too hard,
which I think is a good message.
But how do we prevent it from being pathologized as a drive to be a totalitarian?
Because
and this is something I realized recently,
enlargement thinking, we like to think that it was all about freedom and liberty
and equality.
But no, it certainly had an absolutist attitude towards it.
You know, Hobbes, for example.
So there were many enlightenment thinkers who were absolutist.
And more importantly, the deeper point is the idea of there being, let's say,
categories and that is essential, this attitude of enlightenment thinking
that can be certainly connected or even imbue
tyrannical, totalitarian sort of thinking.
So
it's how do we delineate that?
And it's very it's very nuanced there.
And I really didn't think of this until
maybe one or two years ago.
So
something to ponder and reflect on.
And now we get to the most,
in my opinion, the part I like the most and the most interesting part of the article,
especially because I'm a Nietzschean and and the more I read Nietzsche,
the more I thought, oh, Peterson's, there's something if people don't
read Nietzsche and listen to Peterson lecture on Nietzsche,
they'd get a completely different picture on who Nietzsche is.
But in any case, I am a Nietzschean and I really like this part.
And I thought David made some good points.
So the question is, is Peterson misappropriating Nietzsche?
What I mean by this is I'm not saying
Peterson is misquoting or quoting man of context or trying to,
yeah, intentionally misappropriate him with some kind of
underlying motive, unethical underlying motive, not at all.
But sometimes because like all of us,
Peterson's got his own ideology.
I'm wondering if what he's really doing is just taking something Nietzsche said
and just fitting it into his philosophy, his ideology.
And then, you know, sharing it with the public.
Whereas
this isn't what Nietzsche would say.
So as in this synthesis, let's say, of taking what Nietzsche said and
synthesizing it along with what Peterson's saying and whatever that result is,
Nietzsche would completely disagree with what the result is.
He would be totally opposed to Nietzsche's overall philosophy,
even though Nietzsche hasn't really got one set philosophy.
And I think he did that intentionally.
So there is one has to be careful.
One has to be careful when when they
try to understand Nietzsche through a Petersonian lens, let's say.
David writes,
in the birth of tragedy, Nietzsche argues that the notion of truth that runs
through the course of history, history, the course of history,
are founded not on their object, objectivity, but in their
continual self proclamation of objectivity.
For Nietzsche, the shift from language to science plays a scientific method at
the forefront of Western civilization,
making everything quantifiable under the scientific gaze.
As he explains, it is language which works on building the edifice of concepts.
Later, it is science.
Nietzsche expands on this idea of writing.
What I understand about the spirit of science is the belief which first came to
light in the person of Socrates, that the depths of nature can be fathomed
and that knowledge can heal all ills.
According to Nietzsche, this belief in the ultimate infallibility of science or
Socrates's tendency to murder are
is destructive, especially when left unacknowledged.
Now, Peterson here would certainly agree with this point, because
I've listened to a couple of interviews where Peterson comments on Stephen
Pinker's Enlightenment Now, and he pretty much says that he's quite
disappointed that in Enlightenment Now,
Stephen Pinker has all these chapters dedicated to the scientific method,
Enlightenment, freedom, democracy, all that.
And a little chapter towards the latter part of the book.
I haven't read the book, so I'm not really sure, even though I think I've got a copy.
Where he dedicates to the arts and the humanities.
And he says that that's unfortunate, because really it should be the other way
around, because most of life or most of what we are is, let's say,
we should be indebted to the arts and the humanities.
And science is very, very much a new phenomenon.
It's a new thing in our society.
Therefore, it is a good point.
To Nietzsche, science is truly capable of confining the individual within the
smallest circle of solvable tasks.
As he explains, science, spurred on by its powerful delusion,
is hurrying unstoppable to its limits, where the optimism hidden in the essence
of logic will founder and break up.
So then we get to Nietzsche versus 12 Rules for Life.
And this is kind of the point I made when I started commenting on the section
where if Nietzsche read 12 Rules for Life, he probably disagreed with most of it.
And David explains why.
12 Rules for Life proclaiming the necessity for people, young men.
I want to say, you know, David's put this in here kind of as like a slight comment,
you know, kind of being dismissive that all Peterson only caters to this certain
demographic, it seems like a straw man and a ad hominem attack.
Because firstly, ad hominem as if helping young men makes him a particular evil person.
I mean, I don't see what's wrong with helping young men.
You know, if people need help, people should get help.
I'm a young man.
And when I was 20, 21, reading Jordan Peterson's book helped me a lot.
It gave me structure and meaning and purpose.
And those things matter.
Life is difficult.
And I'm truly grateful for that.
And other than that, Peterson,
I know a lot of, in fact, a lot of the people that I know who are Jordan Peterson fans,
let's say, are women.
Funny enough, one of my good friends, she and I, we'll be going to the
Jordan Peterson comes to Melbourne, he's visiting Melbourne at the end of the yard
and we bought tickets for his kind of talk.
And I'll be going with him.
She really, she loves Jordan Peterson.
So I don't know if it's fair that, you know, it's it's sort of like a straw man
and a hominem and also, frankly, such slight comments seem unproductive.
I mean, such a good article.
And it's just saying young men as if it's a bad thing.
It cheapens and reduces this well written article to that of a
headpiece by some corporate media journalists.
And that's unfortunate.
But anyway, it's just a little bit of criticism that I had,
a little bit of criticism that I have.
So I'll get back to it.
Twirlers for life proclaiming the necessity for people to adopt an aesthetic
lifestyle in the form of a mutated Christian conservatism, conservatism,
stands diametrically opposed to Nietzsche's central claim in the genealogy of morality,
that the aesthetic ideal is not something to strive for, but rather it is the consequence
of a life attempting to inject artificial meaning into its veins in a poor attempt
at inoculation from degeneration.
In this capacity, Peterson resembles the ascetic priest that Nietzsche castigates.
The task of intellectual should should not be to inject arbitrary rules and
regulations into people, but rather to foster
a spectacular scene that welcomes more eyes, various eyes,
we are able to use to sketch a more complete understanding of our objectivity.
Superlative point.
In my opinion, this little para here or this little part sentence, let's say,
it's the best sentence in the whole article.
Really good point, because it's something I began to realize,
maybe again, two or three years ago, because I saw that in our new age
entrenched culture, it seems like every public intellectual is becoming a self
help guru, and that's kind of unfortunate because there's nothing wrong with self
help, but we should understand that everything has its place.
Self help should be separated from
intellectualism and public or public intellectuals, because it seems like
you know, a lot of even the Sam Harris, you know, he's got meditation and mindfulness.
A lot of public intellectuals have just become self help gurus,
kind of the celebrity self self help gurus, and that's unfortunate because the
what intellectual, in my opinion, should do is not reaffirm what you already believe.
But yes, as David beautifully puts it, it clearly points out.
Really make us feel uncomfortable in our beliefs, make us make us completely
change our perspectives and view the world in different lenses and give us
kind of perspectival seeing Adorno had a great quote, I think, in a aesthetic theory.
I'm completely paraphrasing here, but he says and he's talking about art here.
He says, Adorno, that the real purpose of art should be to.
Sort of.
I can't really remember the quote, but the idea is the purpose of art should be
to make us feel uncomfortable, to challenge our dogmas, our pre-health beliefs and really.
You know, lift, change our life radically and fundamentally in how we view the world.
And in my opinion, that's also what a public
intellectual should do, not become a self help guru.
And if they want to become self help guru, there's nothing wrong with that.
That's that's OK.
But then there's something else.
They're not a public intellectual or an intellectual for that matter.
So this is probably the best point David makes in the whole article.
Peterson's project is that is an attempt then to move away from the Nietzsche
notion of perspectival scene toward the domain of a historical, a contextual scene.
This narrowing of possibility operates to maintain the authority of those who choose
what is considered worth seeing and through that through and through what needs
pushing society towards sovereign and
the tutorial rule. Again, this last bit here
is quite apt to the whole covid lockdown controversy debate that a lot of people
got got into in the intellectual dark web.
I'm using that as an umbrella term
for like the Peterson's and the Sam Harris's.
That's again, that idea of perspectival
thing is quite important here.
So then we get to the section where it's the science versus Peterson.
And then David comments on
some of the Aristotelian notions of science.
He writes,
though Peterson's line of argumentation seems to suggest a science postmodernism
opposition, a considerable number of scientific journals have published articles
addressing the growing stigmatization and discrimination, trans and gender
queer people experience regularly.
It's a good point.
A lot of us don't spend the time to go and read up on these articles,
but there certainly is a a good amount of literature that probably uses the
scientific method to point this out.
So it is true.
There is that stigmatization
within trans people, especially maybe because it's now it's become a lot more
political. And that's quite unfortunate.
That is that is deep.
I hate saying that's quite that's quite
unfortunate because it's like a throwaway term for everything these days.
But that's that's a that's a sad truth.
And we should think about that.
We should think about that.
Such articles, though they conform to the same
scientific rationale utilized by Peterson, shed light on the great deal of contradictions,
oppositions and diversion, believes in this supposedly objective field of study.
This is an important point David makes.
These studies correspond to the domain of research that aligns with the
Aristotelian Aristotelian, God, I can't pronounce that,
aligns with the Aristotelian maxim of phronesis, which may be understood as
fostering practical intellectual activity aimed at clarifying the problems
risks and possibilities we face as humans and society, societies.
This approach, although still immersed in the scientific tradition,
stands opposed to the other domain of Aristotelian reason of episteme
that proclaims the a priori nature of scientific knowledge.
So this again kind of touches on that.
How do we derive Oates plainly from science?
Because it seems like the scientific institution itself is,
let's say, bifurcated into this phronesis and episteme.
And in many ways, phronesis does help us derive Oates,
but it is complicated because that also involves
contextual seeing, sociology, sociology, all of that.
This brand of research, while disavowed by Peterson,
presents a foray into the lives and experiences of marginalized groups
that would otherwise be silenced, absolutely.
And now another interesting point I would say from the whole article,
my favorite parts were Nietzsche and postmodernism and the
Baudrillard reality and truth.
Well worth a read, just just do those two parts.
The question asks the question that Baudrillard asks us, what is objective truth?
Job Baudrillard has vigorously challenged the position held by scholars such as
Peterson on objectivity and truth, suggesting instead that science like any
discourse is organized on the basis of a conventional logic,
adding that it explains things which have been defined
and formalized in advance, which subsequently conform to these explanations.
And again, Peterson would agree with this point because I've listened to his
conversations with recently Richard Dawkins and then Sam Harris,
where they get into the fact value distinction.
And again, one would assume that Peterson would find a certain
certain validity in what Baudrillard's pointing out here, because
in that sense, Richard Feynman, I'm I'm
connecting many figures here, Richard Feynman, probably my favorite scientist.
I love listening to his lectures.
He is actually wrong to say the philosophy of science is as useful to
scientists as ornithology is to birds.
That's that's a that's a wrong statement.
That's an invalid statement, in my opinion, because no, no, no,
the philosophy of science is a part of the scientific process.
It's a part of the scientific institution.
In many ways, it maybe is what this Aristotelian frenesis is about.
We need to understand what science is and how we make our presuppositions.
Oh, sorry, on what
on what presuppositions we start from, on what axioms.
And that's a good heavens.
That's probably that probably is the fundamental question of science these days.
How do we make our assumptions?
Where what's the starting point?
And again, I think apart from the conversations that I've
heard Peterson have, he probably understands that this problem inherently
exists in our modern conception of science.
It's probably why he's interested in Jung in archetypes and
Christian Neoplatonism, symbolism and in general, religious narrative,
because he sees those to be a sort of he sees that can be coupled with science
to find some kind of, let's say, objective starting point for science to work off.
And I don't know if that's possible, but it certainly at least points to the
problem or hints at the problem.
So David states, Baudrillard doesn't say that scientific conclusions are invalid.
He actually doesn't, I think.
I haven't read much Baudrillard, obviously, but I don't get that impression, at least.
But what he says very clearly is that whatever these scientific conclusions are,
these conclusions should not be transposed onto any societal or cultural context.
So these studies, some studies that he cited above in the article,
the studies speak to the late Baudrillard's conception of singularity.
OK, I'm going to say this is a part that I kind of am struggling to grok yet.
I still can't fathom it.
I don't know, for me, it still seems incomprehensible, but I think it's because I
haven't done enough reading, I haven't done enough studying to Baudrillard.
So David writes,
Baudrillard's conception of singularity, which holds that every detail of the world
is perfect if it is not referred to some larger set.
Reality for Baudrillard is always caught in a play of signification and suggestions
of a naturality made by the authoritative
scientific community, mistake the only true nature of the world as a world of
appearances in which there may not be anything but a discourse of the real and the rational.
Just a point here, the idea of I think this in many ways is the
scientific question. Oh, sorry, the philosophical question and the philosophical
battle that we've been having since time immorial, ever since Socrates, Plato, all that is.
In our epistemology, how do we know what's true and how do we know what's
appearing as true?
It seems to be the distinction between, let's say, the
the rationalist and the empiricists between the
Joan Locke and the David Hume or the continental philosophers and then the
English analytical philosophers.
How do we know what's true and what appears as true?
So that's such an important point and Baudrillard is,
in many ways, Baudrillard's working off that here.
According to Baudrillard,
then notions of an objective truth are fundamentally flawed and any attempt to occupy
an objective field of study is bound to fail and merely become
signs, signifiers of a real signified.
I hope there's a bit of a wordplay there, that's difficult to understand.
The fundamental impossibility of performing objective studies and or
revealing fundamental truths is understood by Baudrillard and his theory of simulation.
For Baudrillard, simulation occurs when the world has become real beyond our
wildest expectations
and can be described as the outcome of calculated
move to put the illusion of the world to death.
Scientific discourse that rely on notions on notions of objectivity and truth,
therefore dissolve into the imaginary of the sign or the sphere of truth
and leaves us with reality and therefore simulation in all its glory.
The real then is merely a particular case of that simulation that Baudrillard
argues, loves our society to think itself
and live itself as superior to all others.
Baudrillard's work can be read as not necessarily opposing the domain of scientific
inquiry, but accounting for the degree to which science,
but accounting for the degree to which any scientific inquiry should be attuned to
the cultural and significator conditions of the object of study.
So now here's where, again, I completely
attribute this to my lack of understanding, my lack of knowledge.
The reason I'm saying that is not for some kind of false modesty or false humility.
It's because genuinely, I haven't done enough study and reading.
This is in my field of study.
I haven't gone through the proper formal academic process of studying all its
philosophers, I'm a autodidact.
I'm doing it on my own.
But really, sometimes when I read these kind
of paragraphs, I do wonder, is this some kind of word game that these thinkers
are playing with their brilliant verbal and intellectual capabilities
with their ability to write?
And is it some kind of game?
I don't even mean game in a cynical way.
I mean, is it truly a way to try to
make some pre-held belief they have and try to make it look as if something
that's true about the world and make it cohere using language?
Is it is it a language game to sound with with with with with I don't know,
because, OK, when I read this, even though, as I said before, I don't fully
comprehend it or fully understand it, I certainly can see that it's it's
intimations of something true, something that's topically true about reality.
And it points to so many different domains of our current way of doing the world.
And for me, that coheres, even though what they're trying to say really doesn't
cohere, if that makes sense.
Like what I'm trying to say is sort of
it's a normatively some of what they're saying is like, oh, yeah, that I can see
how how they come to these conclusions.
OK, I don't know, just thinking out loud here, as I tend to do in this podcast.
And on the topic of not understanding things, I would say, again, not David's
fault, my own fault, my own ignorance, I truly thought it hard to understand this
section, Baudrillard Butler and those voices of the marginalized.
So that's about the whole essay.
That's about three or four paragraphs.
And here's the thing, I think part of it was because simply it's that section
of the essay about the gender controversy that I didn't really care that much to be
frank. And I think I just truly couldn't I couldn't penetrate it.
That's what it was.
It was the reason I found it a bit incomprehensible was because
I could see that David's making some important points here, but I couldn't.
I don't know. I didn't know why.
But for example, the previous points, even though there were parts of it that I
didn't really get, I at least I at least got the essence of his argument.
I was getting at where he was going to it.
But this section for me, I just couldn't I couldn't penetrate it.
And it it didn't click with me to put it plainly.
And apart from that,
this is just a complete personal thing.
I've recently been trying to study Heidegger, been trying to get through being in time.
Mate, I am eternally perplexed about everything.
I haven't really, if you can probably see from this podcast, I haven't got anything
substantial or coherent to say, but especially phenomenology, but virtually
anything because Heidegger has completely
overturned my views on so many things.
So
yeah, I'm in this place of this deep.
I'm I'm self I'm being extremely self critical of what I believe.
And I'm also very uncertain about virtually all my beliefs.
And that on that rather legubrious note, let's go to the conclusion.
But before I do read the conclusion, I want to say something.
Firstly, I want to say I think Peterson
totally deeply understands everything that David points out here, even though
he isn't very explicit about it.
He does get his he sees this inherent
income and stability between between what we have as modern science and how can we
derive values from it?
He sees the incomes, income and stability between what
modernity tells us and the deeper truth that postmodernist found this idea of
context, he's even said it in a couple of his podcasts that he does agree
with this notion of the complexity of interpretations and how much,
how deep that that really goes into reality in some sense, not just at,
let's say, at the level of text or hermeneutics, but that this this this
the problem of interpretation is a big problem.
And he points to AI researchers, he points to many, many places within the field
of science to to hit at that.
So I think he gets it.
And I would say it's because of that, maybe that I say that I,
apart from him as a person, but just at an intellectual, I began to admire him
a lot more because he's willing to publicly flesh out these ideas and make
mistakes publicly, especially someone like him who's got such public acclaim.
And, and, you know, because he gets himself in all his political controversies,
the moment he makes a mistake, he is hammered and he is,
is there always caving critiques written about him, which can be quite difficult
being a public figure.
One shouldn't just think that that's it's quite hard to go through that.
It's it's a lot of stress.
So I do admire that kind of courage that he has to publicly deal with these issues.
And
I I've got to say I am a bit disheartened that I
feel like with time, with his influence, he's becoming more and more ideological
and even a bit more dogmatic in his in his beliefs and his views, which for me
is unfortunate because then this project, he has to work this out to try and reconcile
these, if it's reconcilable, these
incumbents or abilities,
I feel like that then he won't have a genuine journey in doing that because if
he becomes more and more, let's say, dogmatic in his views,
I really hope that he doesn't go there.
But again, all the points David makes in this article, I think is very apt to who
Jordan Peterson is and I think he gets it.
Secondly, I want to say, David,
if you have, if you do watch this episode, I really hope you do.
I want to try and treat this at you a couple of times to to try and get your
attention. But if you do watch this episode and if you come this far,
mate, I know I'm very, very long winded.
It's a problem of mine.
I never get to the point.
But if you come this far, I would like to
sincerely invite you on the podcast for an interview because I would love to talk
to you and learn from you. I have so many questions.
I got to say, David, again,
not blowing steam up your ass, put it in a vulgar way.
You truly have been that kind of intellectual that you talk about this
part here about perspectival scene.
You probably are seeing right now me learning from you and trying to
try to see the world and see all these topics through different perspectives
and different views, because you foster that kind of perspective of seeing in me.
So and I'm a product of in that sense of your YouTube channel,
a living example, let's say, to put it in a dramatic way.
And again, your work on Hannah Irwin has made me fall in love with her in some sense.
Maybe, you know, in fact, maybe I should have you on the podcast if you do agree
that is, of course, after I'm done reading the origins of totalitarianism.
Because then I'll have something a bit more substantial to discuss with you.
But again, this is my invite to the podcast.
And on that note, I would read the conclusion to the article and end this episode.
Beyond locating the various contradictions and fallacious remarks Peterson makes,
this paper has also argued that Peterson's assault against Bill C-16 risks mirroring
the same systemic instantiations of totalitarianism that he claims to know so much about.
To reiterate,
this is not to suggest that he represents these movements directly,
but that there are many affinities between these oppressive ideological systems
and Peterson's faith in a universal conception of truth.
That's to a point.
This paper serves the purpose of mounting a philosophically analytical rebuttal
to Peterson's central claims by pointing an eminent critique.
Pointing to the many shortcomings of his
speculations and locating epistemic fallacies that may be observed in his ideas.
This is a necessary form of critique because unlike the Hegelian model of
oppositional politics that poses a critique from an antithetical and exterior
positionality, this form identifies the core of the theoretical inadequacy
of Peterson's project from the inside.
And I think, David, you accomplished that.
