everyone welcome to yet another episode of the inner realm podcast before we
start off some housekeeping points I apologize if I'm a bit sniffly and I
cough and I do all those things with my throat you know like scratch my throat
and all that unfortunately I've got a cold I just hope that I won't be too
irritable for you the listener and if it is too bad I'll edit the whole thing
out and make it a bit more palatable the second thing is I've got to admit I've
tried recording this episode four times already yeah I've spent four different
sessions on trying to get this episode right and I don't know why but I
simply seem to not be happy with it I simply seem to not be able to convey
the points that I'm trying to convey I think partially is because even when I
was writing the script for this episode I was a bit hesitant because you know
red pill, nanosphere, MGTO doubly, NOFAP, whatever these movements or
subcultures are they tend to be rather controversial and very very political
by nature and as a result of that of course I I'm not a fan of this kind of
casual dismissiveness of you know corporate media and anyone that does
talk about these communities critically I think they've been so maligned and
miscarriage that anyone who tries to even be a bit critical of these
communities end up getting out of slack or end up you know being called a
fraud or a liar or something like that simply because I feel like people that
are part of these communities who benefited a lot including myself by the
way have become very defensive of what these communities are so when I was
trying to record the episode every single time I felt like I said something
that I shouldn't have said I felt like I'm a spoke or I said something that was
untrue so I just you know adequately I didn't feel like I could publish that
episode so I kept trying again and again hey look let's hope I get it right this
time in any case before I start off because of the as I said the nature of
the podcast I do want to make oh I want to do want to stipulate the whole
episode with some caveats it's not only because of the point I made before but
also because this is probably the first podcast where I'm actually being critical
of a certain ideology and certain cultural movement I generally don't
tend to do that but this is the first time I'm actually I think breaking down
my qualms with a certain movement and my disagreements with a certain ideology
and fleshing it out on a podcast therefore I would say things that will
contradict my claims especially my critique of ideology ironically I think
I'm gonna critique ideology using ideology so if so facto at times I will be
an utter hypocrite I will also say adding on to that point I haven't given any of
these communities the time and research effort they deserve so I really do
apologize if I'm being casually cynical or dismissive of the ideologies I mean
it does take a lot of words to truly understand the essence of what these
cultural movements and subcultures are and in no way would I like my my intent
at least and and that's why I said I recorded this podcast five times already
for four times already this is the fifth time because I just didn't want to
misrepresent these movements the way the corporate media does so I hope at
least my intent in making this recording this episode comes across and I'll
definitely put in the intellectual and even experiential labor to try and
understand these groups and the individuals within these groups deeply
as a matter of fact I'm reading Rolo Rolo Tomasi's book The Rational Male now
you know according to his own Amazon page I think he calls let me actually
look it up according to his own Amazon page he calls himself the godfather of
the red pill and I feel like he's very influential amongst his red pill aiding
managed fair community helping men find women and get into relationships and all
that and look even his book there are some some good advice I think there were
some things that are it can be applicable to you know our lives and I also
wanted to sort of understand the broader view of how he views sexual dynamics and
relationships between men and women which is why I said that I'm much not
gonna just watch a few episodes on YouTube or watch a few go through a few
ready threads I'm actually gonna try and you know read the books that come
out of these communities because I feel like writing is the most pulled out most
precise and well detailed ports for you truly want to know a person well first
look at what they do but also read what they write over what they say because
what they write in some sense is more pulled out fleshed out ideas and it's
because of that I would say because of all these points I made that this will
definitely be my first episode on this topic of many to come because these
subcultures I hate it when you know corporate media maligns them saying
that there's some French far-right group or some silly thing like that because
they actually are quite influential I personally know a lot of people that
are that I've got great benefit from these communities and that would be
including myself which is why I firstly want to make a case in defense of
bro culture now we've got a delineate bro culture from the red pill communities
on the internet I think bro culture is a bit more broader whereas red pill is a
lot more political oh by the way I just want to add a point since obviously MGTO
W manasphere no fap it's all a mouthful as a umbrella term I'll just use the word
red pill community but I do think this whole bro culture and this idea of you
know masculinity what would it call it hyper masculinity maybe just connect a
lot with the red pill community it goes hand-in-hand in many ways I gotta say
as a young man when I was maybe 17 18 or probably even a bit younger and then
even into my early 20s like 1920 maybe even 21 bro culture was extremely
beneficial for me as a young person and the best to define what bro culture is
is through my anecdotal experience so bro culture is greatly connected to
sports and and yeah like the red hole the red hole red pill thing it's
interesting right because a lot of people that generally tend to be a part of
really embrace that bro doctor in the bro culture they probably would consider
themselves to be red-pilled or whatever and a good way to define bro culture is
actually by a speech by the Roosevelt the eponymous speech called the
strenuous life and I think it captures what bro culture is best in a more
refined gentlemanly manner and I quote a small part from the speech it says I
wish to preach not the doctrine of ignoble ease but the doctrine of the
strenuous life the life of toil and effort of labor and strike to preach that
highest form of success which comes not to the man who desires mere easy peace
but to the man who does not shrink from danger from hardship or from bitter
toil and who out of these wins the splendid ultimate triumph so yes as I
said this is kind of the message of bro culture it's the whole pull yourself up
by your bootstraps message and as I I'm probably repeating myself now it's
deeply associated with sports it's this embrace of masculinity the good and the
bad keep in mind and it gives the message of self-reliance to nasty
discipline and I feel especially for young boys and young men this is a great
message you know leaving aside politics the whole you know picking up women
thing and the whole all the critiques that I come to their role I still
believe essentially these are good messages you know they they not just
for men but even for women telling someone to take responsibility for their
life it's something that we don't hear much in contemporary culture and I
would also say you know on the on the topic of strength and sort of self
improvement let's say a good good example is Elliot Hulse now undoubtedly
Elliot Hulse is a full-on bro he's like the quintessential bro and is also very
much in the whole redfoot community he's going through his own face he had the
whole mega thing now I used to watch a lot of Elliot Hulse's videos because I
was rather I would say enamored by strength I still am I I admire strength
and you know I really like strongman and I used to watch some some of his some
of his videos to you know to do strongman workouts and all that before I
stopped because suddenly I felt like he became this very zealous
Tradcon traditional conservative and you know he was like all he talks about is
like how women should submit to men and and he really kind of embodied that
whole traditional conservative I don't even know the Tradcon ethos into
himself and then it frankly it became as much I still like him I still think he
gives good advice like for example I'm gonna pick up a small clip from his
podcast here to you know exemplify what I mean but he's became this like a
knowing ideal of that constantly preached Tradcon values and and constantly
evangelized his way of living and prescribed his way of living onto the
world and I guess onto his videos in this case but despite all of that this is
an example of why I think this whole bro culture movement and the let's say the
what's the word not poorly is but the more influential people in this
movement do give a good message so this one's on the whole no fat movement and
which is also connected to all of this look I think the young people especially
young men have a massive problem with photography I've dealt with it I would
call it a behavioral addiction I think a lot of people are either ashamed to talk
about it or they trivialize it but as far as I'm concerned I know a lot of my
mates who sometimes ah it's like they if that isn't an addiction I don't know
what it is you know like they'll go hours sometimes you know indulging
themselves in porn consuming porn so it definitely is a problem it's definitely
something that has to be spoken of and for the longest time the only people
that spoke about porn addiction and this problem with internet pornography
were the red pill grows all the people in this you know no fat movement which
is connected to the bro culture they were the only people that actually spoke
about how this is probably a dangerous thing that it's probably affecting young
people in their cases focus more on men you know psychologically spiritually
but I found this particular video by Elliot to be a rather astute take because
he doesn't just say don't watch porn don't jerk off or he doesn't just say you
know don't don't be a loser that just sits sitting on jocks in front of a
computer all day and you know jerks off for women on the internet just jerks
off to women on the internet he actually makes a very very interesting
point and this is a bit bit of a longer video but I think what he's trying to say
is a good example of the kind of messages one could hear from the bro
culture movement and then how that could be greatly beneficial for young people
mostly for young people but for anyone really I've heard you yo Elliot I've
heard you say that men in their 20s should bust their nut once a week why
is this I think I'd like to retain for as much longer than one week thank you
I'm loving this program so first of all I have my conviction about it that comes
from what I've studied right again this is I'm not an expert in this but I've
often referred to this great little book called listen to your body and it's
based on traditional Chinese medicine and I do think that there's some value I
think there's tremendous value to Chinese medicine and natural health right
essentially it's natural health how to be healthy naturally without you know big
pharma and so there are ways to live that that improve longevity and vitality
and make you feel good right make you make you the best you and so according to
traditional Chinese medicine in this nice little cute little book he goes on
and says that there are clear guidelines and traditional Chinese medicine
about ejaculation of sperm so the the premise is that the more you blow your
load the more you're you're losing your vitality right and I think we've all
sort of experienced that right I know I've had right it took me until my 40s
I didn't realize it when I was younger a lot of you guys recognize it more for
whatever reason but not until my 40s I started to recognize it boy the day after
I blow my load and for like you know a day or two a little off and then I also
discovered takes me about 10 days personally at this point for me to feel
that vigor that fire that I've had before blowing my load and now it makes it
makes sense to me now after reading this pseudo scientific right I don't think
there's anything wrong with pseudoscience right in fact like the whole
vaccine thing is pseudoscience it's like not exactly science but they're
pointing at something there see what I mean for some reason
unfortunately because they get sucked into ideology suddenly everyone who's a
part of the Red Bull movement also have to be you know I would say I'm fairly
critical of vaccines and the whole movement or what whole whole thing that
happened during COVID in any case out of the video so anyway it says clear
guidelines about ejaculation of sperm in general not more than twice a month is
advised because of loss of vitality other consideration includes the men's
health and his age the ancient texts give the following advice for a man of 20
years old once in every four days just going based on that right at 30 once
every eight days at 40 once every 16 days at 50 once every 20 days and at 60
once a month so I come to the conclusion now this validates what was my
conclusion or they kind of work together I don't know if I had this thought
and then read it in the book or read the book and it helped me have thought but
I've sort of sort of brought this together in my own mind that's or based on my
experience as well this is I think this is a pretty solid guideline it doesn't
mean that it's written in stone but one of the things that I've discovered just
through my own experience but watching you guys and watching videos and
noticing this whole no fat we seem in retention movement there are a few things
that could be pathological about it and one of them is that it becomes starts to
become a God it starts to become an obsession what I mean by that right in
the same way that masturbation becomes an obsession right because he's
engaging in that ritual and you're worshiping porn every day when you do
this there is a sense of pride I started to notice it when I was fasting right I
fasted before doing see you see me retention I fasted you know started
fasting back in 2018 I only started doing see more attention this year and so
I'm careful with myself because I saw what happened to me with fasting I started
to get proud I started to personally identify with my streaks you catch where
I'm going with this I started to make it a bigger deal than what it was and the
month the monks the the month the monastery the guys in the monasteries
right I think I remember reading this from Briana Shav also he talks about how
not to be too austere with yourself for fear of pride he says that Satan loves
it when you're really tough on yourself because then you start to become you know
hmm well I did no fat for 20 days I did 30 days I did 50 days all right so then
it starts to become a religion it starts to become an obsession it starts to
become an idol that's barely what it ends up becoming right or I fasted wow this
guy fasted for 10 days why he fasted for 20 days well I only fasted for five
days I gotta live up to these guys it starts to become an ego issue and I
don't and I wouldn't have been able to warn against this as it relates to see
intention had I not messed up during my first season of fasting now I don't take
myself too seriously with any of this stuff in other words I don't make it an
idol I don't have I'm not personally identified with it I don't get my sense
of value and self-worth from it so that's just that's one warning right that's
more of a that's more of a spiritual warning it's a warning against pride
that's all it is right start to feel like well look what I did and even that
just just just the whole idea that I am going to fast is sort of an idol it's
sort of a egotistical way of looking at it when the saints and the divines and
the mystics right I love the orthodox tradition they even call some of their
guys mystics they they they recognize that it is it's a it's a spiritual battle
that you're you're gearing up for it's not a matter of challenging your yourself
right it's and when it's a spiritual battle it's beyond your will and so I
can will myself to get something done and then I can be proud about it because
look at me or if it's a spiritual fast it's a spiritual retention or abstinence
right it's God is helping me God has given me grace to do this this is a
humble way of looking at life that saves us from pride but also saves us from
depression because if you start to think that it's up to me to get things done and
they don't get done you're gonna feel bad about yourself so both either way if we
if our if our will wins or loses we lose if your will wins you will you lose
because you become proud if your will loses you lose because you take that
personally as well it's like the opposite of pride but it's on the same
spectrum I don't even know what to call it right but like depression right
depression is is on the same spectrum of pride I don't that's the right word but
feeling sorry and sad about yourself is just as it's almost it's a it's a other
side of the same coin of feeling proud and good about yourself because they're
both wrapped up in what I can do what I didn't do as opposed to resting in the
Lord and saying and asking God to give me the grace I think that perspective is
good for us right again once again I don't know I know that there's spiritual
wisdom in the literature and the Bible and stuff like this right I know that
there are good ideas that were propounded by ascetics and such and then
then there are commandments things to do and not to do but in my life I've looked
at those things and I recognize them as maybe external like okay I get that I
see that I understand that but it's not until and maybe we gotta all make our
own mistakes is not until I've seen it in myself and others that I'm like oh this
is practical advice it's not just religious weird stuff right so you know
people are like oh that's all archaic religious thinking well it's actually
very practical right so it's very practical to lean on God lean on the
Creator lean on the Father lean on nature whatever you want to call it even
though nature is a fruit of God I want to be in walking with the Creator rather
than offering it up or recognizing that I am not 100% sovereign over my life but
the grace and mercy of God precedes me then you can't get depressed you can't
get depressed you can't get depressed because your life is in the hands of
the Lord and if he sees it fit for you to have this failure then it's up to you
to be grateful for and see the lining in the cloud the silver lining of the
cloud right every every every bad thing that happens to us it's because God is
allowing it to happen to us because we're supposed to make something of it
but if you think that you're in charge and something bad happens you start
going okay what did I do how do I fix this why why why me I screwed up I'm such
a bad person and the same thing on the other side right it's the same coin same
coin oh look what I did proud of me look at this I did it and you didn't
right it's the same shit same shit you gotta stop you gotta stop and so as just
a warning against that right I'm not saying that's gonna happen to you but
just as a warning I advise not to push ourselves that hard I know that doesn't
I know that sounds like a contradiction from you know promasculine Elliot that's
telling everybody to do hard stuff but having austerity having discipline being
committed to something is very different than being attached to something
making something an idol and and and being personally identified with it very
different things try your best in everything that you do but leave room
for God that's all it is I feel like this is like you know Elliot being the
as I said the quintessential example of what a you know the port leader in the
broke culture movement would be this is great this is great advice he speaks
about humility he speaks about he doesn't speak about mere like peace
unanimous weak humility but he speaks about genuine humility he speaks about
the dangers of pride and you know as our culture has become more and more secular
and more materialistic we don't really talk about those let's say higher human
virtues anymore and when I was younger before you know I understand Elliot was
kind of evangelizing he has become very religious but even before he became sort
of the track on bro he used to talk a lot about these things in the middle of
the strength cam strongman videos he would give really good life advice and
I wouldn't even go to his channel for life advice per se as like a teenager but
he'd you know slip it in somewhere and then I'm and I think to myself oh that's
actually that's a that's a gem right there that's quite interesting you know
when he's for example he spoke about how depression and pride or depression and
this sense of euphoria and and eternal happiness or whatever you may call it
it's the same side of the same is a is a different side of the same coin that's
a very very brilliant insight that that shows he's got a perspicuity a
perspicuity and which is why I think messages like this all these workshops
and and different seminars that they organize in these communities it
provides community it provides brotherhood and fatherhood you know we I
believe definitely are living in the midst of a loneliness pandemic a lot of
people I can speak you know through my personal anecdotes through personal
conversations conversations I've had and stuff I've read are lonely
unfortunately due to unfortunately modernity after industrialized
industrialization and you you know how how how how capitalism has
completely been so pernicious in our society and made people into cogs in
this massive machine it's alienated us and that has created a lot of loneliness
that along with you know traditional little traditional small-scale communities
that dying off and people are becoming more cosmopolitan and people are going
to cities these smaller communities that with the epicenters of meaning and
community with them dying off definitely a lot of people are feeling a lot more
alienated ironically even though we think we have connected and all of this
yearnings all of these yearnings that young men let me let me speak for young
men from over here to young men from over here have you know the yearning for
brotherhood the yearning for structure the yearning for a purpose the broculture
for those years yearnings at least it gave me a structure when I was a lot
younger and it really wasn't really comfortable in my own shoes let's say so
the reason I wanted to put that part in the podcast is I wanted to be genuine
and sincere and show that I'm not being casually dismissive I use that term a
lot these days casually dismissive of these movements and I'm actually they've
actually you know helped me a lot that they've benefited me a lot and I've
even been a part of these movements when I was younger which is why probably I have
more insight into how to criticize them because I understood how a certain
person in a red pill movement with pink now the first this first point is
generally the problem with subcultures not nothing particular specific to the
red pill grows it is that Internet subcultures they kind of become a bit
cultish for sure but they also inevitably go to the extreme and they're
inherently ideological like they cannot exist without being ideological because
they need a dogma they need a doctrine to attract people and then they need and
then that doctrine once it's got enough people it becomes a self-perpetuating
belief it becomes a self-sustaining belief the more people that join these
different communities I also believe and I can't get to this get into this in
this whole in this podcast because it's a it's a whole book but I also believe
that unlike religion ideology never tells a full story whereas religion I
believe gives the complete narrative most religious stories give the complete
narrative ideology tells only one part of the story I think it was Jordan Peterson
who really made this crystallized this in my mind when I heard him talk about
this but I thought that makes a lot of sense so of course I've used to what
ideology a lot I've said that I'm critical of these subcultures I've also
said that I'm critical of the fact that they are ideological plus I'm critical
of the ideology so many things I'm critical of but let's run understand
what ideology is now it's a difficult thing to defend you know ideology isn't
merely a set of principles or a set of beliefs that refuse to update itself it's
a lot more deeper than that it affects us the subject psychologically way way
more deeply than I thought until I was exposed to Slavo Gijek's work so
Slavo Gijek kind of talks about ideology in his film the perverts guide to
ideology and he describes ideology best I think here's a short clip
hey buddy you're gonna pay for that or what
look buddy I don't want no house today either pay for it or put it back
according to our common sense we think that ideology is something blurring
confusing our straight view ideology should be glasses which distort our
view and the critique of ideology should be the opposite like you take off the
glasses so that you can finally see the way things really are this precisely and
here the pessimism of the film of the leaf is well justified this precisely is
the ultimate illusion ideology is not simply in post on ourselves
ideologies our spontaneous relationship to our social world how we perceive its
meaning and so on and so on we in a way enjoy our ideology alright to step out
of ideology it hurts it's a painful experience you must force yourself to
do it this is rendered in a wonderful way with a further scene in the film
where John Nada tries to force his best friend John Armitage to also put the
glasses on I don't want to fight you I don't want to fight stop it no and it's
the weirdest scene in the film the fight takes eight nine minutes it may appear
irrational because why does this guy reject so violently to put the glasses
on it is as if he is well aware that spontaneously he lives in a lie that the
glasses will make him see the truth but that this truth can be painful can
shatter many of your illusions this is a paradox we have to accept the extreme
violence of liberation you must be forced to be free if you trust simply
your spontaneous sense of well-being or whatever you will never get free what
freedom hurt brilliantly put you know I I think it was only Zizek who really
made me understand how much ideology captivates or even possesses us and once
it does why so difficult for us to let go of it so in that sense I actually feel
a deep sense of empathy with ideologues because you know actually let me let me
read a few excerpts from this essay by Mac Mac Mac Manus on the philosophy of
Zizek he says the appeal of ideology is that it enables us to bring psychic
stability to a social and natural world that is chaotic and broken in and of
itself that's an important point a latter point is something I it took me a
bit of time to understand this of what Zizek is trying to convey according to
Zizek the essence of being it may be even a metaphysical ontological claim is
chaotic so what ideology does it is at as Matt specifies here it gives psychic
stability which is why once we are assessed by an ideology once we become
a let's say the red pill ideology or the feminist ideology or some some
political framework or some socio-political framework that takes hold of
us it fundamentally changes our psychology it fundamentally affects our
psyche and then we just don't want to let go of it because as Zizek says
freedom hurts because freedom really is the is the confrontation of this chaotic
nature of this chaotic essence of being and that's a scary thing and you know
going on with the essay oh by the way the essay is was on a road magazine it's
called the philosophy of Slavo Zizek I haven't read all of Zizek's books for
sure but I've read a lot read and listen to a lot of his lectures and I would say
this essay was quite apt and quite accurate as to what Zizek tries to
convey through his work another excerpt is ideology provides us with a way of
projecting psychic stability onto the world for instance it enables us to
simplify complex socio-political and natural processes into simple party
narratives once again the red pill bros would say all of the problems that men
have are because of feminist or because of modernity or because of you know
neoliberalism or blame it on some group blame it on the other and that is taking
a very complex socio-political change and a natural process of society evolving
and breaking it simply into partisan narratives or breaking it simply into
something a lot more tribal and that's the danger of ideology and this again
I'm still in some sense even though I'm connecting this to the red pill
movement I'm still making a very general point on how anyone is susceptible any
movement is susceptible to ideology including religion of course that's
when it becomes fundamentalism ideology simplifies the chaotic
incompleteness of society and nature and provides us with a firm sense of
identity and values there you go it's what's interesting is you know the
latter point there and provides us with the firm sense of identity and values so
you probably remember I said initially that you know in my part where I was
talking about in defense of bro culture how as a young person these red pill
movements gave me structure gave me a framework to view the world through and
and it took me a long time probably 21 22 and maybe even 23 took me about two to
three years to break out of it because breaking out of it for me it was a
daunting task it perturbed me it brought this sense of existential angst so
again then I man I really hope I don't sound super serious or patronizing when
I say this that's definitely not I'm not trying to say or look at me over here
free from ideology I've got over the red pill movement I've got over all these
different subcultures on the internet and I'm my own person and I'm so like
above them and pointing fingers at them I really hope I'm not doing that I'm
what I'm saying is I totally empathize with why we're attracted to these
movements and how their their doctrines assess us and you know when
Kedricat again was influenced sorry Zizek was again influenced by Kedricat and
you know when when Zizek talks about this how the the essence of the world is
is kind of broken and chaotic I think it comes a lot from absurdism you know of
course popularized by Kamu but Kamu too was influenced by Kedricat and I believe
Kedricat said this very famous paragraph of his in his book either or and I think
this is a very this is this is like typical Kedricat you know with the humor and with the
absurdity but it's also a a it's a it's a typical sentiment of kind of the existentialist it goes
something like this marry and you will regret it don't marry you will also regret it marry or
don't marry you will regret it either way laugh at the world's foolishness you will regret it
weep over it you will regret that too laugh at the world's foolishness or weep over it you will
regret both believe a woman you will regret it believe her or not you will also regret it
hang yourself you will regret it do not hang yourself you will regret that too
hang yourself or don't hang yourself you'll regret it either way whether you hang yourself
or do not hang yourself. You will regret both. This gentleman is the essence of old philosophy.
There are some things that are just so true, that the only way to speak about them is through
humor, through fuzz. And I think that's what character God is doing here. And then of course,
another famous line from Camus, he says, man stands face to face with a rational,
he feels within him, he's longing for happiness and for reason. The absurd is born out of this
confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world.
This is deeply true. We all look for psychic stability of some kind to cushion ourselves and
sometimes even extract ourselves from the absurd. And we have no choice. We need to confront the
absurd. So my biggest problem with ideology is, in some sense, ideology makes one a coward.
It tells one that, no, just be comfortable in your own little bubble in this little ideological
framework and do not confront the absurd, do not confront the chaotic nature of the world,
which takes courage. And I believe it's in that confrontation once, once soul matures and when
develops his character and builds those higher virtues that we so rarely speak about these days.
Now, I come to something maybe a bit more specific to the red pill movement. And maybe
actually, since I did speak about Rollo Tomasi a bit earlier in his whole manosphere and because
he even though he touches on politics, and especially he's very, very critical of feminism,
he also focuses a lot on gender dynamics and sexual dynamics and relationships and dating
between men and women. So in his book, The Rational Male, and I think this is the gist of
what I got when I was reading it, but I didn't just want to read it, even though I felt reading
is because important for this particular podcast episode. I also listened to some of his interviews
and a big problem with modern society. And this really angers me. It really annoys me is
we've completely lost ourselves in abstracting and categorizing at infinity. We truly stopped
looking as people as individuals and rather started looking at them as abstractions. And this has
got nothing to do with left, right. It's just, it's a cultural, it's a cultural zeitgeist shift.
You know, because we live in such a globalized world, we've begun to bureaucratize everything.
Everything is becoming rather Kafkaesque and the human individual in some sense is being negated,
as being made into non-being, let's say, because we've completely begun categorizing everything.
Men are this way. Women are this way. Black people are this way. White people are this way.
Ah, I don't want to keep going. Gay people are this way. LGBTQ folks are that way. It never stops.
And the more we do this, the more we demean and the more value we give to the individual souls,
the uniqueness, the idiosyncrasies of the individual, the nuances of being an individual,
we don't pay attention to that anymore. And that again, I do blame a lot for the death of religion.
I do think a lot of religions speak a lot about that kind of individual spirituality, individual
connection with the transcendent, with the divine, and with this kind of abstract categorizing that
rarely happens, seldom does that happen. So, as I said, we've stopped looking at the souls,
we've become categorized people, and it's also become kind of obsessive. You look at
psychologists that talk about the big five and talk about psychometricians, because
fairly, maybe that itself is its own ideology because it's easy. It's an easy way to make
sense of the world when we categorize things and put things in their place and give things order.
I only really started to understand this phenomenon when I read Dostoevsky, especially when I read
this part in the Brothers Karamazov, where I believe Father Zezema is speaking to this
young woman who says that she cannot, Father Zezema, by the way, is one of the
wiser sort of sage-like characters in Dostoevsky's novel, The Brothers Karamazov. So,
he's talking to this young woman who says she cannot love people, she cannot love humanity,
and then he responds with this beautiful paragraph he says,
it's just the same story as a doctor once told me, observe the elder. He was a man
getting on in years and undoubtedly clever. He spoke as frankly as you, though in jest, in bitter
jest. I love humanity, he said, but I wonder at myself, the more I love humanity in general,
the less I love men in particular. In my dreams, he said, I have come, I've often come to make,
to making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity, and perhaps I might actually have
face crucifixion if it had been soundly necessary. And yet I am incapable of living in the same room
with anyone for two days together, as I know by experience. As soon as anyone is near me,
his personality disturbs my self complacency and restricts my freedom. In 24 hours, I begin to hate
the best of men, one because he's too low over his dinner, another because he has a cold and
keeps on blowing his nose. That was probably me. I become hostile to people the moment they come
close to me, but it has always happened that the more I detest men individually, the more ardently
my love for humanity. What a, man, you gotta read Dostoevsky, man, like what a, what a brilliant
point, what an astute take on society. Many of these Internet subcultures are making the same
mistake that Father Zezima talks about. As I said, people like Rollo Tomasi, the more I listen to
him on what I hear is, you know, what's funny is he unknowingly does this, he'd even explicitly say,
I'm not generalizing, but then he'll go ahead and generalize. I remember he was having this
conversation with a, with another woman and they were kind of going at it. They were in deep
disagreement. And even when she shared something about her personal life, he instantly took what
the, what she said and tried to abstract it out and put her into some box. I didn't see him
truly paying attention to what her as a unique individual was saying, but he had to
really get the, get the gist of what she was saying and they put her in a box, you're this kind of
woman. And I think that's really unfortunate because, you know, whether, whether he disagreed
or agreed with her, it doesn't, it's not the case. It doesn't matter. It's paying attention to what
her as an individual was saying, which is, you know, to be fair, what the psychoanalyst discovered,
you know, the Freud's that you got to truly, truly listen to a person as to what they're saying.
Don't try and make assumptions. Don't try and pigeonhole them. Don't try and put them in boxes.
Just pay attention. So all of these subcultures, subcultures, they unknowingly categorize women,
men, and relationships to the extreme. And yes, this may be beneficial for some people,
but I think what that does is again, this is something, this is ineffable.
It truly is, this is ineffable human experience.
It can't even be spoken of. And I think we really feel it only when we pay attention.
When we do this kind of categorizing and generalizing, we lose that. It's a magical,
beautiful thing. It's a life sustaining thing. And I feel like a lot of us in modernity have lost
that. And to be fair, this is no different to what a radical feminist or someone in Antifa or
some other ideologue would do. This again is a problem with ideology. And which is why I think
even though one can take certain lessons from the Red Perk community, like the lesson that
Elliot gave about porn and NOFAP and all of that, one should never completely let the ideology
control one and become a mouthpiece for the ideology. And not to never be afraid to think
freely and think independently. It is the most important thing. It's having the courage
to confront the chaos of the world and to truly be an independent thinker. One should never forget
that. I would also say maybe this is a bit of an ancillary point, but I think it's connected.
As the book itself says, it's the rational male. All these books are called the rational male. So
Robo Tamasi deeply respects reason. And generally people who tend to be the rationalist types,
the Stephen Pinkers, people who hold reason to be the highest virtue, let's say, they tend to play
a lot in this abstract game, in this game of abstractions and conceptualization. So the Rolo,
in some sense, one can never win a debate with Rolo because he would say the moment, let's say we
make an experiential claim, not an axiomatic truth, maybe make an experiential claim from our own
subjective life, not some kind of sadistic or objective claim that just generally applies to
everyone, but rather a subjective claim. He'll say, you're being irrational. Therefore, you lose
the debate. So he's already set the axioms or he's already set the rules for a conversation
even before we get into a conversation. So there's no way, which is why Rolo Tamasi is
kind of the Ben Shapiro. So some of those guys, you rarely see them lose a debate because the
framework they view through is that of reason. And again, I'm not being critical of reason.
Reason is important. In some sense, I'm using reason in this podcast to flesh out my points and
lay out my criticisms. But reason isn't the only form of epistemology, let's say. It's not the only
way at truth. There are many ways. For me, in some sense, I probably value experiential truth more
than even reason-based truth. Because for me, in some sense, once experience is more palpable,
it's more real. It's what one truly feels. And I would say, to end off this segment,
the truth is, we're all deeply lonely. No one will truly ever understand us. We must accept this
verity that we are all deeply lonely. No one, not even once wife, once partner would truly know
what happens in one's mind, what experiences we have. So the loneliness itself is an
existential part of life. I think Paul Tillich talks about, in his phenomenology, he talks
about the concept of anxiety. And he talks about meaninglessness a lot. But meaninglessness is
one thing. But even, I think Paul Tillich also touches on the idea of us as being lonely, us as
being like an atom detached from being, this incongruence we feel between ourselves and the
world. And we must confront this is no other way. Ideology isn't going to rescue us, I put it that
way. And now, this may be, oh man, on the whole dating thing, I couldn't believe some of the messages
either explicitly or tacitly that these communities give out. I'm going to be honest,
it rather disgusted me. Some of the ways that they generalize women, and they say that women are
like this, women are this kind of men. And I rarely, rarely hear these groups talk about love,
various love in dating. I don't think I even hear the word love come out. Because essentially,
for me, that's what dating is about. I date for love, for monogamy, for marriage, for deep
commitment. And all these communities, you know, people, let's say from the man's sphere or the
red pill dating communities, make the whole relationship thing like a game. That it's just a
zero sum game where you got to one up each other and you got to win. You know, they'll use terms like
sexual marketplace or sexual market value, detrimental terms. They use terms like economically
attractive. And they'll completely commoditize individuals or women in this case. And you know,
that definitely is because of how pernicious I think capitalism has become. And in some sense,
this is what Zizek, you know, who's very, very critical of capitalism says. It's not that ideology
that the ideology of capitalism has just this detached system that just exists on its own.
It deeply affects us, the subjects who are involved in it. And as a result of that, which is why
even something like dating, which I believe should be undergirded by love, becomes a marketplace,
becomes an economical transaction. And the more I listen to, you know, even when I was reading the
book, you know, they talk about concepts like hypergamy. And I understand that a hypergamy
definitely has a lot of evidence for it. But still, the, they'll say some facts. So we, we,
we run into the, you know, it's all problem, they'll state some facts. This is how things are. And the
odd would be, the odd would be this sort of cajoled or this contrived idea of, of the ideological
presuppositions. And, you know, honestly, some of them make women look like these self-serving,
rapacious capitalists who only date men for, for pretty much for social status or money.
I would say, man, I really recommend this video by Olivia. I'm not going to play the whole thing
because it's 20 minutes. It's called Our Conception of Love is Messed Up. It's such a beautiful video.
I truly resonate with what Olivia says here. She's a great YouTuber. I'll leave a link to it down in
the description. I'd probably play it. And also Bell Hooks, President Peace Queen, say we need to shift
our perspective. Anyway, I'm not going to, I'm not going to play the whole thing because it's 25
minutes. And she talks about how a modern conception of love is all about how can I
better myself? How can I look better? How can I look more healthy, you know, so that I can
be more attractive to my partner? And she says, instead, why not treat love like an art? Why not
treat dating of how can I give myself to the other person? How can I fulfill the other person's needs?
And instead of saying, how can I better myself? How can I play this game? And then if the other
person has a bad day, if the other person doesn't reciprocate, reciprocate, then this person's not
for me. I don't love this person. Like love is, you know, in that sense, love is metaphysical. Love
isn't a mere transactional thing. And, you know, Olivia makes a good point that love has to be
detached from capitalist ideology. For me, I was talking a bit about absurdism before.
For me, essentially the antidote to absurdism and this sense of meaninglessness is love.
It's not just love in relationships and dating, of course, it's not just romantic love, but it's,
you know, love within family, you know, what's it called? Is it filial love? I forget, love within
friends, and even if possible, love for humanity as a whole, as a whole. And when we view this whole
thing as some zero sum game, it truly corrupts it, it attains it. And I would say this, and I really
want to make this point. Love is terrifying. It's beautiful than terrifying. I've fallen in love
twice in my life. The first time it was beautiful than terrifying. The second time it's beautiful
than terrifying. And in some sense, I had no, I had no, it wasn't up to my own volition. I had no
choice in falling in love, which is probably why they call it the fall. And, you know, the whole
red pig communities and the people like Rollo Tamasi make it look like pick some boxes and
completely plan it out. And then you'll find the perfect woman, the ideal woman that you
want to spend the rest of your life with. But that's not true. Life, life doesn't work like that.
You know, yeah, you could write a book, you could make some very smart, rationalistic arguments
and contrive them, you know, using some, using language, but in real life, and this is kind of
why I said, I spoke earlier about paying attention to one's subjective experience, one's deep,
personal being. Love is a risk. And, and, and I truly believe that there truly isn't any substance
to one's soul without risk and faith, which is why love takes courage for sure. But, but it also
takes a leap of faith. It's not a mere game or it's not a mere, it's not like a job interview
where you take some boxes and you work through some framework. It's, it's metaphysical, it's
spiritual, it's beyond that. And it's true that I think one truly becomes a complete person. It's
through that risk, through that character guardian leap of faith. And keep in mind character guard
never said, when you take the leap, the landing is soft. The landing can be terrible. Nevertheless,
one has to take the leap. And which is why it is not a, I'm not making a rational case here. You
might, everything I'm saying may, may sound like nonsense, but I guess I would say
don't even listen to what I'm saying, pay attention to what your heart's saying, pay attention to
where your heart's leading you. And that, that takes practice. It's not easy to be attentive,
attentive to oneself. You know, I would also say another thing about hypergamy and women's
liberation. So firstly, I want to play this clip by Djejec. He talks about marriage. I think it's
a beautiful, beautiful clip from a recent interview he did. And, you know, Djejec also influenced
me to get this view of love. So one thing the Red Pearl community, all the Red Pearl bros say is
that because, you know, women are liberated now, you know, women don't have to rely on men.
Let's say for financial needs, women can earn as much as men want to earn. They can have their
own careers. They can have their own life. And therefore this whole concept of hypergamy,
it's probably not, it's probably, well, hypergamy still exists, but it's not how it probably
traditionally existed where women relied on men as being the providers, as being the breadwinners
of a family, but rather men and women both have independence to fend for themselves.
And what Djejec says, which is fantastic, is that women's liberation has actually
has actually given way for genuine love. You know, and maybe this is a, there you go,
a good thing about capitalism because the free market has given that kind of freedom that
the liberation of the genders has given way for true genuine love where a man and woman can
be in a relationship, can get married if they truly love each other and for nothing else,
not for any financial benefit or not for any kind of, as I said, game in the sexual marketplace
or some game of hypergamy could truly be something metaphysical in that sense. And I want to make
this, play this clip by Djejec when he talks about marriage, which by the way for me
is the deepest manifestation of love. It's the most, maybe the highest thing one could do
symbolically to declare one's love. And here's what Djejec says.
I think that precisely because it no longer has this economic function. Marriage today
can be something beautiful. It's just a pure commitment. You say basically to society,
I care for this person more than for anybody else. I want to be, it's just for me,
it can survive marriage as a commitment to share a world with somebody. For me, okay, sex is beautiful,
passion at night, whatever. But as we all know, then when you awaken, no, there is a problem.
And here true love begins for me. You know, when you, it's not just we were all the night doing it,
but when you have to build patiently small daily rituals, daily life, who will clean the toilet?
Who will do this? Who will do that? All these wonderful small rituals. How do you prepare
breakfast? We go there. And that's for me the true miracle of marriage, this commitment of two.
That's why I also, maybe this will be disappointed to your readers. I don't believe in this fashionable
notion of polyamory. You know, oh, I can love more persons.
Any other relationship? I don't, I'm not a moralist. I don't care if people do it.
For me, but for me, there is still something absolutely exclusive about loving just one person.
Because, you know, because, how should I put it, when you have polyamory open relationships,
it's usually too pragmatic. It's, I have different needs. Let's say for intelligent talks or whatever,
I need you for intense sex. I need you for fun. I need you. That's not love for me. Love is not
about satisfying your needs. Love is kind of a more metaphysical even, absolute trust. Love is,
I cannot live without you. And I'm ready to change radically just to be with you. In this sense,
I would say, I don't know what will happen. Just let's not get rid of marriage because
precisely today in our crazy world of all this, you know, the ideology today is experiment with
yourself. This is typical American ideology. Don't get fix on something. Different partners,
different sexual orientations. Today, you are heterosexual, make some homosexual experiments,
make some group orgy experiments and so on and so on. I don't find this satisfying.
Man, I can't even put into words how deeply I resonate with what Gijek's saying. I, you know,
I've never been on dating apps. And again, I'm not critical of dating apps. I know a lot of people
who found great partners through dating apps. But the reason I never was on dating apps,
dating apps was because well, I was in a long term relationship for about two and a half years.
So I really need one. But other than that, even after I broke up with my ex-partner, I
pulled about it for a while. And then before I met my, you know, current, the current partner
during that period, interim period, let's say, I realized, I don't want to play that game where,
you know, as Gijek was saying, the game of experimentation, you know, I tried this woman,
I tried this woman, I tried this woman. It felt like, again, I was reducing women to just a mere
commodity and just a mere bunch of boxes or categories that I'm ticking off. And for me,
that's not what love is. For me, love is a risk. It's love is, it's a fall and love is painful.
But one, one must experience all of life as that, as that poem by
Eurelke goes, actually, let me pull it up the poem. I've got the poem, actually, I think I've got it on my,
I've got it saved up. Let's see. Oh, I don't want to show any of my, let me just switch the camera
because this is my personal notion. It's this poem called, Go to the Limits of Your Belonging by
Ren and Marie Eurelke. And there's one verse in the poem that goes, let everything happen to you,
beauty and terror, just keep going, no feeling is final, don't let yourself lose me. I love that
idea of let everything happen to you. And I think it's in love, everything happens to a person,
the good, the bad, the ugly. So in any case, my point being, all of these subcultures, as I've
said many times, not probably ad nauseam, have their utility. They really do. But the way to
truly utilize these subcultures, the Red Bull Movement, the Manisphere, even, you know, books like
this, like by Rolo Tamasi on dating and meeting them, which again, great advice, is by having a
sort of paradigm shift. And it's essentially a philosophical paradigm shift of looking, of how
we as individuals look at other individuals and other women. I'm just being specific to the
whole dating thing and how we look at other people as souls and how we experience love.
And I would even say this, you see, this whole podcast, I'm essentially giving a irrational
message because I'm telling to let people make mistakes. I'm telling let people even experience
misery by the mistakes they make without prescribing an ideology onto them. That's what I truly
believe. I think that's what truly develops the human soul and truly gives person the vast array
of the human experience. Because if not, we're perpetually going to be stuck. Not if not, we
actually are always perpetually stuck in a yes or problem. Yes, we have a bunch of facts,
but we derive the odd from it. That's the important part. How do we derive the odd from the yes?
And ideology will say easy, just view the odd or derive the odd through this framework and it's
done. It requires no risk. It requires no thinking. It requires no experience. But I think that leaves
a person empty and it makes one's life rather insipid to be frank. Thanks for listening.
