Hey everyone, welcome to the reading of my essay, The Metaphysical Case for Love. Now in this video
I'll only be reading the introduction because the whole essay is 15,000 words long, therefore
I'll probably read it in parts and upload it as a video series, but today we're gonna start off
with the introduction. Here goes, The Metaphysical Case for Love. Love has to be rescued from the
love industrial complex. The following is the third of my tripartite essay series on love,
why it matters and the dire need for love's reinvention. I'll leave the links for part
one and two in the description down below, and this is the most philosophically dense piece
in the series, so risk yourself. Our culture endlessly speaks of dating, yet rarely of love.
Partly the reason is the death of sincerity and our overall apathy towards life,
expected in a culture void of metaphysical foundations. Most of us live innocuously,
as the saying goes, we approach life by not touching it with a 10-foot pole.
As is the time of nomadism, where cosmic couchsurfers seldom do we commit to anything or anyone,
be it a political struggle, one's family, or a passionate romance. We'd prefer,
quote-unquote, my freedom over being bothered by the messiness of an engaged and old consuming life.
But, as Marxists understood, the freedom we speak of is a pseudo-freedom to sell our labor,
succumb to the demands of the market economy and be a consumer. That is, the freedom to be a slave
to capitalism. Footnote, consumerism acts by creating false needs in us, the subjects.
They aren't genuine needs that satisfy us but are imposed by our society, or life world.
When you succumb to ideological demands and strive to fulfill these needs, you realize they are
unfulfillable. Nonetheless, you will keep desiring more, consequently loosing your freedom.
For more context, read Chapter 1 of Herbert MacCousa's One-Dimensional Man, and watch this video
by Julian de Medeiros explaining Gisex's theory of Coca-Cola, which I'll link down below, and
footnote. Love also is difficult to speak of because it only makes sense in retrospect.
Doesn't Soren Kerkertgaard's best known saying,
life can only be understood backwards, but it must be lived forwards, apply the most to love?
Footnote, the original quote from Kerkertgaard's journals,
it is really true what philosophy tells us, that life must be understood backwards.
But with this, one forgets the second proposition, that it must be lived forwards.
The proposition which, the more it is subjected to careful thought, the more it ends up concluding
precisely, that life at any given moment cannot really ever be fully understood.
Exactly because there is no single moment where time stops, completely,
in order for me to take position to do this, going backwards.
End footnote, there perhaps isn't anything more unfathomable than love.
Falling in love is a bizarre experience, because it always hits you by surprise,
thus it's aptly called a fall in English or Thumbehe Meiro in French.
You may be casually dating someone for a while, and suddenly you realize you're in love,
and afterwards, you attempt to rationalize and retrospectively give meaning to your fall.
If the point of love is that, despite it appearing to be predestined, the fall always comes first,
it's fully contingent and unplanned. Therefore, within eros, romance has no technical strategy,
the secret of love is that there is no secret, such as why Slavoj Rizek says the modern dating
approach is flawed. Start quote, the problem with online dating is that it automatically
involves an aspect of self-commodification or self-manipulation. When you date online,
you must present yourself in a certain way, putting forward certain qualities. You focus on your idea
of how other people should perceive you, but that's not how love functions, even at a very
simple level. The English term is endearing foibles, an elementary ingredient in love.
You can't ever fall in love with the perfect person. There must be some tiny small disturbing
element, and it is only through noticing this element that you can say, but in spite of that
perfection, I love him or her. End quote. So, self-help books, dating and relationship coaches
are useless in attempting to make romance a tactical game, epitomized in the self-commodification
done by users of dating apps. If all of poetry, literature and cinema has shown as one thing
since time immemorial, authentic love has no recipe to be conveniently followed.
Does this mean speaking of love is futile? No, because as Peter Rollins writes with a twist on
the famous Wittgensteinian proposition, footnote. Little bit Wittgenstein wrote,
what we cannot speak about, we must pass over in silence and footnote. But Peter Rollins writes,
that which we cannot speak of is the one thing about whom and to whom we must never stop speaking.
Love, not unlike God, is inexhaustible, therefore it ought to be spoken of for eternity.
Now more than ever, philosophers, poets, artists must tackle the subject of love.
It shouldn't be left to be exploited by capitalism and violated by its actors of the
love industrial complex. Dating coaches and apps, pop psychology and self-help books,
relationship podcast, pickup artists, etc. Now more than ever, philosophers, poets, artists
must tackle the subject of love. It shouldn't be left to be exploited by capitalism and violated
by its actors of the love industrial complex, e.g. dating coaches and apps, pop psychology and
self-help books, relationship podcast, pickup artists, etc. Abha Kamu famously wrote,
There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide. Judging whether life
is or is not worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy.
All the rest, whether or not the world has three dimensions, whether the mind has nine or
twelve categories, comes afterwards. If I ask myself how to judge that this question is more
urgent than that, I reply that one judges by the actions it entails. I have never seen anyone die
for the ontological argument. Galileo, who held a scientific truth of great importance,
exerted with the greatest ease as soon as it endangered his life. In a certain sense,
he did right. That truth was not worth the stake. Whether the earth or the sun revolves around the
other is a matter of profound indifference. To tell the truth, it is a futile question.
On the other hand, I see many people die because they judge that life is not worth living.
Coincidentally, since it's been a predominant reason for people committing suicide, love too
ought to be placed in the position of suicide as a philosophical question.
Can we continue? Suicide has never been dealt with except as a social phenomenon.
Similarly, love, in our times, is dealt with psychologically and scientifically through
neuroscience, neuropsychology, sociology, etc. And this mechanization of love is to our own peril.
A case in point is when psychologist Dr. Shannon Currie
testified in the spectacle of the death versus her trial. Notwithstanding her necessary role
in evaluating the parties for legal and judicial proceedings, she seemingly played the role of a
high priestess for the general public. When her truths are absolute, especially in matters of
romance and love. Of course, neither Currie nor anyone else explicitly states this. But what
matters for critical analysis is what is not said over what is formally proclaimed.
Society tacitly accepts what public-facing psychologists like Currie or more politically
Jordan Peterson says to be truths about being as such, that is ontology, the study of the fundamental
nature of reality. The psychologization of existence is distinctly manifest in our times.
So when a psychologist makes claims on love or politics, for instance, we subliminally accept
these as metaphysical truths. i.e. when Currie was a guest on Lex Friedman's podcast,
she went on to describing falling in love as being high on heroin due to the chemicals pumping in
your brain. Since she does not stipulate her statements with, this is only a neuropsychological
view, we implicitly take her views to be absolute and boil down love to be a neuroscience of sorts.
There is no room for the unknown and no for the speculations that are allowed, or worse,
are considered a waste of time if they don't serve the aforementioned love-industrial complex.
Footnote, I'm not criticizing Dr. Shannon Currie as she doesn't need to include this caveat in
every public conversation. Expecting her to do so would be unreasonable. Unlike Jordan Peterson,
she never claims to be more than a psychologist. However, I only point out the error of our
cultural zeitgeist. Her case serves as an example of this phenomenon.
End footnote. It was Fyodor Dostoevsky who critically delineated the phenomenon of
psychologizing the human condition best. In the Brother's Karamazov, during Dimitri Karamazov's
trial, after being accused of patricide for murdering his father, Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov's
defendant Dimitri's attorney, Fetkovic, says he was forewarned in St. Petersburg and I quote,
that I shouldn't counter here as my opponent a deep and most subtle psychologist who has by this
quality long acquired by merit and a special reputation in our still young judicial world
and continues sadonically, but profound as psychology is, it's a knife that cut both ways,
end quote. In other words, psychology allows us to interpret the same facts in different ways
or in a way that suits our pre-held beliefs. Ergo, we should be wary of treating the discipline
as a whole form of truth because it too, like all human practices, is placed within an ideological
structure. During Dostoevsky's time, forensic psychology was a discipline in nascent forms
and he had a great interest in how it was practiced in the Russian courts. If he were alive today,
he'd have similar comments about the depth be her trial. He wouldn't find fault with science
or the practice of psychology. In fact, he'd load the findings of psychoanalysis,
not a Ben A. Dostoevsky heavily influenced Sigmund Freud with his theories. Yet he would be critical
of ego psychology, today's prevalent form practice in the western world. And being the
romantic Dostoevsky is, he'd find the desire to reduce the human condition to an essence
within the bounds of any academic discipline as an eye. The point being is, yes, love is a
psychological phenomenon, but it is that and much more. To love in all its beauty and terror is the
epitome of human existence. So if there's one thing philosophy needs to tackle, it's what love entails.
Or the rest, whether or not artificial general intelligence is possible, whether capitalism
or socialism is the viable system for our times comes afterwards. What is love is the question
worth asking till the end of time.
