Speaking of David, I would like to revisit the the agony of heroes because this is certainly I
think but I think it's the same for you burnout and agony of heroes are my favorite. I've only read
probably four or five of his books. So I certainly love this book. One point I want to make about
the the agony of heroes and I don't know what your thoughts on this are.
So we talk a lot about this like the other and how the other can be a complete alien other and
then they kind of disturb our sameness, our controlled life. But I really like the kind
of the notion that Alan Bajor makes that yes, it's true that the other is completely alien.
You can never plan the love event in that sense. But when when when when two love he says love
takes two and in the event of love by allowing yourself to like opening yourself up to the other
there is a higher truth or a newer truth created. So love becomes a project in that sense. So it's
not that the other is a complete alien and then you know your life is complete chaos. But through
this again it's paradoxically through opening yourself up to this other you in some sense you
find a truth even about yourself. And I'm wondering like I don't know if that makes sense. I'm sorry
if I'm being a bit long winded. No, no, no, no. Just like if you want to comment on that because
for me that's a beautiful idea of like letting ourselves love and opening us up to the other.
Yeah, I think maybe something that you also are you're also expressing in that with that sentiment
is the idea that the other is not just outside that it's an inner inner other too that you
discover about yourself. That this logic of sameness is imposition that we do we also impose it on
ourselves. Like the idea of waking up and planning every minute since the moment you wake up until
the moment optimizing everything. Optimization is really based based on the assumption that I know
myself. I know what I can do and I know what I want to do. But it's a it's a very dull life if I
operate with the assumption that I know everything about myself I know what I'm what I should do.
So yeah, I agree that it's in our relationships that we find aspects of ourselves that we wouldn't
find. A long time ago I had a friend who is a very close friend and in a moment in the
sentimental moment she told me if I don't talk with you for too long I will forget who I am.
And it really made me think I feel I feel like that's a general statement that we could apply
to all good friendships and if we don't get in touch with our good friends we will really lose
touch with ourselves because they they provide us with a place a good friendship or good conversation
it provides provides us with with a place to be to do well get to to to express who we are
and then be responded to and in that dialogue we find something and that part of that
something is is ourselves but it's not the narcissistic self it's the is the other self
if you will. Yeah you know and and how have you found because I was going to read out it's a bit
of a mouthful so let me in fact as the book ends the the agony of heroes and I'm so glad you brought
up your friend because the the part I'm going to read is about friendship uh so Bianca Lan ends
the the book saying the philosopher is a friend a lover here the lover is not an
outward personality uh an empirical circumstance but a presence that is intrinsic to thought
the condition of possibility of thought itself a living category a transcendental lived reality
and this is perhaps my favorite part because this idea of thinking uh thinking in the strong
sense begins with heroes to be able to think one must first have been a friend a lover
without heroes thinking loses all vitality and turmoil and becomes repetitive and reactive
heroes uh infuses thinking with desire for the atopic other so you know and this your friend
said that um she she kind of forgets even who she is unless she's in dialogue with you and I
I'd say I have a lot of friends in my life where I do know if I don't talk to them eventually I
start forgetting even who I am I love that line thank you for reading that to be able to think
one must first have been a friend a lover it's so true and it you know because people who have
an interest in philosophy and have been involved with philosophy for years they might forget that
that it didn't begin with an interest in a given book or a philosophical question
it began as maybe in a context of a relationship with the teacher or with a friend with a person
who seemed very intriguing uh there was friendliness there at the bottom and uh that's why a lot of
times philosophical questions begin with a line of thought with something like uh what is love
what is true love or or you know in some movies characters ask each other can men and women really
be just friends and you know that's you have a relationship with someone and within that within
the context of a relationship friendship those questions are are posed yeah you know but the
engine of those questions is their relationship that's the idea but it's so easy to forget that
and that that itself is also interesting that we forget
