Okay, so I got a big boat in the middle of work and I was taking a coffee break and I decided to waste my time on social media as we all do these days.
And I came across that meme, the meme on how a horn becomes a Christian through vulgar atheism and reading Lacune and then Hegelianism and then understanding what the Holy Spirit encompasses in a very materialist sense.
And then I put that quote or it reminded me of Salvo Zizek's famous quote that the only way to become an atheist is via Christianity.
This is why I claim that the only way really to be an atheist is to go through Christianity.
Christianity is much more atheist than the usual atheism, which can claim there is no God and so on, but nonetheless it retains a certain trust into the big other.
This big other can be called natural necessity, evolution or whatever.
We humans are nonetheless reduced to a position within a harmonious whole of evolution, whatever.
But the difficult thing to accept is again that there is no big other, no point of reference which guarantees meaning.
Now what does that mean? What the hell does that mean? How can you say the way to become an atheist is via a theistic faith like Christianity?
Zizek essentially gets his idea for those that don't know who Zizek is.
He's a Slovenian philosopher inspired by the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacune and Hegel of course.
Alright, back to it. So Zizek gets his idea from G.K. Chesterton, his book Orthodoxy, and then Hegel's idea of how the spirit has to other itself to find itself.
Now that sounds just bizarrely abstract and nonsensical, so I'm not going to get too much into his Hegelian reading of Christianity.
However, he is inspired by Chesterton where Chesterton has an insight where he says in the crucifixion, so when Christ gets crucified, as most of us know,
Christ goes, right before he gets crucified, Christ goes,
Elah Elah Lamasabhaktami, father, father, why have thou forsaken me? What's that message? Father, father, why have thou forsaken me?
And the reading of Chesterton, Zizek, and some other death of God theologians is that this highlights a bizarre paradox in Christianity where Christ, who we're told is God embodied,
is God Himself in some way, becomes an atheist because Christ Himself stops believing in the divine.
Now another way of thinking about that is that Christ Himself at that moment sees that there's no big other or that there's no God the way we perceive God to rely on for grace, salvation, whatever you may call it.
And that's what Zizek says that the only way to really become an atheist is to understand it through this lens of our subjective destitute where we see that there's no God.
So does this mean that Christianity is an atheistic religion? Both yes and no, that's my take on it because I also do believe and here's where I bring in the theology of a contemporary thinker,
Peter Rowlands, the Irish steel ocean, that the crucifixion is indicative of how the way we understand God in contemporary society is as a being or something that we worship.
But all of that is adulterous.
They aren't reflections of what God is, but they're just idols that we worship. It's very common to see when we go to church, there's an altar call, people are told, come to Christ, you'll be saved.
My take is that Christ doesn't save you in the sense that we are told in contemporary religion.
But the best way to view the take in the crucifixion is that it's as if the only way to know God is by defining what God is not.
Because every time we define God in any kind of substantial positive sense, that's an idolatry, that's an idol of God.
So that's Peter Rowlands' take. So the way we connect this to that initial point by Zizek, that the only way to become an atheist is via Christianity, is that to also say the only way to become a Christian is via atheism,
because what atheism rejects is this God as a patriarchal father or God as a being, the kind of the God that the new atheists like Richard Dawkins or Sam Harris attacks.
However, if we take a more mystical reading of someone like Meister Eckhart, their understanding of God is a lot more different.
Their understanding of God is as a being that encompasses non-being itself.
And in many ways, God is viewed as a void, at least existentially a signifier of something that's not there.
Okay, I may have completely confused a lot of people by bringing and pulling all these ideas together, but look, that is what it is.
Go read some books.
Though, though, though, what's interesting again to reiterate the initial point by Zizek's reading of Chesterton is that one has to understand that atheism is not opposed to Christianity.
Atheism is a part of Christianity, because Christ himself, the figurehead of Christianity, had a moment where he became an atheist in the sense that he stopped believing in the transcendent divine,
and he saw that there's no salvation in the sense that we're told in contemporary society.
But also that if one becomes a Christian in the way we are told, you know, you go to church and you pray and God saves you, that is not God that's saving you.
That's an idol of God.
That's not really what God is.
God can't be explained in a sense of some kind of being out there that comes and helps you.
Rather, the best way to approach God is by what or who God is not.
So it's kind of a negative theology.
Okay, I'm going to get back to work.
That's enough.
