Hey everyone, I just want to make this quick video for one of my favorite
YouTubers and people on the internet right now, coffeezilla, a message from a
fan. I love his work. I think he's one of the most important people on the
internet right now. He's doing true journalism, exposing these scams and
just it's to a almost bizarre and absurd level when a normal guy like me just
sees them and it's unbelievable. And I think he's in great work. He is
extremely insightful, he's brilliant, he works hard and what he creates, his
content is of true value to society. I truly believe that and I'm not trying to
you know blow steam up your ass, I mean sincerely. However, saying all that, saying
all that, here comes the jab jab and the right hook. I do think he makes a huge
mistake. I think he gets one point room, especially when I see him on
podcasts, on huge podcasts like Lex Friedman or Joe Rogan. He portrays all
these scams as being anomalies to the current neoliberal capitalistic order. He
in fact even says that I'm a capitalism, there's really nothing wrong with
capitalism, it's just these things are the anomalies. And I think he makes a
mistake there. I think the best way to portray it is to in fact understand that
these scams are built into the, are built into capitalism itself. They're built
into the antagonisms, the deadlocks, the consumerism, the desires that capitalism
creates and these scams aren't anomalies and they'll only keep getting worse in
the current economic system and the current ideological system we live in. So
look, if he's interested in Epshrew's theory, I would highly recommend him read
anything by Slavoj Džek. Essentially any of these books probably start with the
plague of fantasies, but if he really wants to get some some heavy stuff,
perhaps start with Karl Marx's capital. Now don't get me wrong, while I am an
anti-capitalist, I'm not saying that Marxism is the answer. I don't know what
the answer is to be honest, but sometimes it's not even the answers itself, but
it's the questions that count and perhaps we should start questioning why do
these scams come up every couple of years and why is it, why does it seem like
things are getting worse for the middle class? Why does it seem like we're in the
midst of an ecological crisis and in the midst of a mental health crisis, in the
midst of a almost existential crisis for most people where there are terms like
debts of despair and those questions are perhaps important asking and maybe it is
because of our current ideological system, our current hegemonic system of
capitalism and all these scams, they never really aren't going to go away.
It doesn't matter how many scams Coffizula exposes, as long as things
remain the way they are, they'll still unfortunately still keep coming up and
in fact, probably even get worse. I do like the joke by Slavo Žižek where it's this kind of naive,
I'm not saying Coffizula is naive, I'm saying all of us, we're all naive, we have this
naive hope that there's a light at the end of the tunnel and then Žižek says,
oh, that light is in fact an oncoming train. So in fact, we make structural changes.
Yes, it's important to make changes in individual action and certainly do things
like what Coffizula does where we expose these scams, expose these frauds and even
partake in local communities and try to not get people caught up in MLM schemes or pyramid schemes
or Ponzi schemes or whatnot and all these little games that are that are imbued out of capitalism,
but still we have to make a structural critique and I think given Coffizula is currently
extremely influential and we all know how internet fame works, there's a rice,
you got to make good use of it and then it goes away and people just kind of forget about you,
but at this moment he can really embrace the opportunity and use his platform to show that
no, these scams aren't anomalies, they in fact are built into our system itself.
Simply that's what I want to say and I would highly recommend watching lectures by Žižek on
this matter or even Žižek is a bit too, because he comes from a very theoretical abstract angle
reading a book like Capital by Piketty, where yes Piketty for me isn't radical enough,
but still he does make some good points as to why we in fact are in deep shit
and we need to make some fundamental changes in society.
Okay, I talk too much, I shall let you go. Cheers.
