In this episode, I would emphasize for people who are new to Han, my kind of invitation would be
he is really great at connecting our very personal experiences, like the experience of being tired,
the experience of not having enough mental energy to do all the tasks that you're supposed to do.
Our experiences of loneliness, being tired and alone at the end of the day.
And all these experiences, he pays attention to them and he connects them to broader patterns,
broader trends in culture, in society, in technology. And that is really valuable, I think.
He keeps, he doesn't keep the discussion of private experiences at that level, at that scope,
at that original scope of interest. Yes, of course, we're interested in it, but
he helps us make sense of it by putting it in a larger context and different contexts.
And with the help of different thinkers, he introduces us to a host of other valuable
thinkers like Foucault, Plato, Nietzsche, Arendt, Hannah Arendt, and he's very good at connecting
the moments in our thought, in a discussion with the right moments, the right person.
Hey, everyone. Welcome to my conversation with the cognitive psychologist,
writer, fellow bibliophile, and now someone who I can hopefully call my friend, Dr. Davood Gosley.
This certainly was a conversation that I expected to be amiable and good-natured,
and it certainly was. My expectations were met. I've been following Davood's book reviews for
about a year now, and I've thoroughly enjoyed them. And a couple of months ago, I noticed that he's
done a lot of reviews on Byung-Shul Han's work, and they were fantastic reviews. They weren't
mere cheap summaries where you'd quickly get across what the book says, but rather he critiqued them,
he discussed the ideas that spoke to him more deeply, and they always came from his point of
view, despite him reviewing the work of another thinker. And this got me thinking, perhaps I've
always wanted to do an episode or a podcast dedicated to exploring Byung-Shul Han, and I
thought Davood would be the perfect candidate to converse with. And I hope I was a good interlocutor
and brought up the best of both Davood and Byung-Shul Han's work, but you'd be the judge of that.
We spoke about a variety of topics. We discussed Davood's experience in academia, both it's
good and bad, perhaps mostly bad, unfortunately, and also some of the ideas of living in
neoliberal society and the logic of neoliberalism, and then explode some of the concepts that
Byung-Shul Han has introduced to the contemporary critical theory dialogue, let's say. But also,
in many ways, I was joking around during the episode, but I kind of meant in some sense too that,
sorry, I've got a bit of a cold, that I do want this episode to be some kind of propagandistic
conversation for you to go read the work of Byung-Shul Han, because I do think it can bring
great value to your life, especially in the society and culture we live in, where
a lot of the problems are made private and personalized when some of them really aren't
private in the first place. They are social problems. But we discussed this in detail during
the conversation, so I won't get into it right now. That being said, as I tend to do, a bit of a
formal introduction to Davood. Dr. Davood Gosley is a cognitive psychologist. He received his PhD
from the University of Toronto. He has held research and teaching positions at the University
of Vienna, Leiden University, and the University of Macau. He is the author of many scholarly articles
and a book titled Experimental Psychology and Human Agency. Dr. Gosley has a YouTube channel where
he posts book reviews panning a vast array of writers and genres from Heruki Murakami to Byung-Shul
Han and fiction to critical theory. He also runs a book club organized through his Patreon page.
Having said that, here's my conversation with Dr. Davood Gosley, where we discuss the work of Byung-Shul
Han. It's really interesting. I think I subscribe more to kind of the Todd McGovern, in fact,
wrote a book about this, which I'll be talking to him soon. It's called Embracing Alienation.
And I find that I don't try to, like, at least personally, I don't let myself kind of be too
attached, overly attached to the kind of the socio-symbolic order of a certain culture. Like,
I don't really, despite being a dual citizen, just like in terms of formally, I don't really
think of myself as like a Sri Lankan Australian, or, you know, it's not something I attach myself
to too much. Certainly, my home is Australia, but yeah, don't get me wrong. I'm not like a hippie
that's like, oh, I'm a globalist. No, we need a home. I think, you know, we need a place that we
call home. But I guess to be succinct, I try to not think too much about, like, which culture am
I a part of? What's like my true, unique, you know, authentic culture? Because, as I think
Jacques puts as well, cultures themselves aren't authentic in themselves. They themselves have
this like, sure, ontological incompleteness, let's say. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And sometimes people go after
having a culture, they turn that into a project, expecting it to provide them with something,
something very stable and final, and help them get rid of that sense of alienation once and for
all. Yeah, yeah. If we turn that into that kind of turn it into that kind of project,
I think that would be disappointing, ultimately. Yeah, because unfortunately, I don't know what
your thoughts on this, David, especially given you're much closer to the US than I am. I mean,
there's a there's a rise in nationalism, right? And I think a lot of them are looking for this,
the big other, the stable big other, and they want to fully attach themselves with it. And then
it's from there, they have this like, sense of stability, which, at least since modernity,
subjects have never had in the world. We like, Todd McGovern says that kind of the one sign of
modernity is that all subjects are alienated. We don't have a home in some sense. None of us
are rooted in a home. But yeah, I think I mean, Todd McGovern, I mean, I like him a lot, but what
does he know about being really alienated, living in a living in a place that nobody speaks his
language? I mean, sure, theoretically, I follow him to I follow him to but there's there are different
degrees of being out of place. Some of them are more visceral. I agree. Some of them are more like
you have to really think your way to them. But to be in a place and everybody's pointing at you
and saying, Oh, look at the foreigner, or is that is that foreigner going to stay here with us?
Yeah, that's that's like very in your face. And I since I've experienced that, I mean, that's
maybe that's not exactly what he's talking about. But maybe it is maybe it's like, you know,
I think I totally get your point there. Because like, I remember when I came here, when I was a
kid, much younger, even things like, I mean, I think Canada is okay. But like a lot like
Australian slang and colloquialisms, I was kind of like, what the hell are people talking about?
You know, and like, it's not even the direct judgment or the gaze of the others, just generally
me, myself, I'm trying to see where the hell do I fit in here. And then what I even the reason
Todd McGovern's work was really helpful was to be honest, I agree with you, I think there are like
certain limits, there's like, like, there are like, some of it can be a lot more palpable and
visceral was that because I realized, Oh, the trick is to kind of embrace your alienation to not like
to not as a not I don't try to this used to be the case where I tried to like overly attach
myself with a certain culture, be the Australian culture or the Sri Lankan culture, which is the
culture that my, you know, I was born and raised in. But I realized no, no, no, that's all of that
is fine. Like, I'm not, I'm not going to actively negate that side of me, of course, not that's
impossible. But also, I won't overly attach myself and be like, Oh, this is why I'm this is a true
core of my being. I like the whole kind of idea that in some sense, at the core, what we are is
like this kind of abyss or like a void. At least for me, being again, being a migrant, probably
that that's probably the reason I like that idea a lot more than trying to find like an
authentic kernel of who I am as a as a subject. Right, I see, I see. I feel like this is this
can be a this can be a long conversation, an ongoing conversation. Yeah, we can definitely
talk about this. Hopefully, we will be on with this. But I can, I can see how that could connect
to your interest in cognitive science as well, because that's tacitly cognitive science has that
attitude of not too much being attached to any particular culture. Interesting, what sense would
you say? It's a very non-culture in general, I think cognitive science, cognitive psychology has
a very non-cultural view of human nature, of a human being and human thinking. It kind of
brackets out the idiosyncratic, local, you know, regional practices, regional, I mean,
idioms of language. Everything becomes neat and formulaic and trans, maybe because you say
transparent, not these like interpretive, indirect, you know, a cognitive psychologist or
cognitive scientist doesn't necessarily, doesn't, I mean, habitually or typically pick out these
indirect communications, communication practices of cultures where you have to be immersed in a
culture to know how to decode a given sign, you know, that's what I mean. I see, I see, like it
tries to be like trans-cultural in some sense. Yes, yes, or beyond cultures. Yeah, no, I think
you're right, because like, in fact, I'm going to start my master's program next year, and it's
partially in cognitive science, like it's a research program. And I think I'm more, let's say,
I find more affinity with those kinds of studies, because something that also bothers me at the
Buddhist is kind of like, sometimes people get into this, like, they focus too much on, like,
the particularities, like other feminists or Marxists or black or white, and at one point,
that's very exhausting, you know, it's like, yeah, I get it, we all have particular identities,
but what about the universal? And that's why I'm more caught up in, like, I like the sciences,
because there is this kind of universalistic with that has its negatives too, for sure,
it's very absolutist. But I prefer that, I think you hit the nail on the head, that idea that
we can go beyond the particular into something a bit more universal.
Yeah, what you said partly is cognitive science. The other part, is it philosophy?
It's philosophy, that's correct. Yeah, yeah. Okay, nice.
One by the department, but they have like, it's a very interesting program, like they,
they kind of intend them with some cognitive science fields. So I'm looking forward to it.
You're going for it. Yeah, man. I'm like, I, I, I kind of want to do what you did, you know,
go through the whole process, get my PhD, and then who knows, it might end up becoming a but not
academic, but I'm going to do it, regardless. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Good luck. Thank you, man. Thank
you. I might, in fact, I might come to you in the future for some advice. I hope I can.
No, I'd always be appreciative of that. But yeah, as I said, David, sorry for my, you know,
raspy voice. I'm getting over a cold. I'm telling you it's not. You sound, you sound fine. You sound
great. Perfect. Thank you, man. Yeah, look, so what we kind of are hoping to do today is to discuss
Bianchel Han's work and sort of let's do it in some sense, the propagandize as to why you should
read Bianchel Han. But before that, David, I thought a rather pertinent question would be,
my God, you've got over 400, I think, book reviews, probably a couple hundred on our YouTube channel,
and you're an avid reader. And from different genres, certainly. But I want to ask you a question,
which I think a lot of ink has been spilt over, which is how does one read philosophy and theory
well? You know, Rahul, in general, I am, I find it very difficult to adopt that perspective,
adopt that position of how does one do this and that. I know it's very attractive to go
for that perspective and formulate a kind of advice, generalities, general guidelines.
I can talk, I find it easier to talk about the things that I have,
I have kind of slowly settled into the kind of perspective I've settled into and maybe the
what I would say to myself, to my past self, maybe 10 years ago. In fact, in fact, I know
that you're not the advice giving type in any way, but perhaps that's a better way to
say what would you say to your past self. But there is that, that temptation to give advice
and ask for advice, both are very strong. And it's the, it's a temptation to be, to take a,
to, to help the other person save some time. You know, I really want other people to not go
through this inefficient process that I went through. But that's my mistake when I give to
that, give into that temptation, because everybody needs to go through their own inefficient process,
their own inefficient journeys, they own, they own, they own set of wrong books, the books that
they will later be embarrassed to admit that they liked, they enjoyed. Okay, so back to the question,
see if I can retrieve it, if I can remember it. How does one read philosophy? I mean, literally.
Slowly, you know, slowly without rush, trying to not do too much. I always have this. I mean,
I had it more, like, I just as to pick one example, the person that you read, one of the people you
recently interviewed that I really admire, Simon Krishly. I have, when I become interested in somebody
like, let's say Krishly, I was like, okay, here's a list of all Simon Krishly books. I'm going to
start chronologically from beginning to the end, and read them all. And see, read all the other
people that he was influenced by. And okay, if I replicate that whole process, what's going to
happen? I will catch up to Simon Krishly. Okay, that's like, by that time, I'm like seven years
old or something, or something, some age like that. I've tried to replicate Simon Krishly's
reading and writing life. I mean, that's not a practical thing to do. And I don't think it's
very useful. It's better to be, to accept that maybe I'll read one or two books by this thinker.
And by the time I'm finished with the second book, maybe I'm too busy with some of their
projects, some of the tasks, maybe my life will be interrupted by some facts of life,
maybe ill health or, you know, losing a job or whatever. And then, when I get back to philosophy,
I'm interested in some other topic or some other, some other thinker. So embracing all those
limitations, all those, the negativity of the reading life, to borrow Byung-chohan's
and others, Byung-chohan really brought this back and urged us to think in terms of negativity,
to embrace that. All those features that are negative, you know, lack of speed. I'm not
going to be as fast as I want to be. I'm not going to read as exhaustively as I want to be.
I'm not going to remember as much as I want to remember, you know, so often I read again a text,
it's like, oh, I can't believe I read this before. This is so fresh. This is so new. And
there's this other kind of experience that you feel like I was never in a position to really
appreciate this text until now. The passage by Nietzsche, you know, it was just after reading
maybe something by Freud, and he returned to a passage, a paragraph from Beyond Good and Evil,
and you realize, oh my god, what did I read before? I totally missed this. So sorry to
give a long answer to that. No, that's a great question. I really liked the last point because
I think in a conversation you had with Daniel Ghana, you know, OG Rose, they're lovely. I want to
speak to them soon, but I want to first read that book before I have them on. He said a similar
thing where, especially Nietzsche, because it's very aphoristic, so you'd read a bit of Nietzsche,
and then you come back to him, let's say, two, three years later, and it's like a totally different
author, you know, a totally different book in some sense. Yeah, I think for me, I see this,
probably it's more for your temperament, because you're a bit of a calmer person,
because I'm a bit of a neurotic person, and I like action, you know, like I'm a typical what
we call this burnout subject in some sense, you know, like I like this kind of making, you know,
Björn Scholland talks about making yourself into a project. You make yourself into like an
entrepreneur of the self, right? And therefore, a part of me does like that because I enjoy it,
but also the problem with that is I don't appreciate, as you pointed out, the slowness
and like having the patience and even like that negativity where you detach yourself
from this, let's call it noise or the hyperpositivity, and just sit with an idea. If it's for hours,
if it's just like a verse or an excerpt from a book, hours and even days, and just like kind of
meditating on it. And I found that that can be a lot more valuable than trying to read 60 pages
in a day or try to like hit some reading quota or be it may. Yeah, yeah, I'm, you know, the older
I get, the less I can relate to those things like reading quota, like read 200 pages a day.
Why? For what purpose? Because the ultimate, the ultimate effect of these reading life is
you want the effect to show up when, for example, you are talking to a kid that's like a nine year
old, eight year old kid. That's where, you know, it's a critical moment where you want to behave
somewhat wisely when there is a sensitive person who is listening to you or you're dealing with
somebody. And if you're reading 200 pages a day, you're exhausting yourself and you're
very impatient probably when you, when you meet that, you know, kid or student or a person who is
really receptive to you, open to you at that moment. I think we should keep an eye out for,
for those moments where we want the impact of our reading life to, to show up. You know what I mean?
Because it's, it's all for something, you know, it's, it's supposed to be for something and that
something is, there are very limited chance moments, there are very limited moments of our
lives where you want to be like, I try to be a somewhat decent person and reading is, is hopefully
part of that. Interesting. So for you, you always see reading as a, as a, to put it crassly as like a
means to an end. Because for me personally, I find that I read for its own sake, like I don't
expect anything out of it. Well, some, some books I do, especially if it's like preparing for like
my studies or the podcast, but some other books, I read them for their own sake. That's a good point.
You want to read for its own sake, but not purely. I mean, there's, there's a limit to that
because sometimes it's work. Sometimes it's, it doesn't seem like you're doing it for its own
sake because you're putting the, putting extra effort in. But yeah, that's why I kind of reach out
for some purpose, some other thing out, outside of the intrinsic enjoyment. But yeah, I relate to
reading for its own sake too, as something that is otherwise.
Yeah. Now, I certainly see that because like, especially, you know, this is a beautiful thing
about with all of its discontents, the internet and this kind of new podcasting, whatever you
may call it, book, booktube, a community that's being built up. It's like given life of the mind
or reading to use a bit of a pretentious term can be a, you know, very solitary thing. It's just
lovely to see people that are, that truly cherish it, cherish it as much as we do. And we connect
with them through the internet. And that, that for me, despite growing up with the internet,
I've never gotten over the fact that you could just like you're in Canada and I'm here in Australia
and we both connect over this shared love for, for reading and learning. I'll never, you know,
get over that fact, that datum, you know? Sure, sure. But you know, there are all these people
who cherish reading, but they show the cherishing moments when they turn on the camera, they say
how much they cherish that, the activity of reading, but the camera is off most of the time and they
don't always cherish it. I mean, we don't, I don't, I don't always enjoy reading and I don't, I don't
have a very simple, always filled with pleasure relationship with reading. Interesting. To me,
life of the mind is, is full of suffering and uncertainty. It's a struggle to struggle. I
agree. I mean, I joke around, I joke around. I say that I'm probably a bit of like a masochist,
because it's such a struggle to like, I mean, try to read like Hegel, right? I'm like, God,
well, what the hell is this guy talking about? And I, or like, like corn, for instance, and then
it's like, what, but nonetheless, you persevere. And it's never like a walk in the park and like
a very pleasant experience. It's a struggle for sure that I agree. I couldn't agree more with that.
Yeah. All right, David. So Bianchel Han, getting back to Bianchel Han. What, what, you know,
especially being a cognitive psychologist, what would you say, what firstly attracted his work,
because he's a critical theorist after all, what attracted you towards his work, but also what
isomorphism similarities do you see between cognitive psychology and the work of Bianchel
Han? Oh, I, let's first talk about how I got into his work. So I, and it was by accident.
I have a friend who is here in Toronto, and he gave me a copy of The Agony of El Ros.
And I noticed the kind of book it is first, I noticed, yeah, it's very short. It's, you know,
50 something pages, I think 53 pages, excluding the notes. And I didn't read it immediately. I just
read a couple of pages and I said, okay, I know, I know what the kind of thing that he's writing
about. And three, four years later, I kept running into Han's work in bookstores. And I said, okay,
I'm going to do that thing. I'm going to chronologically read his work beginning with the
first burnout society. And so I started. And yeah, that's, that was my entry. I don't want to,
you know, you asked about the relationship or possible relationships between cognitive science
and Han. And this is difficult for me to say, given that you, you have this exciting project of
going into cognitive science now. So I don't kind of, I'm hesitant to say this, but for me,
let's say my own particular relationship with cognitive science, I don't have a very
high opinion of it. So I would say, for me, becoming increasingly critical of cognitive
psychology, the experimental method as applied to the study of human beings.
Han became, eventually, he became one of the resources for me to think about
the conduct of psychologists, my colleagues in academia. So when he talked about, you know,
the shrinking of time, we don't have this long view or relationship with time as something
that can linger, that continues, that covers a long span, that our form of consciousness
is structured such that time is very brief for us, that we have this
more metaphorically, at least ADHD-like kind of subjectivity, where at any given moment,
we want to say wow and be surprised and be impressed by a research project in cognitive
psychology. I felt like every meeting, every kind of departmental presentation, it started
from scratch, no history, no memory, a quick presentation and a quick wow. And soon after
it was done, that's it, it was gone. So you become like, it becomes a piece of entertainment and a
piece of, you know, easy, quick persuasion. And if you look back, there's not much relationship
between different projects that people are pursuing. And so when I read and thought with Han, I became
kind of aware of this, this thing that was my career, this is just one expression of
something bigger that Han is talking about, namely the neoliberal order, the neoliberal subject of
which, you know, one way it shows up is in research, research projects, projects, you know,
in general, projects. Yeah, in fact, I recall in one of the videos, I think the one you made on
Psychopolitics, you even mentioned that in academics, like, because again, we're all part of the old
immersed in the neoliberal symbolic order, let's say, right? And academics constantly love coming
up with new terms, new words, new ideas, it's a novelty, you know, we fetishize novelty.
And that is because we have this kind of almost imperative to create, to produce.
Yeah, you gotta have a thing, academia, you gotta have your thing. Exactly. Yeah.
That's fascinating. That's fascinating. But first of all, David, I want to say I really do,
that means a lot to me that you took my personal career into into account when
replying to that, because I mean, look, I, it's interesting. I know the, I've spoken to many
people like yourself, who are academics, who've been through this journey. And I know it's,
it's, it certainly has its own problems too, you know, university itself, the neoliberal
university has its shortcomings. And in fact, perhaps it's, it's, it's becoming another corporation,
unfortunately, like, like, what we see in the rest of society. So I mean, in fact, you're gonna
Yeah, please. But I would never discourage you to, I would never discourage you from pursuing
that way of life, because the problems that we attribute to university life
are not unique to it. Indeed. We become, we become disappointed. Yeah, we become
disappointed and disillusioned to find that university is not special, that it also has
all those problems that we find in the corporate world, for example.
So that's, I mean, there, there are still a lot of good things about having, having a life in
university, you know, teaching and thinking and writing. It's still, there's still a lot of good
in it. I should emphasize that for me, after, you know, six years, plus the PhD, getting the PhD,
getting the PhD, that was another five years, postdoc one year. So about 11 years after about
11 years, I realized, you know, I had enough of this. I want to do something else. I want to
create something else. And I, it really became a question for me, like, if I don't do this,
what would my life be like? What else could it be? So it was, I needed to
become independent of this thing that I, I continuously criticized, because you can't,
I mean, I, in good conscience, can't continue to criticize something while depending on it,
still, while still getting my salary from it and say, Oh, I hate this. So, so I wanted to live
with more integrity. So you know what, I'm going to put my money where my mouth is, or I want to,
you know, I want to really, like, really mean this. I mean this critique. I mean it enough to say,
I don't want to devote my life to it anymore. Well, in fact, let's, let's go here. Let's go a bit,
delve a bit deeper into this, because, you know, let's, let's bring in the actual hands, you know,
psychopolitics, excellent book, kind of he, you know, critiques, neoliberalism. So
in the context of academia and the university, David, what would you say in your view is like
the ideal, like the platonic idea, whatever you mean, called the ideal of the university?
And then what is the current in actuality of the university we have in, let's say, most of the
world, which people like the actual hand are critical of? Wow, that's a very difficult question. I,
you know, we have to, that probably deserves a kind of round table discussion with a lot of people
for me and help getting to that ideal, unpacking that really. But just let's say that for me,
the idea, the ideal of university is not separable from the type of person that
it's supposed to cultivate, a form of life, a form of life that is thoughtful, that is interested,
that is open to a certain kind of wonder, a certain kind of openness,
and keeps a certain mindset alive, keeps a certain spirit alive, spirit of inquiry.
So it's a form of being that university is the platform, it's the medium for that form of life.
So a lot is probably required for that. A lot of practices, a lot of support
goes into that structure. So it's a structure, a place where, you know, a certain form of life can
be supported. Right now is what we can say about university, how it deviates, is that people still,
I think people still have that in the back of their mind when they do their works. But
that ideal is something that is perpetually postponed. They will say things like, okay,
this year I need to get these publications out. They're not important, I don't really believe in them.
But I need to publish these couple of papers to get the promotion. And after that,
I can focus on what I really want. But this thing, if you pay it, if you keep listening to people,
if you keep paying attention, you hear the repetition of this pattern, that it's always later.
And ultimately, it's after they retire that they want to do the thing that they want to do.
They say typically in psychology was, people would say, I want to study consciousness after
I retire. That's a typical thing. Although they get tenure, now that's stability.
Yeah, tenure. But in some cases, even tenure is not enough. Because the department sometimes
turns against you if you do what you like to do after you get tenure, because they say,
we hired you to do this type of research, why did you stop?
Yeah, it becomes, I mean, deviation from the ideal, I would say, happens when it becomes
about performance and metrics, and the signs of accomplishment, the signs of success.
Yeah, and then in fact, perhaps you could connect us to that idea that
Björn Schullhand talks about his critique of big data. This goes really well again with
your previous point. It's about positivity, right? It's a measure, everything is,
you become another statistic, you put it in like a very cliched way. Whereas as something in thought,
and in fact, he says it's theory, that it's a negativity. There's no, it's not a positive thing,
you kind of remove yourself from being, and it's a different kind of mode of being.
Yeah, remember, when big data was very hot and new, you probably remember this, there were these
statements like, now we have so much data, that the need to think isn't, we don't have that need
anymore. We don't have the need, people said that there was a statement about we don't need to think
anymore, and we don't need theory anymore. That definitely, I remember that hearing that, reading
that. All those things that we really want to become, to cultivate the capacity for those things,
capacity for thought, capacity for theory, these serious consideration of this upper topic or
subject matter, that requires lack and requires negativity, and also that having a relationship
with negativity. Big data, the way people think of it as like, providing us too much, more than we
need, we get so much that you almost become like, helpless, like you can't, it's not up to you anymore
after crossing some threshold. It's not up to us, we just submit to it, we submit to the big data.
Yeah, I mean, perhaps, I'd say for me, the almost quintessential example of this is health and fitness,
you probably noticed that people have the watch where they track their steps,
they track their sleep, they got the ring to, I think, track their pulse heartbeat. I mean,
you know, you completely mechanize the human body to a point where I think in my view,
it ends up, it ends up harming you because you know, you burn out from that kind of like, you get
fatigued from this constantly having to, you know, measure yourself. In fact, a funny anecdote,
one of my friends, I'm not going to mention her name obviously, she even has like a,
almost like a Trello boat or like a project management, like a software she uses to keep
track of her dating, her dates. So like, this person has these pros, these cons, and she's a
lovely person, we get along really well, but, and we're quite close. So I always kind of make
fun of her for this, you know, do you, do you keep track of like, how many times you had sex per
week and everything? And I'm like, I even tell her personally, for me, if I live like that,
I'd probably end up killing myself. I mean, I can't think of anything more depressing than
having to track everything in that sense and making yourself a part of this big data ideology,
let's say. Yeah, that's, that's very interesting. I haven't heard of anybody doing that, but
we should still ask like, what is that tracking doing? It might not be doing what it might,
what it would do for us. Maybe for some people, it just creates that, the sense of stability and
that, you know, it might not result in anything, it might not lead anywhere, these dates that I'm
going, but at least I have this, the records of it. Yeah, for some people, that could be, you know,
they could write a novel about that. Maybe that's similar to like a technological record keeping.
Yeah, I think a lot of it has to do with this. This, this, I mean, in fact, let me read out this
quote, David, I was gonna, this idea where there's this lovely thing where it says, so the achievement
subject, this is from the Bernard Society, Björn Chaland says, the achievement subject explodes
itself until it burns out. In the process, it develops auto aggression that often enough,
escalates into the violence of self destruction. The project turns out to be a projectile that
the achievement subject is aiming at itself. And I think for me, this goes back to the idea that
everything has to be a project, right, including academia. And then, and then the problem is,
and just to kind of get at this bit, but like high level, in the book, he talks about how in
disciplinary society, kind of what Foucault critiques, the, it's, it's still a society of
prohibition, right, you do, thou shall not, you shall not have sex before marriage, you shall not,
if you're, you know, gay marriage is illegal, whatever you may call it. Whereas in our society,
in the society of the hyper positivity, we achievement subjects, everything is, yes,
you can, yes, you should. And in that sense, I think we, we, we all of us, all of us, this is,
in no way am I like sitting on like high chair, like pointing fingers, we all do this. I know I
do this. We make projects out of our life and we ourselves become a project. So, and I think
Han puts it beautifully, we exploit ourselves. And to get back to this thing about what you said
about stability, I think there is, there is this idea at least in my view that this is feeling,
you do get some kind of safety when you feel like everything is tracked, everything is in order,
you know, everything, everything has a place, everything makes sense. Now, we don't know in
reality if that stability exists, but at least the, the ideology is, yes, my, my romantic life,
I can plan it out. I know, I'll know exactly who I'll meet, the kind of person I want, or the tick
all the boxes. And of course, in, at least in my view, what happens there is we are always,
we're always surprised. In fact, I'd argue the paradoxes, the more you try to order your life,
the more control you lose. Right, right. It just also occurred to me that that, that's the closer
to the transparency society to, to keep records of everything. You're making your dating life
transparent to yourself, to yourself and potentially to other spectators, that this is what I'm
doing and I'm recording everything here. And the other thing that happens with that is everything
becomes the same because person number one and person number seven, because you kept track of them
with respect to similar dimensions, they are comparable, they all become comparable. And the
otherness about them, their alterity is pushed aside. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Could you elaborate on
that point? I'm so glad you brought that up. The idea of otherness and alterity, how that,
how that's a part of our subjectivity in some sense. Yeah, so I think that's, I mean, by,
by definition, that's a difficult concept to articulate because it's always what we call
the other, truly other is always the thing that is not captured by the logic of our current project.
Whatever that is not that you're not capable of because of the way we have positioned ourselves,
the kind of structure that you're participating in. By virtue of that, the other is outside of
that, and we are not ready to even understand it. What we can do is to be, we could say vulnerable
to it, we could become vulnerable to its effects, like having an argument with, with, you know,
with our significant other, having something that a disagreement that seems irreconcilable,
or having a problem with a stranger and not even knowing what the root of the problem is.
So Han, identity, he argues that we are inclined to move in the direction of sameness,
the tyranny or the terror of sameness to impose structures and logic, kinds of logic,
when we deal with different kinds of situations, impose kinds of logic that simplifies what we
are encountering and treats plurality in terms of same, so same kinds of stuff. So in dating,
for example, the example, very useful, we just number people or the books, you know,
hundred classics that you should read before you die, you know, that's like, that's also a kind
of unfair way of treating books because, you know, you want to hundreds and one is probably the best,
hundred is like, yeah, okay, you can skip that. But the logic of sameness is imposed on that,
on that list, you know, it turned the thing turns into a list. So it's, it's very interesting by,
by getting out of that, funny enough, the effect of that is the kind of liberation,
you liberate ourselves by getting out of the logic of sameness. Indeed. And the detail of that,
the detail of that is in a book that I haven't yet finished by Han is the expulsion of the other.
But just like any, any of his books, it's great by really continuing and, and
and illuminating what he has done in the previous books. So, for example, you just touched on the
burnout society. And he, he says this, he makes this really beautiful, very insightful observation
that, you know, he's talking about the new liberal regime and self exploitation. Okay.
But we perceive that self exploitation as freedom and we are, we think that we are self
optimizing, self realizing. And he writes here, there is no other as exploiter to the,
the exploiter is not another forcing me to work and alienating me from myself. Rather,
I voluntarily exploit myself in the belief that I am realizing myself. This is the diabolical
logic of neoliberalism. And then he writes, hence the first stage of a burnout is euphoria.
The first stage of burnout is euphoria. You're happy in the beginning.
I plunge into work euphorically until I finally collapse. This is, this is really,
it's a transferable insight. You might think about this type, there's a type of person who
gets in and out of relationships, and they get really passionate. When they start a relationship,
they get this euphoria of, I finally find, found the one. And of course, these problems,
they're waiting. The problems are brewing from the very beginning. It's not that something goes
wrong. No, the very structure from the very beginning is set up for that huge, heated
disappointment to happen and for the explosion, for a breakup to happen explosively. So this
is now in here, in this passage, Han is describing burnout as something that
we set ourselves up for from the very beginning, when we euphorically start engaging with the project.
Indeed, like the absolute high and then the complete destruction, isn't it, that comes along
with it? Yeah. Yes, they're part of the same, they're part of the same pattern.
Yeah, because we set it up through this kind of, let's call it within our society, kind of what
the ideology we hold, hold dear to us. And two points on that, David, one other really good
example you used to this kind of the massification of like sameness is traveling. I remember you,
I think you used it in one of your videos. And look, I'm not again anti-traveling, I'll be going
on a holiday next month, in fact, but I am very, very critical and I even find it, I'm a bit even,
I even detest this idea that, you know, I got to tick all the boxes every single city of Paris
or Florence or Berlin or and go to Europe, especially, you know, because us Australians here,
we're quite away from Europe. So love going to Europe. And then the point you make is that it's
kind of cheap and you go to Paris, you stay there for four days and you're like, I know Paris,
you know, but of course, that's not how you get to know a city. And then that same ideology,
it comes along to other human beings too, you know, you start viewing even humans,
it's just another person, just another city, just another commodity.
Yeah. Yeah, it's kind of, it's almost tragic that we get very close to getting somewhere,
you know, when you travel, when you go to Paris, you just get so, it's such an opportunity.
It's an amazing city, amazing history. You go there and then people miss it.
People miss the fact that it's supposed to be enjoyed, it's supposed to be an experience,
you're supposed to be surprised. And maybe you go through the Paris syndrome, that's another
whole thing. But to what I noticed, unfortunately, the tragedy is that for, for people, for some
people, it becomes about taking photos and then it doesn't become enjoyable until the moment they
are back and they show those pictures to their friends. That's when they start enjoying it.
I mean, that's just, I mean, that's kind of, that's a kind of sickness, isn't it?
It is a kind of sickness, but also I think it's, you know, in the Transparency Society,
he has a one essay called the Society of Exhibition, where you've got to exhibit your,
it's like, until you got the approval from the other, in this case, the gaze of the social
media, it's as if you haven't really done this thing. You know, and I think
he says, the Society of Exhibition is a society of pornography, that kind of hyper unconcealment.
I really do like that because it's like, it's as if we want to get rid of this friction
between us and the world. We want it to be completely seamless and there's no, it's just
whatever it's in here, it has to be out there. Whereas for me, the subject, what's really
fascinating, and I think Jijek gets this point quite well, is that we are a complete fisher in
being, we're, it's this absolute negativity that that kind of, we kind of, in many ways, we don't
fit into the subject, doesn't fit into the order of things because of this absolute negativity
that that's created. And with this need to be completely transparent, we completely
jettison this negativity. Right. And that's where for me, traveling, because, you know,
if you think about it, I am all about, in some sense, I'm like a levinazi and like, I really
believe in exposing yourself and opening yourself to the other. And travel, you could argue, is a
beautiful way to do that, you know, opening yourself to just a completely different culture,
a different mode of being even. But if it becomes kind of like the whole, it's just going to become a
game for, you know, Instagram selfies. So it was put up on the internet. There's no, there's absolutely
no opening yourself to the other. It's just simply another exhibition. It's another, yeah,
another box to take. Yeah, yeah. All the inconveniences of traveling and people,
the parts that we are inclined to not appreciate, I mean, those are the real, those are when those
are the moments where we encounter what is not planned, what is the real justification for
getting out, getting, getting into the, indeed, into the journey. Just, it's a really good point
you make about the inconvenience, because I know you've been on Kareel Last, the philosophy
portal, his podcast, love his work. I mean, I feel like the, I'm hoping to talk to him one day.
I'm probably going to have like one of those moments, because he was one of the first people
that I, his channel was the resource for me to understand, you know, probably five years ago.
I went through his lectures and then Hegel and he's an amazing, amazing elucidator. But anyway,
leaving that aside, he has this point about inconvenience. He says that, you know, we,
we have these kinds of conversations online and it's fantastic. Like it's just,
it's like an oasis of where we could just get lost in this world of thinking and theory and
philosophy. But he does say there is something very convenient about this, right? As in, let's
say David, you and I, we wanted to have the same conversation in person. You're in Canada, I'm in
Australia. We may have to organize our flights, take up a lot of time from our day and there's
like a lot of friction for us to have this in person. But now all I had to do was just, I mean,
I sent you an email and a bit of back and forth, but that's nothing compared to, and then, you know,
click a button, zoom video opens up. All of that friction is taken away. And I wonder
if there will be some kind of richness that comes out of this friction, if it is in person
and how it's in the future of like this kind of what we're doing in this community, how that
would be where I'm, I'm trying to see as I grow this community, if I can do a bit, a few more
in person events in Australia, just so that there's something, the difficulty of that itself
makes it worth it, if I could put it that way. Yeah, that's a great idea to do more in person
stuff. Just, you know, if you and I just to use this to stay with this example, if you and I were
planning to meet, it could not just be because it's such a big distance between us. It can just be
like, okay, we talked for an hour and then bye, see you later. It has to be like, okay, if you're
visiting, you know, I have to kind of help accommodate you and help find accommodation for
you or vice versa. It becomes more than what we were initially interested in. We have to embrace
more. We have to kind of accept that there's going to be more inconvenience for this, you know,
a small slice of interaction that I was planning. I'm supposed to, I'm forced to have like a whole
bunch of unplanned, you know, but necessary, it's going to be a lot of necessary evil in that process.
But technology is really, it's good at eliminating all those and giving us just that one slice,
precisely the slice that you asked for, you're going to get it and then turn it off, turn off the
zoom and you're done. But there's a, we can be skeptical of that purity.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, I've always been skeptical of this idea of like,
pristine purity, refined things. I, I, I, here's a game where I'm sorry, I keep referring to
Jack. He is one of my master signifiers. I refer to him a lot because I've essentially,
my ontology is just ontology. And like, he always talks about that yet. There's something it's in
the, it's in the, the flaws, it's in the, the lopsidedness, it's in the, the antagonisms,
whatever you may call it, it's, it's in the error itself in some sense, the answer lies.
And, and I liked the idea that complete order is felt, that's fascism, but also
complete disorder, that's anarchism, right? So I'm not trying to say you need to get
find the best of both, but I think that the trick is to find disorder in the order.
And to see that, okay, yeah, yeah, things can be seamless, but there's some, there's value to
things going wrong too. An example is that way, you know, when the Frenchy jokes around,
when the cheese went off, the French took that, that error, the fault, and now we have blue cheese
over the wine, it went off, no, we have champagne. So it's to find something positive in the
error, something productive in the error itself. Yeah, yeah, philosophy itself could be an error
in normal conversation, in normal discourse. You know, there was this guy, Socrates, for example,
he kind of introduced weird variations in questioning people and questions and answers.
But to make that official, to officially bring that into conversation,
that would be the active philosophy, the decision.
And speaking of, David, I would like to revisit the agony of eros, because this is certainly,
I think, but I think it's the same for you, burnout and agony of eros are my favorite.
I've only read probably four or five of his books. So I certainly love this book.
One point I want to make about the agony of eros is, and I don't know what your thoughts on this
are. So we talk a lot about this, like the other and how the other can be a complete alien other,
and then they kind of disturb our sameness, our controlled life. But I really liked the kind
of the notion that Alain Bajor makes that, yes, it's true that the other is completely alien,
you can never plan the love event in that sense. But when he says love takes two,
and in the event of love, by allowing yourself to like opening yourself up to the other,
there is a higher truth or a newer truth created. So love becomes a project in that sense. So it's
not that the other is a complete alien and then your life is complete chaos. But through this,
again, it's paradoxically through opening yourself up to this other, you've, in some
sense, you find a truth even about yourself. And I'm wondering, I don't know if that makes
sense. I'm sorry for being a bit long winded. No, no, no, no. Just like if you want to comment
on that, because for me, that's a beautiful idea of like letting ourself love and opening
us up to the other. Yeah, I think maybe something that you also are, you're also expressing in that
with that sentiment is the idea that the other is not just outside, that it's an inner other too,
that you discover about yourself. That this logic of sameness, this imposition that we do,
we also impose it on ourselves. Like the idea of waking up and planning every minute,
since the moment you wake up until the moment optimizing everything, optimization is really
based based on the assumption that I know myself. I know what I can do. And I know what I want to do.
But it's, it's a very dull life if I operate with the assumption that I know everything
that about myself, I know what I'm what I should do. So yeah, I agree that it's, you know, our
relationships that we find aspects of ourselves that we wouldn't, we wouldn't find.
Long time ago, I had a friend who is a very close friend, and in a moment in a sentimental moment,
she told me, if I don't talk with you for too long, I will forget who I am.
And it really made me think, I feel, I feel like that's a general statement that we could apply
to all good friendships. And if we don't get in touch with our good friends, we will really lose
touch with ourselves. Because they provide us with a place, a good friendship, a good conversation,
provides us with a place to be, to dwell, to express who we are, and then be responded to.
And in that dialogue, we, we find something. And that part of that something is, is ourselves.
But it's not the narcissistic self. It's the, is the other self, if you will.
And how have you found, because I was going to read out, it's a bit of a mouthful. So let me
in fact, because the book ends the agony of heroes. And I'm so glad you brought up your friend,
because the, the part I'm going to read is about friendship. So beyond Shalan ends the,
the book saying, the philosopher is a friend, a lover. Here, the lover is not an outward personality
and empirical circumstance, but a presence that is intrinsic to thought, the condition of possibility
of thought itself, a living category, a transcendental lived reality. And this is perhaps my favorite
part, because this idea of thinking, thinking in the strong sense begins with heroes.
To be able to think, one must first have been a friend, a lover. Without heroes, thinking loses
all vitality and turmoil and becomes repetitive and reactive. Heroes infuses thinking with desire
for the atopic other. So, you know, and this your friend said that she, she kind of
forgets even who she is, unless she's in dialogue with you. And I'd say I have a lot of friends in
my life where I do know if I don't talk to them, eventually I start forgetting even who I am.
I love that line. Thank you for reading that. To be able to think one must first have been a
friend, a lover. It's so true. And it, you know, because people who have an interest in philosophy
and have been involved with philosophy for years, they might forget that, that it didn't begin with
an interest in a given book or a philosophical question. It began as maybe in a context of a
relationship with a teacher or with a friend, with a person who seemed very intriguing.
There was friendliness there at the bottom. And that's why a lot of times, philosophical
questions begin with a line of thought with something like, what is love? What is true love?
Or, you know, in some movies, characters ask each other, can men and women really be just friends?
You have a relationship with someone and within the context of a relationship, friendship,
those questions are posed. But the engine of those questions is their relationship,
that's the idea. But it's so easy to forget that. And that itself is also interesting
that we forget. Yeah, yeah. No, I think that's beautiful.
Well, I feel like we did touch on the burnout society, but I perhaps maybe let's try that,
because for me, what I was thinking was, so for myself, I've been recommending
Byung-Shul Han to many people and even sharing your videos around, in fact.
And one reason I do that is because I think people that aren't, and I don't mean this in
any way in like a super serious, you know, condescending way, people that aren't, let's say,
obsessed with reading the way you and I are. You know, this is why I started the question
with how do you read philosophy? Because, you know, philosophers write in dense ways that are,
you know, esoteric and abstruse, it's really hard to get through to them. And for me, Byung-Shul
Han is certainly an exception, because I find his work extremely accessible, like he writes in very
clear, concise terms, plain language. And that's, that's one reason, you know, I talk about him.
So, but then the other reason is because he theorizes, he's a, he's a living, breathing,
critical theorist, right? It's not, we're not reading Heidegger from the 20th century or,
or Adorno from the 20th century, we're reading a person that's, that's in, for instance, in
Transparency Society. He talks about Facebook, you know, he talks about social media. So,
I'm curious to ask a rather, there's a bit of a banal question, but I think it's worth discussing
what are your views on the world of social media? This, I mean, I'm going to stop calling it the
online world, because I don't think it's the online world anymore. It is our world. It's our
life world. Social media has become, it's become the modern church that become the, the town square
in some sense. So, just through the kind of the Beyoncé hard framework, let's say, or worldview,
what are your views on the world of social media? Yeah, great. The world of social media, these,
these media platforms, there are places for consumption, but they're also, at the same time,
places for production. You and I, we both go there to produce, and they are not neutral. They,
they put demands on us. They put demands on us both when we are consuming and they put demands
on us both, you know, also when we are, you know, putting a producer hat or content creator
uncomfortable with that phrase. But, you know, we all, as somebody who posts, anybody who posts
regularly on, on YouTube, you know that the super ego of the YouTuber tells, tells him or her
or them that you should put, put something every week. You should post something. You should have
a posting schedule. Why? Because the platform demands you, demands that from you. Algorithmic
DIA. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So social media, to me, every time I, I feel like
I'm really using social media for myself or for genuine human relationships, it always feels like
I'm cheating it or I'm getting away using it in the way that I'm not supposed to use. I have a
couple of friends that I, I messaged back and forth on Twitter, and Twitter with them is
like a messaging system. It's private messaging. You know, we have these long threads of
talking about books that we're reading. And Twitter or X is not supposed to be used that way.
It has its own way of, that it wants you to use it. Ideally, you will use it in this way.
So yeah, I think it's important to be, you're right. Han is important to read because he's writing
for our time. He's writing for us. He really is writing about things that are aspects of our
reality. And that includes the digital media, social media, or, you know, quote on quote social
media because they're not really social. I don't always feel like I'm connected when I, when I'm
there. So I decided I myself, I don't know what your thoughts are on this, but I decided to limit,
really limit. So I don't have Facebook anymore. I don't have Instagram anymore. I just felt like
I need one or two. So I kept YouTube and, and X formerly known as Twitter. These two, I feel
like, okay, two, I can, I can deal with them. I can be careful with them. But when it comes to like
multiple, you're always catching up. I felt like I was always catching up to them. And you have
different people in your social circle. Everybody is more on one platform. It's really, it's really
strange. And you forget that, you know, these people are not really in your life, some of them.
Some of them are not really in your life. You like delete Facebook, completely lose touch with
some of them. And I did. It was like, okay, what does that mean? I don't know.
Yeah, I like that you said social media is not social. I couldn't agree more. In fact,
it's a, for me, it should probably be called something like a narcissistic media or something
because it's, I've realized that this goes back to the idea of you, you discussing sameness
in social media. It's the ultimate tool to make everything same. Because everyone's just
another follower, another comment, another listener. And then, which is why, in fact, I should have
spoken about this earlier. I love that you do the reading groups, where it's a much more smaller,
closer community. And you know, the people that it's not a parasocial relationship.
That being said, David, I want to ask you this. I love asking this question from kind of people
who are into critical theory. So you probably noticed or observed a lot of technologists,
they, they think, okay, the solution is decentralization, crypto social media,
sorry, blockchain social media, or the solution is this new telegram or like, so
that they always look for technological solutions, right, as in to the, to our perils of our contemporary
world. Now, personally, I don't think the solution is technological, even though it's
interesting, you said that you cut off certain platforms, you cut off Instagram and Facebook,
and you only use Twitter and or X and YouTube, perhaps in that case, yeah, so those, those
platforms suit more of what you want to do on social media. But at a broader level, I'm wondering,
do you think not that there are simple solutions to any of this, but at least to, let's say,
reduce human suffering? I mean, I think that's a good thing that people, people have through
social media. Do you think that the solution is technological? Do you think it's,
it's something a lot more social and ideological or political even? Or has there got to be
something which is kind of a dialectical between between the both, between both these, let's say,
camps? I'm not sure. I think if you think of technology broadly,
beyond just digital technology, I think the answer has to be technological. And that just means
being mindful of how we use our infrastructure, the platforms that we have. And, you know,
I'm using technology in the sense that, you know, a chalkboard is a piece of technology, too.
You know, a matchbox is a, or a glass is, you know, a piece of technology. It, we,
any kind of solution requires its own technology and it's, it comes with its own set of beliefs
as well. So it's, I think they go hand in hand. The kind of world that is reflected in the
technologies that we embrace. But yeah, I'm not sure. I don't really spend much time thinking about
large-scale solutions. I don't think my brain really has those, those ambitions, unfortunately.
The reason I asked was because I think my, in fact, I still haven't got like a thesis topic,
but something I would like to theorize on is for my masters is like on the philosophy of technology
and kind of see if I can do that. And, you know, a person who perhaps the single handle of the
essay that influenced me the most is Heidegger's A Question Concerning Technology. And like the
idea is that, you know, this is now kind of like a point that I think everyone agrees on that
technology isn't itself a neutral thing. It has its own metaphysic. It's always
tilted towards a certain side. It cannot be neutral or objective. So when we introduce a
technology that itself comes with its baggage of let's say ideas and presupposition. So,
and like, but then the question is, does that mean, does that mean the, the, that technology,
you know, the kind of the more than the Marxist sense that our material conditions,
the technology will change how people, people's beliefs, or is it more that the technology is
created out of more of like the background beliefs people already have. So to use again,
Bjarne Schultz's idea that the idea of burnout society, where everything becomes a project,
you'd see people create like myriad software tools to make him a productive
and tracking tools, you know, different kinds of, so for me, those, those technologies are kind
of like symptoms of what our society has at the moment, like our current, yeah, in some sense,
I'd call it a sickness, you know. And so I don't know, I'm just bringing some ideas out here just
to, you know, hear your thoughts, but I found them quite interesting. Example I sometimes think
about is, you know, when I, for the first time I joined Twitter, I really became aware of how
my mind slowly started to think in terms of tweets. You know, this was years ago, this was,
I think, 2014. That was before I first deleted my Twitter account and joined again after some years.
But this, this change happens, this change of, you know, you're plugged into a, to a piece of
technology and it morphs, it shapes the ways in which not necessarily the content, but it forms
your thoughts, say, okay, your thoughts appear to you, appear in your mind in the form of a, of a
tweet, or you get an idea and the idea is already pre-packaged. If you're a YouTuber,
your idea is already, it comes to you in the form of a, of a YouTube idea, idea for a YouTube video
and you write it down. I'm sure that's how novelists or short story writers experience their
lives. They experience a moment where an idea comes to them and they write it down potentially,
because they are, they're, they're plugged into that practice of writing short stories or writing
novels. We are plugged into these technologies that we have relationships with and they enable
certain forms of, forms of expressions and prohibits other forms of expressions that, you know,
they're, they're out now. And if you take it, if you take a radical view, the kinds of expressions
that we come capable, we, we are capable of because of these technologies are the kind of,
kinds of expressions that we are capable of thinking. The things that we cannot say anymore
are the things that we cannot think anymore. So the, the very structure, the very form of our,
our beliefs are limited and formed. In addition to that, there's this time bound
and nature of the things that we say, you know, something comes to my mind. I
write a tweet about it and I let go of it. It's gone. I, my relationship to it becomes like,
oh, look at me. I did that. How many likes did I receive? Okay, 20 or 10 or two, you know,
but it becomes like, it brings it into a particular logic of sameness that all thoughts are equal.
You know, the difference between them is based on this metric of likes or views or whatever
the metric is that the platform tells us. You talked about that. You said these technologies
might shape our beliefs. But I think before that, that's, that's certainly true that they influence
what we believe, but they also influence how we believe. They influence how we relate to the things,
how strictly, how seriously we take them, or what else do we take seriously? Like,
is that what you meant by the form of belief?
Yeah. Yeah, the form. I see. The how, the how of our, you know, thoughts. Indeed. Indeed. In fact,
uh, you know, Simon Critchley, when I spoke to him, he made a really good point that, yes,
the internet social media has done, it's done wonders for philosophy because now everyone's,
you know, having these kinds of conversations, people are listening to philosophers online. It's
like everyone's exposed to philosophy in some sense. It's just, it's so convenient. But
it's been terrible for the novel. It's been terrible for long form. You, you kind of,
you sit in some corner, no distractions, and you just read a book. You read, I don't know,
James Joyce. So I'm not that I've read James Joyce, but you know, where you can, you can really
spend days and even months, you know, carefully gone through a book. And
because of this idea that as you, you said it, well, that all, everything's the same. All ideas
are the same. So no, no, no pinker, no novel, no work of art deserves some kind of salience over
every other book out there, you know, and, and, and I find that quite interesting. So, and,
and yeah, I mean, it's, it's, it's, it's, because for me, I always thought that
it's, it's, it's a rather like simple thing to say that, oh, of course, technology affects us
and our thoughts. That's, that's fine. But my, something I really would like to explore more is
what, what creates technology? I mean, okay, a part of it is certainly this kind of creative
impulse that we all humans have this, this need to create. But the, the, the different kinds of
technologies we do create in our society. What's the, what are the, what's, what are the ideological
presuppositions we create them off? You know, be the productivity app and my background's in computer
science. I'm a software engineer. So I think a lot about software, you know, be the productivity
app or some kind of like sales app. So what are the presuppositions we have when we have the
motivations to create a technology? And that's the part that interests me.
And is that motivation, is, is that motivation something that we get from the market?
Yeah. I mean, that's, that's a good question. Cause like, okay, a very, I think I'm playing
with it, put it as, yes, for money. I want to, you know, I want to make, I want to have like a
startup and make a lot of money. But I don't know. I don't think it's that simple. I think
that's a bit of a, because there are many ways to make money. I mean, you could, I don't know, you
could become a real estate agent and make a lot of money. But I find that these, especially in
the tech world, the more of like the hipster creative types, they have this, you know, they
have this very like, even like a messiah complex, I want to save the world. I want to create this
amazing software that, that revolutionizes lives. And so my question is where do those beliefs come
from? Right. But the very, the very statement that this is going to make money, that itself,
tacitly, it is expressing a set of beliefs about the market that a certain type of app will sell
because, that's true, because there's a demand for it, because there's a market for it, because
certain types of things are in demand, because we live in a culture where productivity is,
is in value and people are struggling with it. So a productivity app is going to be great.
And so those, those kinds of,
now I stood one, I said, like, if you want to make money, you want to create something that,
that falls within the logic of the market. And then that, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Excellent. And said, I mean, oh, wow, it's funny, I lost record time. It's almost,
we, we got about 10, 15 minutes remaining. I was going to say, I wasn't very efficient.
Oh, no, please. Oh my God, don't worry. This has been an absolutely enjoyable path. And
this has been an absolute pleasure for the police. I mean, look, I really hope we can have a lot more
conversations and like keep on, keep this dialogue going. But it's funny, I was going to say,
in the interest of time, and then I realized that the utter hypocrisy of that, that we're talking
about slowness and taking time, but, but just for the listeners, because really, you know,
my, one of my goals with this conversation, again, see, I'm goal oriented was to kind of
propagandize for Bianchel Han. It really was that I really wanted more people to read him because
I think, I think that's great value in, in, in reading his work. Just, just, yeah, just for
the listeners to kind of put in like a very simplistic way, let's say, or like in a nutshell,
to use the term I hate. What do you think of Bianchel Han's perhaps his most valuable insights
and his most pertinent insights to our time and that perhaps can be a reason to read him?
I would say I would emphasize for people who are new to Han, I would, you know, my kind of
invitation would be, he is really great at connecting our very personal experiences,
like the experience of being tired, the experience of not having enough mental energy to do all the
tasks that you're supposed to do, the experiences of loneliness, being tired and alone, you know,
at the end of the day. And all these experiences, he pays attention to them and he connects them to
broader patterns, broader trends in culture, in society, in technology. And that is really valuable,
I think. He keeps, he doesn't keep the discussion of private experiences at that level, at that
scope, at that original scope of interest. Yes, of course, we're interested in it, but
he helps us make sense of it by putting it in a larger context and different contexts. And
with the help of different thinkers, he introduces us to a host of other valuable thinkers like Foucault,
Plato, Nietzsche, Arendt, Hannah Arendt, and he's very good at connecting the
moments in our thought, in a discussion, with the right moments, the right person,
and bringing a passage, a quotation. He really has an, he's very artful in the use of quotations,
in the use of references. So that style, that general style, I think, is a great contribution.
He also highlights these structures that we are participating in. And becoming aware of these
structures, I think, is very helpful. We won't forget those structures that he's talking about.
And then, like any good thinker, he also has his maybe points where we can critically engage with
him and respond to him. But that's, you know, that's part of the journey. Indeed. I don't
know if I, if I responded to your question. No, you absolutely did. In fact, just on that note,
you even, in one, in a couple of your book reviews, you do, you are critical. You do say,
yeah, that this is probably not, not my favorite book of hands. Yeah, I think that's, that's,
you hit the nail on the head, David, because for me, I think people who read a lot of self-help books,
they would really benefit from reading Marshall Hahn, because what he makes, he makes the
private social, he shows how the private is political, that what we think are these private
struggles, they, they, they are social struggles, that they're, they're a result of the society
we live in. So I think that's a beautiful place to conclude. And at the moments where he says,
okay, if you just, you might think that if you just push hard enough, you will get to the,
to the bright side, you will get to the, you will solve it, you know, if you just
optimize yourself enough, but that's part of it. But that's not, that's not
the solution. That's, that's part of the structure of the problem.
The solution itself is part of the problem. Yeah.
That's right. That's right. The promise of the solution is a false promise.
Thank you, David. I hope this is the first of many more conversations to come between
me. I hope so too. Thank you. I hope so too. Thank you so much.
