Hey everyone, today I want to make the case as to why you should not live your best life
using the ideas of Jacques Lacourne, Slavoj Zizek, sprinkled in with a bit of the theology of Peter
Orleans. Now firstly, of course, let's try and understand what the thesis I'm trying to negate
here is. What do I mean by living your best life? I think the best way to make sense of this, let's
call it societal, cultural imposition is to go through podcasts that people consume and the books
people read. So if you look at contemporary culture and if you look at, let's say, kind of
consumerist, productivist, moral injunctions, if you look at, let's say, the Amazon bestseller list,
which I have opened right here. I just googled it for this video. You'll see some of the bestselling
books are in the self-help category. Books like Atomic Habits or Jordan Peterson's 12 Rules for
Life. And yes, there's some pop fiction, but there certainly are many books that are either in the
personal finance or the self-help category, along with the New Age self-actualization
category books, books like Eckhart Tolle, people like that. And if you look at the top podcasts,
the podcasts like Andrew Huberman's, what's it called, the Huberman Lab podcast, which is
a pretty good podcast on health and well-being, but people certainly obsess over the tips that
Andrew Huberman gives on how to optimize your life, how to optimize your brain or your physiology
and whatnot. And then of course, another example, which probably is a bit more from, even before my
time really, is the book The Secret by, what's her name, the Australian Bern, whoever, Ronda
Bern, right? So this book, just according to Wikipedia, it's sold over 30 million copies worldwide.
That's a lot of copies. And that certainly is a bestseller that there was a documentary about
this book. People still talk about things like the law of attraction and this kind of, I call it
toxic positivity, where the, it seems like in our culture, the imposition, kind of the imposition
by God himself in many ways is to live your best life, to self-actualize, to be as productive as
you can be, to be as healthy as you can be. And not only that, to also in the more of the consumerist
crass, crude sense, to have as much as you want to have, not merely in the sense of just, let's say,
material things like clothes and shoes and cars and watches or whatnot, but even experiences,
travel, experience the world. And of course, we have, you know, terms, colloquial terms like
FOMO, the fear of missing out and whatnot. And all of this comes from this deep seated imposition
that we put onto ourselves, ironically, or rather, physically, I'd say, to live your best life.
And the question is, what does that mean? Why do we always feel guilty for not living our best
life? Why do we always feel guilty for missing out, not just on things that are purely entertaining,
but even on things like self-actualization and becoming divine in some sense and becoming whole
or to use a more technical term? Why do we always have this desire for ontological wholeness?
One way to answer that question is through the ideas of Peter Rollins, who says that we are subjects
of the Achievement Society. Our culture is a culture of self-help and achievement. We
have to live our best lives. The kind of the imperative by God himself, even though most
people in modernity are so-called atheists, is to self-actualize, to live your best life.
And unlike in the past, the categorical imperative to use a content term or simply
what we are ought to do, what we should do was, you know, don't lie, don't shoot, don't murder,
don't commit adultery, all the, you know, typical traditional Christian virtues, let's say.
The categorical imperative of our times, the demands of our times, is to achieve. And that's why
Peter Rollins says we are subjects. We are people living in Achievement Society or Achievement
Culture, because that is ultimately what we're supposed to do, achieve. And if you could take
those ideas of achievement or living your best life, which seem a bit more metaphysical and,
let's say, try and make them a bit more psychoanalytical, the best way to put it is in
Na'a Slavu Žižek's catchphrase, which is enjoy a super ego.
The traditional notion of psychoanalysis is that because of some inner obstacles you internalized,
identified excessively, excessively with paternal or other social prohibitions, you cannot
set yourself free to enjoy, to pleasure is not accessible for you. It is accessible to you only
in pathological forms of feeling guilty and so on. So then the idea is psychoanalysis allows you to
suspend, overcome these internalized prohibitions so that it enables you to enjoy. The problem today
is that the commandment of the ruling ideologies enjoy in different ways. It can be sexual enjoyment,
consumption, commodity enjoyment, up to spiritual enjoyment, realize yourself, whatever. And I think
that the problem today is not how to get rid of your inhibitions and to be able to spontaneously
enjoy. The problem is how to get rid of this injunction to enjoy. Now, before I get to the
negation to keep fleshing this idea out, I'm going to use two books by Slavu Žižek. The first one
is perhaps his most, one of his most accessible books, How to Read Lacan, and the second one is
certainly one of his hardest books to read for they know not what they do. Here's what he says
about super ego or enjoys super ego in How to Read Lacan and after I read from both these books,
I'll kind of explain what he means here. Žižek states, super ego is real, the cruel and insatiable
agency that bombards me with the impossible demands and then mocks my botched attempts to meet them.
The agency in whose eyes I am all the more guilty, the more I try to suppress my sinful
strivings and meet its demands. The cynical old Stalinist motto about the accused at show trials
who profess their innocence, the more innocent they are, the more they deserve to be shot,
is super ego at its purest. For Lacan, super ego has nothing to do with moral conscience as far as
its most obligatory demands are concerned. Super ego is, on the contrary, the anti-ethical agency,
the segmentation of my ethical betrayal. So that except I read is a very, I call that summarized
or called down version of a very perspicacious idea that Žižek has been writing about ever
ever since he's been writing really. The idea that the Lacanian super ego, at least in modernity
in our culture, is quite different to what we would, let's say, conventionally think about the
Freudian super ego, where generally if you ask from any person who has any idea of who Freud is
and you bring up the concept of the super ego, let's say the super ego is this ethical agency,
kind of like the, again, the Kantian categorical imperative that talks about, you know, don't
lie, don't cheat, be a good person, carry out your civic duties, whatnot. Although our culture,
things have shifted. Our super ego is the imperative, as I said many times already, to in fact be
anti-ethical. In fact, to not in a hedonistic sense, to an indulge, indulge, indulge, but rather
it's to the demand itself is to live your best life, as I said in this video. And ironically,
a part of living your best life is certainly being anti-ethical and doing things that are
moral transgressions, so to speak. But also, again, the new age of self actualization and whatnot.
But then comes the important point where he makes the cynical Stalinist joke that
the reality of the super ego demands are that they can never be met. And in fact, the more we
carry them out, the guiltier we feel, the more we engage in self help, the more we engage in
productivity, reading all these books and listening to all these podcasts or the other
side of things, the more consumerist we become, the more we try to experience new things and
constantly pursue novelty, the less emptier and more guilty we feel in the sense that we always
feel we aren't doing enough. And that's the cruel, sadistic nature of the super ego. So that idea
of the super ego demands being unfulfillable brings us to an excerpt from this book for they
know what they do, where initially, before I read the excerpt, Gizek states that as we probably all
kind of intuit at least, we all kind of feel it that in post-modern culture, we have no
moral laws to say. We have no substructure that guides us in how traditional societies did guide
us in the sense that most people are atheistic, we have no metaphysical principles, and we don't
have a lot of prohibitions. Now, of course, the naive way to view that is we think, oh, that means
we can live in infinite bliss and freedom. There isn't all these old patriarchal ways of existence,
we could just be free. It's not so simple. Here's what Gizek states. He states, how do we
account for this paradox that the absence of law universalizes prohibition? There's only one possible
explanation. Enjoyment itself, which we experience as transgression, is in its innermost status something
imposed, ordered, when we enjoy. We never do it spontaneously. We always follow a certain injunction.
The psychoanalytical name for this obscene injunction, for this obscene call, enjoy your super ego.
So here's where all the ideas connect. In the past, the universal law, the Kantian categorical
imperative, was prohibition. Do not do this. Whereas now, in our post-modern culture, it is
you ought to do this. You must do this. You should do this. You must read this many self-help books.
You must listen to all these productivity podcasts. You must take care of your health.
You must focus solely on your well-being and on your health. You must have this much money. You
must own this thing. You must have this experience, so on and so on. You get the point. And of course,
that begs the question, if the current imperative, and we can't detach ourselves from these imperatives
there, there, regardless of whether we like them or not, how do we live our best life? Unfortunately,
here's where things get a bit dark. It's impossible. It's primarily due to reasons,
because firstly, we don't really want to live our best life. What we want to do is to fantasize
about living our best life, but never really live it. You have a serious ideological deviation at the
very beginning of famous proclamation of independence, you know, pursuit of happiness.
If there is a point in psychoanalysis, it is that people do not really want or desire happiness.
And I think it's good that it is like that. For example, let's be serious. When you are in a
creative endeavor in that wonderful fever, my God, I'm on to somethings and so on, happiness
doesn't enter it. You are ready to suffer. Sometimes scientists, I read history of quantum
physics or earlier of radiation, were even ready to take into account the possibility that they will
die because of some radiation and so on. You know, happiness is for me an unethical category.
And also, we don't really want to get what we think that we want. The classical story that I like,
the traditional Meyshovinist scenario. I am married to a wife, relations with her are cold,
and I have a mistress. And all the time, I dream, oh my God, if my wife were to disappear,
I'm not a murderer. But let us say, drop me, it would open up new life for me with the mistress.
You know what? Every psychoanalyst will tell you quite often happens that then, for some reason,
wife goes away, you lose the mistress also. You thought, this is all I want. When you have it there,
you turn out that it was a much more complex situation where what you want is not really to
live with the mistress, but to keep her as a distance, as an object of desire about which
you dream. And this is not just an excessive situation. I claim that this is how things
function. We don't really want what we think we desire. And of course, manifest and consumerism,
as we all know, the more we shop, the more we buy things and purchase things, the more we want to
shop and buy and purchase things. What we are really looking for is in that case, not a particular
consumable item, not a particular commodity, but rather at a fundamental ontological level,
what we desire is the object, this virtual void that isn't there. But perhaps even more
pertinently to our times, leaving consumerism aside, because it seems rather obvious, it is also
the fact that we never do really want our desire to be ever met. Despite the fact that it's
unfulfillable, regardless, what we want to do is fantasize about this object, about getting
whatever this virtual category is, this empty virtual category is. And perhaps the quintessential
example is something like Paris syndrome, where as we all know, it's a phenomenon where many,
many people, many, many tourists, whoever, they always fantasize about Paris. And once they do
go to Paris, once they do go to France, they see that it's just the brutal reality of what it is
and they see that it's just another stupid country. Of course, what they really were fantasizing about
wasn't Paris the actual material place, rather the object. And I think Gizek puts it best
where he says that, if there's anything psychoanalysis has told us, that is that human beings
fundamentally don't want to be happy or don't want their desires to be met. So to keep expanding
on this idea a bit more theoretically, Todd McGovern elucidates it really well in his book,
Capitalism and Desire, he states, capitalism is the effect of sustaining subjects in a constant
state of desire. As subjects of capitalism, we are constantly on the edge of having our desire
realized, but never reached the point of realization. This has the effect of producing a satisfaction
that we don't recognize as such, that is, capitalist subjects experience satisfaction itself as
dissatisfying, which enables them to simultaneously enjoy themselves and believe wholeheartedly
that a more complete satisfaction exists just around the corner embodied in the newest commodity.
So of course, when McGovern talks about capitalism, he's also talking about the
capitalist ideology, which is the kind of the culture that I'm talking about of living your best
life. And I'm sorry to quote myself here, but a little commentary on what Todd McGovern wrote.
Here's what I wrote. And again, I'm sorry for narcissistically quoting myself.
Since our lack is unfulfillable and our desire is unmeetable, we are the perfect subjects for
capitalist dynamics because paradoxically, capitalism works by not working. We are always
kept on the edge of having our desires met by, in fact, not having them ever met in reality.
So you could replace the word capitalism with new age, with self-help, and the idea would still
apply. And then we come to the other concept, which is perhaps one of Lacan's deepest ideas,
where he famously said, desire full stop is always the desire of the other, which basically means
that we are always asking the other what he desires. And this is where Jujak states in his book,
but even in the video I just showed you, that our desires, what we are supposed to do,
living your best life, whatever it may be, don't come in any authentic, spontaneous sense.
It always comes by the other, which is our sociosymbolic reality of culture, of society,
and it manifests in many ways. It's true, of course, the very conspicuous marketing
of celebrity culture, but even in more subtle ways, where it could be completely unconscious.
Nonetheless, our desires are always coming to us from society.
Okay, so it seems like using these Lacanian ideas of psychoanalysis and Jujak's ideas of
more cultural analysis, we seem to be in quite a dilemma, given the fact that, firstly,
our super ego demands of living your best life can never be met, and the more you try,
the guiltier you will feel. And secondly, the fact that you realize that your desire is not
some authentic desire of you, of you wanting to live your best life is never what you truly want,
but rather it's what society is telling you to want. We seem to be stuck in a rather catch-22.
What do we do? What's the solution here? Now, the purpose of this video, like all my videos,
is never to give any easy solutions, nor is it to ever, ever, absolutely not give advice,
because what the hell do I know? But, at least to end the video on a high note and not in a kind
of cynical, defeatist note, I could talk about a few things that Peter Rollins introduces to
this conversation. He too was, in fact, influenced heavily by Lacan and Jujak, but his kind of
theological understanding of what we can do, given that we, in many ways, need to try and
liberate ourselves from this culture of self-help and productivity and living your best life.
But before that, before talking about certain things we could do living amidst such a culture
and such a social reality, there's a caveat, a very important caveat that I need to put forward,
which is you cannot step outside of ideology. Now, I've spoken about ideology quite a lot in
this video, and especially post-modern capitalist ideology. Now, we could all think the way the
andrate people think, oh, that means now that I know all these things, I could just step outside
of ideology and get red-pilled and wake up to the truth. This is to quote Lacan himself,
le nom d'oeuvre air, which means those who are not d'oeuvre air most. To think that you can step
out of ideology is the most ideological thing you could do. So, whenever someone tells you,
here's the reality of our world, here's consumerism, here's all the problems we're facing,
come to me, I'll give you the solution that is instantly ideology suspect, because the solution
itself is a ideological reality, because we can never step outside of ideology. This is perhaps
one of JJ's most original and perspicacious points that the only way to live in such a reality
is to understand that ideology itself is our sociosymbolic reality that gives meaning to our
lives. So, the only way to live in such a reality is to critique ideology from within,
not to think that you can step outside of ideology and to make this argument a bit more
metaphysical in the very famous Plato's Cave example. The idea is not that you could step
outside of the cave and then see a reality, rather, reality itself presents itself to you
through the cave, and the way you understand reality is through critique of ideology, in this
case, critique of our social reality. So, with that caveat out of the way, here's one thing
Peter Rowland suggests. It is the idea of grace. It's a very Christian concept, of course, and
in such a culture, in such a culture of self-help, such a culture of obsession with living your
best life. One thing we can struggle to do is, in fact, understand how grace works. Grace is a
unearned love, and now you might think that, oh, unearned love, it's great, God's grace,
it's fantastic, but no, it's not just saying there's some abstract God out there loving me,
but rather learning in your social reality that you have the ability, the space, the freedom,
whatever you may call it, to accept love, to accept love from your friends, from your family,
and if you believe in God, from God himself, that it's okay to not fall into achievement society
and just simply, and to use a very, very cliche term, be the stupid, dumb self you are,
and still find love in this world. Find love in however way it may manifest, and this is, in fact,
what the radical notion of grace is, because grace, Christian grace particularly, is unearned love,
and you might think, oh, again, as I said before, that it's fine, I can enjoy unearned love, but no,
keep in mind that in our post-modern society, with all the super ego imperatives of achieving,
of doing the best, of getting to the top, of being your best self, receiving anything unearned
is a traumatic, even traumatic experience. It is something we struggle a lot to feel
loved in this world and to accept love, but if we learn, and that's really important, if we learn
how to accept love and to accept grace, I believe to a certain extent, this can help us to live within
such an ideological society with our current moral impositions and super ego imperatives.
And the second thing is, as much as we learn to receive love, we also learn to give love,
and to love others. Now, there are two ways I would put this. I could say, oh, of course,
it comes in interpersonal relations, romantic love, loving your friends, loving your family,
but I also think, and perhaps it is quite important, given as Aristotle said,
we are political animals, and he meant that more in the sense that we are social animals in a
social reality, not in this day to day silly, the spectacle of politics, they didn't mean that at
all. Given that we are a part of society as much as society is out there, it's also within us,
it's learning to understand that it's important to have a vocation, it's important to have an
existential project in life, whatever it may be, you could be a writer, you could be a political
activist, you could be a scientist, an engineer, an entrepreneur, whatever it may be, it has to be
something that's an existential project, not something silly like a careerism or making money,
not playing the rat race and falling into the game of capitalism, certainly not, but rather
understanding that what you do in this world matters, not only to yourself, but also to others.
And I think that in some sense, liberates us from this kind of narcissistic obsession to live your
best life and to always sub-actualize. So yeah, that's at least for me what's helped me to understand
that I don't have to live my best life, I could be the shitty stupid person I am, but at the same
time, learn to love, learn to accept love, but also to find a vocation and to commit myself to that
cause, to that vocation, and in fact to go all the way, not to live this kind of tepid life of
oh, I've got to meditate five hours a day, have my cold shower, exercise, take all my vitamins and
live this perfect, balanced, holistic life, none of that, none of that, to understand that
existence itself has an antagonism and chaos to it, and that despite that, despite that chaos,
or perhaps through it, I will learn to partake in my vocation, partake in my existential project,
while also understanding that the ultimate guiding principle, the impetus behind all of it,
is love, and that is why I would say Christian theology, the Christian idea of grace, certainly,
I would say, is perhaps most important for our culture than any other culture,
when I mean our culture, I mean neoliberal capitalist culture in the times we live in.
