It probably isn't anyone right now who's doing a better job than Lex Friedman at showing the
beauty of science and scientific discourse. Because of Lex, ordinary people like me have the
opportunity to listen to the most brilliant months in the world as if we are just nonchalantly chatting
over a beer. And I'm sure there's an innumerable number of people who have turned on to programming,
AI and science in general, because of the Lex Friedman podcast. With his starry-eyed curiosity,
Lex, resembling Dostoevsky's idiot, not only makes science accessible for new fights like myself,
but also shows his viewers the absolute necessity and pertinence of science in our own lives.
So of course, he's right in venerating the scientific enterprise, but science too has its
shortcomings, like every man-made philosophical enterprise. And that's why I think Lex Friedman
is wrong in believing science will save us. Now, when I do make a video where I'm disagreeing with
one of my heroes, a person who's had an unbelievable influence in my life that I can't just even put
in words, I probably need to make this caveat or have this caveat where I try to convey what the
purpose and intent behind this video is. This isn't a gotcha or a Ben Shapiro debunk slash destroy
this kind of video. Like those early 2010, edgy atheist anti-SJW stuff that used to be on YouTube,
not because I'm above them or I'm saying that, you know, I find them below me. I actually found
them quite entertaining, but they were just that. All I found them were pretty much entertainment,
but I don't think any of those really edgy kind of videos changed my mind. So I don't want this
video to be that, because I just find them unproductive. Rather, I want to try and delineate
and expound on what I think are philosophical differences between Lex and myself in the hopes
of finding some kind of synthesis to its trip. My disagreement is that when Lex considers our
reality and the human experience, he makes generalizing statements about science like this.
I wonder if there's something that could have been done better to give people hope
that science will save us as opposed to science will divide us.
Or when he says science wins through love and humility. For example, this was from Lex Freeman
podcast 238 with Francis Collins, where they discussed the pervasive pandemic on our reaction to
it. In the battle of ideas, I think humility and love wins. And that's how science wins,
not through having quote unquote truth. Now to be fair, though, when Lex uses the term
science colloquially, I don't mean he means it in the academic or scholarly way, the word science
would be used, which involves, you know, empiricism and the systematic categorization or organization
of knowledge. Since he is a romantic like myself, I think he talks about the beauty of the scientific
enterprise of what it is for a conscious entity like a human being to do science, which is in
reality more different from what science means technically. Regardless of the semantics, I think
because of science's almost miraculous rise to influence and it's become so
ubiquitous and just a part of our day to day life as a society, we've unfortunately begun to
replace the whole of the human experience with just science. And I think the problem with that is that
in some sense, when we replace the whole by a singular, so the whole of the human experience
by a singular aspect or a fragment of the human experience like the scientific enterprise,
it begins to lack any balance, let's say.
Because in the real world, as I kind of touched on, the scientific enterprise itself is nested
within the broader human experience. And I think we make this mistake or we confuse these two things
at our own peril as we evidently see in the unraveling times we live in. So if I could consider
Lex's podcast itself, I'm glad he changed the name from artificial intelligence to the Lex
Friedman podcast. Artificial intelligence is a multidisciplinary academic and scientific discipline.
The Lex Friedman podcast is a phenomenon that an observer experiences in different things. And I'd
even postulate that people are not necessarily attracted to AI, but rather to the Lex Friedman
podcast where the discussion of AI, another sub experience, so to speak, is only a part of the
broader podcast experience. My point being, there is something to our experience. Let's make it a bit
more tangible and say the experience of learning that transcends mere scientific empiricism and
materialism. So I've made all these claims, but I really haven't backed any of it up. And that's
what I hope to do in the rest of the video. But before I do do that, I kind of want to try and
once again succinctly lay down my points using a bit of brevity, something that I'm terrible at,
because I'm quite verbose. Anyways, here's my point. My assertions are the scientific enterprise
doesn't encompass all of the human experience. Rather, science is nested within something
transcendental. Therefore, it's wrong to unequivocally assume that science will save us or be the
ultimate panacea to our predicaments. Science is merely a tool to be exploited to use a somewhat
dramatic term by our values, which lies in a different domain, possibly the religious.
So to try and elucidate my points, I'll break down the rest of this video into two parts.
Firstly, the fact value distinction. I'll discuss the axiomatic presuppositions we used to think
and act in this world. I'll try and understand the qualitative distinction between values and how
facts are always, bar none, filtered through our bellies, more specifically, moral bellies.
And then I'll use Jonathan Pedro's ideas of the hierarchy of bellies to show how science is
nested within religion. Secondly, I'll discuss the dangers of scientific utopianism, the totalitarian
impulse of reason by coupling my concerns of scientism with the ideas from Jonathan Haidt's
moral foundations theory. And then of course, we're looking to Alexa's favorite novelist,
Fyodor Dostoevsky's critique of utopian thinking with his use of the crystal palace in his
literature. You know, it's very common in the media where there's some political pundit or
commentator that say with rather overweening confidence, follow the science, they declare
that we ought to follow the science. But the problem is, none of us can truly follow the
science the way they mean it. Because when someone makes a statement, they make this
presupposition that we know where to begin with. They make the presupposition that we've got axioms
to start this journey of following the science with. I mean, to put it plainly, when someone says
follow something, that assumes there's a beginning point or a start and an end. Like for example,
a topic that comes to my mind is something that's of course innocuous and not controversial at all,
like COVID and vaccines. You know, from both sides in this whole debate, people say follow the
science. And you know, there are some people who are pro vex, some people are anti vex, some people
are pro lockdowns, anti lockdowns, or there are people like me who are, you know, lockdowns to a
certain extent. And then afterwards open up society, people should get vaccinated and then,
you know, move on with your lives, but don't cause or mandate the vaccines. Sorry, I had to
say all of that just to clarify my stance. But the point being, you see, all these people in some
sense, we are all given the same data. We're at least exposed to similar variables, let's say.
However, the debate about COVID isn't scientific anymore. It's completely value space. It's
completely on what that starting point is, what those axioms that we use to begin our journey of
following the science's whip. It's nothing to do with what the epidemiology says. Instead,
epidemiology or science in general is used as a tool to accentuate ethical contentions
in this debate. At a minimum, we all used economics, politics, science, our personal
intuitions, insight, et cetera, and did a sort of multivariate analysis consciously or subconsciously.
The scientific facts itself never makes a decision for us because they simply can't do so.
Rather, these facts were always filtered through a philosophical framework or more accurately,
an indispensable narrative structure, the Seneca known that a person uses to interpret and filter
through reality. Therefore, speaking somewhat figuratively, the moment human consciousness
becomes part of the equation, a fact value and a is odd distinction is created. So a big part of
the whole COVID debate, of course, was the idea of safety. We took all these measures so that we
can be safe. But safety itself isn't a scientific value. It doesn't exist in the domain of science.
Safety is actually deeply subjective. Some people are more risk averse, some people are more tolerant
towards risks. And these things differ broadly in a massive society. People don't want the same
thing. Some people value safety or freedom and people like me value freedom over safety. We just
simply have to make trade-offs depending on our values. And all these different groups, let's say,
hypothetically, even in a perfect world, were given the same exact scientific findings, the same
exact scientific data. This is what they were exposed to. They would all come up with different
conclusions. They'd all have different ending points because their axioms, their starting points,
or let's call it their odds and odds, or nots are different. And these ethics that herald our
actions, so to speak, they come from a much deeper set of moral values, something that is beyond
science, something that's beyond rationality, that's something that's, I'd even argue,
transcendent. It goes to the domain of religious and the domain of mythology and narrative. And in
the domain of values, in the domain of the religious, the verification method or positivism or whatever
you call it, that has worked so well in the scientific domain, in the scientific enterprise,
isn't simply going to work. It's where reason and rationality,
culturally speaking, runs out. And I'm going to say something which
some people are quite averse to. It goes to the domain of the mystical, the transcendentally
ineffable. And all these things that we've taken for granted for the longest time,
and to use a union term, I think these values, these deeply held moral values, or these deeply
held stories that, let's say, imbue our moral values to use a union term are embedded in our
collective unconscious. And of course, needless to state, none of these ideas come from me.
Philosophers, religious thinkers have been trying to debate, understand and seek out answers to
these questions since time immemorial. Reading a bit of philosophy, it's actually a beautiful
experience knowing that people have always pondered and thought about these questions.
And it's always been a part of the wisdom tradition, and it's always been something
everyone's spoken about a lot, even though I think now it's spoken about less.
Then again, a recent acclaimed conversation that took place a couple of years ago,
the debate between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris on truth and morality,
is a good example on how pertinent these ideas are to our life.
And even though I hate to reduce such rich conversations to a bunch of propositions,
I have to do so for the sake of brevity. The gist of the debate was Harris believes
values and moral principles can be derived or inferred from facts. Much like he doesn't
as book the moral landscape, he challenges Hume's yes or problem, and asserts and ought
what to do can be derived from a what is on the grounds of increasing well-being.
Peterson, of course, disagrees. However, unlike most of Sam's debate is, he doesn't
merely place a somewhat arbitrary goal as an unforeseeable propositional axiom. Rather,
he sees religious narrative and story which involves God as being an ontic point for us
to live and act in this world. As a union, he tries to demonstrate how archetypes act
as intermediary structures to arrange the facts in such a way to imbue values.
According to him, stories aren't true in the sense of a scientific fact,
that they are meditates by marshalling our actions on what to do with the fact.
So Harris' claims of increasing well-being is essentially a narrativized,
necessary axiomatic presupposition that prevents an infinite regress, which is not a fact.
I don't know if I have a stance on this matter. I don't think anyone really truly
has a stance on this matter, and if anyone does, either they're lying or they're just being
unbelievably hubristic. But I would say that I happen to
stand or agree a lot more with Peterson than Sam Harris. The more I've pulled about and I'd even
say struggled with these questions, I think I've come to the realization that one cannot infer
values from facts or values from truth, we'll say, without being self-referential and presuppositional.
My best intuition of this, I'd say, actually comes from someone I've been reading recently,
Mr. Nietzsche, his idea, his philosophy of perspectivism, where we can't divorce
observation or understanding of the world from our perspective. We don't just observe the world
plainly without any perspective or without, we are a conscious being where the world is
observed and filtered through us. So in this filtering process, we do have a values framework.
We have certain narratives and beliefs that we hold, and knowingly or unknowingly,
the world is interpreted through this. Interestingly, speaking about Nietzsche,
he also makes a point in Döngeren Evel, and I think a couple of his other books that,
you know, Christianity by its this ardent and sort of, you know, vigorous drive, let's say,
towards truth, because in Christianity, truth is the highest ideal, Christ himself is the embodiment
of truth that Christianity ended up destroying itself by giving rise to science. I don't think
I know what to make of that statement. I don't know what that tells us about contemporary society.
However, that does lead me to probably one of the most radical and incomprehensible points
for us modern people that made by Jonathan Pedro, a Christian near-playtoness,
where he explicated how science is nested within religion, not in some inadvertent,
pragmatic or inspirational sense where religion inspired people to do science,
but rather that without religion itself, literally, science cannot exist. Apart from the enigmatic
kind, Jonathan Pedro's work has had the biggest influence in changing my view on science. He helped
me realize that science has a problem. Science cannot define or categorize itself, and as a result,
it has to make arbitrary, mercurial accidents. And this always goes wrong as we see from the
politicization of science these days. One of Jonathan's contemporaries and another intellectual hero
of mine, John Revekey, explains this paradoxical dilemma of science best in Jordan Peterson's
science. The science exists. Okay, if it is, what kind of entity is it? And tell me using
physics or chemistry or even biology, use just though that ontology and those methodology,
tell me what science is, and tell me how it has the status to make the claims it does,
and tell me how science is related to meaning and truth, and how do meaning and truth fit
into the scientific worldview? They're presupposed by that worldview, but they have no proper place
within it. That's what I mean. So whenever we're doing the science and saying, this is what the
world is, we are absenting ourselves from it. We have no home in which we are properly situated.
And I think that ramifies through everything we think, say, and do to each other and with each
other in a profoundly corrosive way. That's what I mean by the meaning. It's to this problem,
Jonathan Pagel replies with his explanation of the hierarchy of values using symbolism and
religious language of the neo-Pedonist kind. He postulates that as science itself is a product
of consciousness, it cannot exist without a higher old encompassing framework, which ultimately is
what religious language attempts to portray. In this video using the example of a mountain,
Jonathan points out that such language is a type of meta language or meta process
that contains science within it. And in some sense, gives it meaning. So in relation to modern
science, religious language would be something like something of a meta process or a meta language,
because it tries to express the thing it is focusing on, let's say a mountain, while also
expressing the process by which that focus is even possible. So if modern science can describe
a mountain height with terrain, its foliage, its mineral constitution, religious language is expressing
why I have a category like mountain in the first place, why that category is relevant to humans,
basically what does a mountain mean? So the scientists will retort something like this,
will retort something like a mountain doesn't mean anything. But to say so is to ignore the human
variable, ignore that we are the ones looking at the mountain, even if I believe that that mountain
is outside of my tiny existence. It ignores consciousness, ignores why I would bother to
have a category like mountain. It ignores that I have to climb a mountain or go around a mountain
when it's in my way. It ignores the effect going up a mountain has on human consciousness.
All those things are real. There are no more illusions than the scientific data.
Symbolism tries to take all of that into account, that is discuss a mountain without pretending that
we are not human beings living in a world of mountains. So it does have a personal and social
aspect to it because it takes into account consciousness, but it isn't just personal and
social. And also taking consciousness into account doesn't mean that it's a relative thing and
subjective in the way that we see that word today, subjective in the sense of idiosyncratic,
arbitrary, to my own particularities and preclivities. There's a universal aspect to the experience of
a mountain. So the religious language is above the scientific language and contains the scientific
process within it, makes it possible. You know, a lot of caveats have been added in this video,
I think, but I do want to add another one. I want to make this after I listen to a debate
between Jonathan Pedro and rationally roots. The reality of what Jonathan's talking about,
to understand that, or even to understand the fact value distinction, it truly does require
a rather radical paradigm shift in one's thinking. But also, I think more importantly,
we really have to start paying attention to our conscious experience. It's funny,
a lot of these skeptics or rationalists always say, follow the evidence. I go where the evidence
leads me. And I can't believe how much people can lack in self-awareness to believe that
they're so open-minded. I don't think any of us are as open-minded, or let's say we are like a
sponge that just absorbs evidence and just changes our worldviews based on the evidence the way we
think we'd like to be. It's really difficult to change our mind. So at least I'd say, I'm going
to be honest, I find it quite hard to change my mind. I don't think I could just follow the evidence
and just go where it leads. I don't think that's how my mind works. And I think apart from the
problem of the fact value distinction, that kind of metaphysical philosophical debate that I spoke
about before, I think, you know, reality is human psychology, which simply just don't change our
minds like that. And since I used to word psychology, maybe now is a good time to move to a section of
this video that's a bit more tolerable. You know, I've been talking about these obstruous philosophies
for a while, metaphysics and all that, which can be rather hard to grasp. And you know, let's be
honest, you know, in some sense, we are all confined in our way of thinking. We are all confined to,
in many ways, we all think the way the Enlightenment philosophers, when I mean we, I mean, we,
modern society, we all think the way Enlightenment philosophers told us the thing, that that's how
we were told to perceive and understand the world. And as Wittgenstein so brilliantly put it, once
you climb up that Wittgensteinian ladder of just philosophy and propositions or rationality, let's
say, one must transcend it, one must throw it away and move beyond it. So I'm not going to be
transcending that ladder or going to a different philosophy, rather I'll be coming to something
a bit more grounded, a topic that I think we can understand a bit more, which is psychology.
And that leads me to a point, which I've been trying to understand and probably explicate
in some way. It is that utopian thinking, scientific utopianism, any kind of utopian
thinking is, psychologically speaking, essentially totalitarian. And understanding why the psychology
of utopianism is totalitarian isn't some philosophical game, at least in the analytical
sense. It's rather deeply experiential. It's having this unbelievable amount of self-awareness where
when one has a thought, where one has an idea or some kind of ideal one striving towards,
I think it's really important to be deeply introspective. And I'd even say try and observe
oneself without any moral judgment from a third person perspective. See what emotions rise,
see what makes me or whoever. Why am I thinking this way? Am I being totalitarian? Am I being
absolutist in my quote unquote remedies to the world's problems or my own problems?
And I think then we all come to the realization that utopianism is always totalitarian in nature.
Because knowing oneself is knowing how one comes to their conclusion. It's good or bad.
And what we're capable of doing once we have those conclusions. And to be honest, sometimes
that's a deeply terrifying realization. As psychoanalysts have told us, human beings have an innate
nature to us. However, this doesn't necessarily mean we're all the same. We differ in our interests,
temperaments, proclivities, idiosyncrasies, and certainly physiologically. A manifest example
of these differences is shown in the moral foundations theory, popularized in Jonathan
Hyde's book, The Righteous Mind. The basic idea of the theory is that our moral intuitions come
from certain foundations and concerns, some of these even mutually opposed, that we nonetheless value
in informing the moral basis for our beliefs. It could be because of these fundamental differences,
we find it difficult to see eye to eye on social, religious, and political matters.
And so far, I don't think any of these findings are controversial or worrisome. I don't think we
need a thorough knowledge of social psychology to understand that we all differ, even though it
might help us empathize more with people of different views to our own, if we know how and why
they develop these worldviews. But what deeply perturbs me is the claim Jonathan Hyde makes in
his book of social intuitionism, where we form our views through intuition rather than rationality.
And furthermore, we actually use rational port to justify our initial belief. Using the elephant
and the rider metaphor, he says we don't come to our beliefs through rationality as some of the
enlightenment thinkers would like to proclaim. The oldest ideas in intellectual history is the
idea that the mind is divided into parts that sometimes conflict. And wherever you look east
or west, there's sort of an idea that there's some sort of higher, more reasoning area and then some
sort of lower, more animal-like faculty. Plato gives us many metaphors in the Timaeus. He says
that the gods created mankind. They put reason in those orbs, and orbs had a role on the ground,
so they had to create the bodies. So that's one metaphor. The other is the phaedrus,
reason is the charioteer, and the passions, the noble passions, the base passions, are the horses.
And if a man studies philosophy and learns to control those passions, then he can escape the
bondage of reincarnation and return to the gods. Now, I think this view, the idea that reason,
of course, Plato didn't say that reason is the master in most people, but he said it can be.
It is in philosophers, and everyone should strive for it, so he believed it was possible.
I think this view of reason has taken quite a beating since the 1990s, certainly from the
neuroscientists, who found that when you lose your emotionaries, you don't get hyper-rational.
In fact, you either become unable to really think, because reasoning actually depends critically on
emotion and intuition, or if you're still able to think at all, you become more like a psychopath
who simply doesn't have any emotions in forming his reasoning. So I think the reason as master
view has taken quite a beating, and I'll give it more of a beating, model two, the idea that
reason is a servant. This is, as you know, the model that I endorse, that reason is a great
helper, but it simply is not qualified to lead. But rather than speaking of reason as a slave,
which is Hume's word, or a servant, I think if we think about it as a really intelligent servant,
really more like a press secretary. This is Robert Gibbs, Obama's first press secretary,
and he's a very, very smart guy. They're partners. They work together, but you will never change
Obama's mind by convincing his press secretary that something is wrong. That's just not the way
the system's designed. So it just structurally can't happen that way. Now, Hume said that the
passions were the master. Jesse Prince embraces emotion straight out. He says we can do all
this work with emotion. I used to think that in the 90s. I don't think that anymore. I think we
really need to talk about intuition more broadly. A lot of the things I've studied have been moral
emotions, but as you'll see, there are many cases of gut feelings that aren't exactly emotions.
Now, you might say, well, okay, maybe reason's not the master, but it could certainly be an
equal partner. And this is the view that Josh Green has and that Darshan Arvayas has. Green
gives us the idea of Kant and Mill fighting it out in the brain. Darshan Arvayas uses the
metaphor of dancing. Now, it seems to me that if you have dancing, you have one person leading,
the other following, but she says, well, it's a different kind of dancing where they take turns.
Okay. But even if you downgrade it from master to equal partner, is the evidence that we have on
reasoning, is that consistent with reason, even playing an equal partner role? Is reasoning good
enough, independent enough to play the role of equal partner? I don't think so. So the science
that we hold in such high regard, much like reason is merely a tool to be used by our emotions and
intuitions. We may like to think in a sort of blank slate kind of way where these
emotionless, intuitionless automatons that simply follow the facts. And once we
have all the facts, we come to our conclusions, but we are not. And on a bit of a side note,
I personally like the fact that we simply aren't these automatons. I like the fact that
we have emotions. We are deeply feeling creatures. We aren't just merely governed by
reason alone. Now, I don't have time to get into it, but I would leave a link down below to a great,
great essay or story, a sort of allegorical story by Raymond Smully and called A Planet Without
Laughter, where he describes the paradox of what it would be like living in a reality
where we are only governed by reason. Anyways, I digress. Getting back to the video,
the problem now is whatever conclusion that we've come to, we believe that we came to this viewpoint
using reason and mere facts alone. And we think that regardless of the consequences,
whatever the outcome of our conclusion is, we must push through just by the consequences,
because we think the conclusion we have, the viewpoint we hold now, this is absolute truth,
because I came to this conclusion based purely on facts. Therefore, I must hold the truth,
and it just makes sense to go ahead and let that truth, let's say, actualize in the world.
It's in this kind of self-referential, self-fulfilling way of thinking what I mean by
totalitarian. It's to bring forth the utopia we will do whatever it takes, because we are 100%
absolutely accurate in our conclusions. And in modern times, this torturizing mentality manifests
in many ways, but I think the most salient way is in the name of science and reason. It's very
common for us to see a Ben Shapiro destroy someone with facts and logic, because he's got the facts,
he's got the logic, he's got all the answers. Therefore, he's absolutely right. Ben Shapiro
is a right-wing conservative guy, and it's a complete lie that the right wing is anti-science,
or the left wing is anti-science, or vice versa, or whatever. None of these sides are anti-science
or anti-recent. They're both pro-science and pro-recent, but the problem is they both think
that they come to their truth merely by using science and reason alone. But no, both these sides
don't come to their conclusions from just facts. They come to their conclusions to keep it a bit
more grounded, let's say, at least based on their moral foundations. So science, again, just becomes
a means to an end, that end which is created through their moral foundations. And these moral
foundations, left-wing, right-wing, conservative, liberal, whatever, doesn't matter. These foundations
aren't derived using a scientific method, because they aren't scientific truths and I'd even say
science isn't the only way to get at truth. And my fear, of course, is because our society is so
deeply, for all it's good, influenced by enlightenment thinking, and both sides, right or left, whatever
are influenced by science and reason, there's that aspect of totalitarianism that comes in,
and we move towards the dangers of scientific utopianism. You believe in the Crystal Palace,
eternally indestructible. That is, one at which you can never stick out your tongue
furtively, nor make a rude gesture, even with your fist head in a way. Well, perhaps I'm so afraid
of this building precisely because it's made of crystal and it's eternally indestructible,
and because it won't be possible to stick out one's tongue even furtively. So what's this Crystal
Palace Dostoevsky writes about? It's actually based on a real monument from the 19th century,
and I think it's deeply, in a very profound way, pertinent, in a symbolic sense, I'd say,
to the society we live in. It was this vast exhibition hall built of glass and iron in London
to house this great exhibition of 1851. And for the time, it was very technologically advanced,
and anyways, the specificities of it doesn't matter. What matters is, as I said, what it symbolizes.
In Russian literature, along with the Industrial Revolution, it symbolizes progress and this
move towards the utopian society. There were authors like Shona Shevsky who used it to represent
these utopian socialist communes that the people of the future would live in. And of course,
Dostoevsky rebukes his claims and says that, no, human beings don't desire utopia,
even if there was a utopia, we would end up destroying it because that's not what our heart
really wants. You know, my reading of Notes from Underground, which probably is the book
that I've read the most in my life, is that I think what Dostoevsky is trying to say is that
the human soul, the human beings are obviously very, very incomprehensible beings,
and we are all walking paradoxes, you know. In our souls, yes, we want to be safe,
we want to be happy and live a good life with well-being and all of that, but at the same time,
we also want to be free, in some sense, existentially free, and we would desire being free
than over-living in so-called paradises of the utopia. If we do live in a so-called utopian
paradise, if we didn't have this freedom of conscience, freedom in our soul to do as we
will in that paradise, we would still not prefer that. We'd still rather suffer and be free than
not be free and not have any suffering. So before I go on and on about Dostoevsky,
which I could do forever because I absolutely love his work, a good question to ask is,
why does any of this, the Crystal Palace, all of it, why does it matter to our times?
I think it's quite straightforward. It's because what the Crystal Palace represents
is the modern AI project, and I think Lex, as much as I love him, very much falls to this car,
I guess, trap or this way of thinking about AI the same way maybe thinkers of that time
poured about the Crystal Palace. We look to technology to be our savior, we look to AI or
whatever it is to be humanity's redeemer, savior, and to be the means that gets us the utopia.
Such utopian thinking isn't necessarily a modern phenomenon, nor is it merely a product of scientific
advancement. For example, we see forms of it in the Tower of Babel, a very ancient story from the
Bible. My point being, it's not the object or theory we project this desire onto that matters,
but the psychic phenomena of that desire itself. It doesn't matter if it's the Tower of Babel,
Crystal Palace, AI, or Steven Pinker's Enlightenment Rationalism. What we should be
attentive towards is the totalizing impulse we have to attribute a certain thing, scientific or not,
to be the panacea to all our problems. Furthermore, since utopianism inevitably becomes
totalitarian, it is all-encompassing and doesn't leave any room for fragments of being that are
outside a given utopian ideology. It's a similar idea that Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Peugeot
discussed in a recent podcast about the key difference between heaven and utopia.
Heaven is generally conceptualized. You can conceptualize it as a state of being. It might
be the state of being that those people that you described live in have had paradisal experiences
where everything transformed itself into something that was perfect, that appeared perfect,
and I was unable to stay in those frames of mind. The heaven, is that something we build?
Is that something? I don't understand the relationship between the heaven that awaits us,
let's say, after we die. That's the idea and what we build here on earth. Do those touches?
Is that the doctrine? There's so much of this doctrine I don't understand.
At all. I think a way to see it has to do with attention again, and it has to do with a hierarchy
of attention. If you try to build heaven, you're going to fail. You're going to fail miserably
because you're not aiming high enough. You're aiming and then you get stuck in this
in these weird world of opposites that you don't even understand the side effects of what you're
doing. For one person, heaven will look like if everything could be perfectly ordered then,
right, and then we know what that looks like. Another person will look at heaven and think,
if everything could be free, we could all just be free and then that we know what that looks like.
The idea is to look higher. There's a story that I've been had.
We have to strive for something better, but then we end up in, which is what you're saying,
is that we end up with the Tower of Babel or we end up with the flood or we end up with
the catastrophe, continual catastrophe of unintended consequences. But
as you yourself said, we are aiming for something better. The question is, how do you pursue Utopia
while avoiding the pitfalls? That's a theological question. Yeah, it is. I think it,
I know people are going to hate that I say this, but it has to do with worship. It has to do with
what you worship. So if you worship those things that you're aiming towards, the lower things,
if you worship the making a safer society, if you worship the making a freer society,
if you worship making a stronger society, all of these things are going to go off the rails
because they have unintended consequences that you don't understand because they're a fragment
of reality. They need to be encompassed together in order to reach something higher.
That's the danger of ideology. It's the part that takes the place of the whole.
The idea is that if you worship God, then those other things will
will kind of lay themselves out slowly and you won't be able to force them. They'll kind of lay
themselves out slowly and they'll start to manifest, you know, progressively and as you,
but you have to attend to the highest. With scientific utopianism, one value is divinized
and science becomes the means to bring forth the ends. The safety, freedom, order, or even
technological progress with no regard to any other value, or even the ramifications of said value.
And since science itself is only a tool that's malleable and has no way of justifying the
means it uses, that one value that all utopians pursue become the only thing that matters.
There's no balance, no nuance, no context as utopianism lacks and hierarchy of values.
After all, utopia was derived from the Greek meaning nowhere and there probably is a good
reason for that. Regardless of our philosophical or religious beliefs, I think a laudable goal for
all of us, I'd even say the motivating spirit of the scientific enterprise should be to bring heaven
on earth. I truly believe a lot of people, especially those like Lex, who just have a
big heart and just truly loves life and humanity and everything that comes along
with the baggage of being, let's say. I believe the goal of most scientists and a lot of people
is this, it's to make life on earth better. It's the motivating spirit, it's to in some sense,
yes, to bring heaven on earth. And this is in no way an anti-science or even worse, an anti-scientist
video. I really hope I didn't convey that I was being cynical in that sense because absolutely
not. I mean, I work in committee science, I'm a software engineer and my field wouldn't exist if
not for this world of science that I review and love so much. I could never forgive myself for such
lazy, casual cynicism. Rather, the intent or the purpose of this video was to try and contextualize
science. It was to try and understand in the hierarchical topology of epistemology where the
science stands. A lot of big words I know, but plainly in a broader culture, what's the role
science plays? Because I think by understanding this, we not only make the scientific enterprise,
we not only make that a much more fruitful endeavor, but we also make the human experience
much more richer and substantial. And Lex, of course, is a good example of what happens when
the scientist and the poet meets. So saying all that, please do consider sharing this video with
Lex. That would be a dream come true. Thanks for watching.
