Firstly, I would say, in my view, self-help is a post-modern phenomenon, and what I mean
by that is that, which is perhaps why that self-help, as you said, Joanne, it doesn't
really have, it doesn't question the odds, it doesn't question what's driving us towards
the point B, from A to B. So it's purely focused on the systems. It's like a ruthless pragmatism.
It's just get it done. This is how you get it done. Apply these frameworks. James
Clears Atomic Habits or whatnot. My critique of self-help comes in two ways. Firstly, in a more
existential sense, and then afterwards, certainly my political critique, where I critique the ideology
of self-help. So the existential one is rather interesting because here's what I put it this
way. So as you were talking, it reminded me of Camus's quote from the shoot, The Fool. He says,
sorry, a man wants to earn money in order to be happy, and his whole effort and the best of
the life are devoted to the earning of that money. Happiness is forgotten. The means are taken for
the end. So I'll just replace money with self-help there. It'll go like this then. A man wants to
practice self-help in order to be happy, and his whole effort and the best of the life are devoted
to the earnings of that money or to the practice of self-help. Happiness is forgotten. The means
are taken for the end. Now, happiness is forgotten. Again, happiness is not a big deal here, but let's
assume in the context of this quote, the happiness is an ought. I ought to be happy. It's the B,
the person's moving towards. So within this, though, what I've seen with self-help is that
essentially speaking, the means are taken, the means replace the end. The means don't become
just a means to an end. They become the end in themselves. So what happens is when people get
obsessed with self-help, all their life, all their life, all they do is try to optimize everything.
They try to meditate, run cold showers, read myriad self-help books. In fact, I saw this
really interesting statistic. I can't pull it up now because I got to find it, but it said that
majority of people who buy, so majority of people that buy self-help commodities, so except for
products, whatever, courses, books, all that, they're generally a really high number, like 80
or 90% of it, they're recurring customers. It's the same people that keep buying this stuff.
Because what happens is, I think people get to use a Lacanian term, a sense of Jewish zones,
from just the act of engaging in self-help. I'm going to read 10 self-help books despite all of
them virtually saying the same thing. It's not that advanced. It's just basic stuff. You don't
have to be a genius to have habits, be disciplined, have some framework, have a calendar, have a to-do
list. I mean, no shit Sherlock. You don't have to be a genius to know that. But then people get,
like, you know, what's this, Tiago 40 is a second brain thing where you optimize everything's
productive. From the processes itself, people find a great sense of pleasure, although I would use a
more psychoanalytical term, Jewish zones, where then there's no real, they really aren't really
doing anything apart from optimizing their lives, apart from self-helping, you know, and that that
becomes a whole lot. And it's kind of a sad existence if you think about it, because like,
there's no creative outlet. There's nothing, there's no creation per se. It's just this like very,
in a peculiar sense, narcissistic obsession with the self. And my question, the way I like
always think is like, I like to think of, for humans, you know, I'm a Hegelian, so we're historical
beings, right? Imagine if Napoleon or Churchill spent, you know, six, seven hours a day focused on
self-help. Like imagine Napoleon before he went to, you know, was trying to beat the Nazis, woke up
in the morning, meditated, you know, had the cold shower and did all these things. We would probably
all be speaking German and you and I probably wouldn't even be born. We've probably been some,
our parents would have died in some concentration. One would imagine Napoleon to have been more
effective, but I don't think that would be the case. You would have not stopped reading.
Yeah, you see a self-help ideologue would say, oh, if Napoleon or if Churchill did all these
optimization things, they would be even better at that, whatever they did as leaders, let's say.
I disagree. I think the greatness that doesn't come from this very little tweaks, optimization
here and there. It comes from something even beyond what you can articulate. It comes from
to the ancient term from trying to be that ubermunch, you know. So it comes from, in some sense,
the greatness comes from some kind of insanity. There's like a sense of insanity to what they're
doing and self-help ruins all of that. It makes you a very tepid vanilla kind of person and that's
why I'm going to be totally honest, man. Most people I talk to who are hyper obsessed with
self-help and I used to be one of these people. So I kind of know a few people who I used to be
a part of a pyramid scheme at MLM. Unfortunately, I got sucked in as a kid. So I still know a few
people who are in that circle. Great people, lovely people. We all do. We all do. Yeah,
everyone did a part of Amway, right? It's just like, I think Bill Clinton was a part of Amway.
So anyway, lovely people, but man, they're so boring. All they do is obsess over like,
focus on your dreams, your goals. I think the interesting thing is they're very,
you can say they're boring, but they're also very obnoxious in a very interesting way.
Oh, I mean, look, okay, I can't speak for being obnoxious because I'm an obnoxious guy.
No, that's true. That's true. I tend to be this. I tend to be on the top of my head.
Okay, so maybe just what I wanted to mention earlier as well, and you will tie here, it's like
how self-help used to look like was morals, right? It's a lot of morals and ethics,
but then there wasn't the end alone. I would say it's frenesis to use a term by Aristotle.
Frenesis is kind of this like pragmatic wisdom. Very sort of easy system. Frenesis,
which is like a very interesting. I haven't heard of that one. It's like how to engage in the world
as a virtuous person. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. That's right. And I think that's D,
like it's along the lines of how to look it up to self. It's virtue, right? But it's actually,
that's like, in that case, it's not the means becoming the ends. Like I think the means are
still the means and the ends are still the ends, right? Like when you look at it, people in ancient
times, like you, there's no way to parade that you're someone who's, you know, someone who's
thought about all of these things and someone who does all of these routines on the side,
because they're actually operating things. Well, you can only embody it really. I mean,
the only way to be a virtuous person is to embody it. Exactly.
As in the surfer, people can vary. I mean, we all do this. I do this with philosophy, for instance.
It's to use a term by Judith Butler, performativity. Be sure that, look at me, I'm doing all these
things. I'm performing the role of what a self-help person would typically do, which is, yeah,
productivity, meditation, all of this. But then that's, it's a bit unfair to say it's just something
self-help people do. I think in postmodern, which is why I said it's a postmodern phenomena,
in postmodern culture, everyone does that. We are all performing something. We are all putting
on a performance, because we live in this kind of groundless existence. Our being has no...
True. But I have one more point to make on the political side. Can I make that point? I'll let
you go. Is that all right? Yeah, yeah, okay. Or do you want to respond, though, to the point?
Actually, maybe I'll go first, because you probably take a while with that one, knowing you.
Oh, no, no, no. This is actually... No, I think I already... Okay. To be honest, the existential
point for me is the important one, because the political one, it's not just self-help.
I think it's given our current milieu, ideology, and many things connect to this. But I would put
it simply, I think self-help is also a conformist category, because it's this idea that this connects
to the whole therapist and all the conversations we've been having before. The idea that I'll focus
on myself, don't critique society, the Jordan Peterson thing, clean your room before you criticize
the world, focus on myself, focus on improving, focus on my immediate life, getting my finances
in order, getting my personal life, my personal, whatever health, wealth, whatever in order,
spiritual life, whatever you may call it, and don't critique structures, don't be critical of
neoliberalism, the capitalism, whatnot. So it's the moment one steps into the ideology of self-help,
you already taken on many ideological... There's a lot of ideological baggage that comes along with
it. It's not... So self-help certainly is not a political thing. It's not something that just
exists, again, independently. This is within our culture. So which is why that... Again,
the funny thing is that existentialist critique, I think it perfectly connects to the political
critique, because the existential... Essentially, when you replace the means, when the means become
the end, then there's no real end, right? Because it's a postmodern phenomena. The end of... Let's
say, again, we want to create a more just society. We want to create a society where there are less
people suffering, where we want to create a society where there's more love, let's say. We want to
create a society which is perhaps a lot more like what Christ taught us. Now those things matter,
because the end is already there. The end is engaging in the self-help things and not critique
society. So then there's no... It's like this very kind of like... Yeah, it's a slave category.
It's like this tepid existence where you never question society. You kind of live this zombie
existence in many ways, which is really interesting, because if you look at people who are engaging
self-help, you're right. They are rather obnoxious. You think that, man, they're people who are getting
things done. They're so productive. But no, sometimes you should step back and question why
you're doing what you're doing. Doing... Just do it the way Nike says it itself is a
ideological imposition. It's an injunction. Do what? Do what? Do what, man? But that's why
I think they're both... There are many existential drawbacks, but certainly there are many political
drawbacks of self-help pissing, the ideology of self-help.
