So before getting into detail into the various quantum technologies past and present and
future, I think it's important for all of us to be able to be on the same footing regarding
what quantum effects are behind them and really kind of have a thorough sort of list of all
these quantum effects that really I think at this point everybody should know about
because they're really kind of prominent in many of the technologies that we already use.
So here's the four quantum effects for the layperson.
The first is probably one that everybody already knows about because it's almost something
that defines quantum mechanics and your first conversations about it and that's discreteness
of quantum states or discreteness of energies of quantum states and it basically just says
that a quantum state that you can pick from does not occupy arbitrary energy.
You can only have a set of states that occupy certain quantized or discreet energies.
The word quantum even comes from this one simple system that we can demonstrate this
with is called a particle in a box.
There's some box here, there's some position X here that we can denote and this is very
similar.
The states of the system are very similar to the slinky that Professor Moriarty and
his monkey were dangling next to the wall and if you imagine that you know a slinky
you can sort of drive it to have to be in a standing wave with no nodes.
You can have it be in a wave with one node.
You can have it be in a wave with two nodes, etc.
The energies of this are one, two, and four for this quantum system.
The point is that here the energies are indeed quantized.
What is the reason why you've got energy levels one, two, and four, no three?
A particle in a box, the energy is proportional to the square of the number.
Energy is proportional to n squared where n is the number.
Do we see this?
Do we see this in the real world?
Are my hand positions quantized?
Is your mashed potatoes in the microwave come at quantized temperatures when you measure
the temperature?
Not really.
You need to have for the most part a small and a cold system to be able to start to see
or resolve these different energies because sometimes the unit of quantization is pretty
small.
This is maybe at first seems really strange because in our world we're at such coarse
grained scales and there's so much energy around us that we don't really see any of
this minuscule microscopic quantization.
But it's definitely there and it's extremely precise, namely that we use this quantization
of energies to determine many of our fundamental constants.
We've been doing that for a while now.
So we're basically certain that all of this is kind of there if you know where to look.
So for a quantum system going forward, you want to just have some system of writing these
states and denoting their quantum.
And what we do is we put them in a cat.
So this is called a cat.
And inside the cat we put in the picture or some symbol or a number denoting which state
we're talking about here.
So we're talking about here the no-note state, so I'll just draw a picture of the no-note
state.
Same here.
Here's the cat for that one and then there's another cat for this one.
And you know, the stuff inside these cats can be whatever you want to denote the quantum
system.
It could be a cat that's alive or dead, you know, the famous example.
It can be some real number, etc.
It can be a binary string, a string of zeros and ones to denote the state of qubits of
a quantum computer.
Even though the set of states occupy discrete specific energies that are spaced apart in
some energy difference that's very precise, there can still be infinitely many of them.
And as you can see here, you know, this is no-note, one-note, two-note, three-note, etc.
So quantum systems can be in arbitrarily high energy states, but, you know, as you crank
up the energy, you lose a lot of the control and so for the most technologies we really
use just the few low-lying energy states and the simplest case is just two states, hence
the name qubit.
The second principle is the principle of superposition and collapse.
This to me is probably the weirdest one, even though this is something that you also
see in wave mechanics, for example, dropping pebbles in a pond.
You have some fixed types of waves that you have in the pond and if you drop multiple
pebbles, you can, these waves will interfere superpose with each other.
Similarly, the states of this quantum system that I have, say this no-note and this one-note
state can be in quantum superposition with each other.
Now what's different between the superposition of waves in a pond from, say, one pebble
and another pebble and this quantum superposition?
Well, two things.
Number one, there's a source of intrinsic randomness here.
So we really don't know which state that this system is in.
Let's say, why is this intrinsic?
Well, let me compare this to ordinary randomness.
Let's say I flip a coin and I put it down in my hand and I don't show it to you.
So you don't know what the outcome is, the coin is, is it heads, is it tails.
And does that mean that to you the coin is in quantum superposition?
No, because somebody knows.
Let's say I look, I know, but even if I don't look, the skin in my hand knows whether it's
touching the heads or the tail side of the coin.
So this state of the system has been predetermined, you just happen to not know it.
The tree's already fallen in the woods, it made a sound, you just didn't hear it.
The difference here is that this is in truly a quantum superposition, namely nobody knows
which state this is in.
And the second part that's different is that you change the state by looking at it.
So the principle of collapse here says that if you say look at it, look at the state,
you will project onto some set of states with some probabilities associated with them.
And this will be intrinsically random, you don't know the outcome a priori.
And once you look at it, it'll immediately collapse to one or the other outcome.
Let's say here, just as an example, I can collapse to this state with 50% probability
and to this state with 50% probability.
Now if I go back to my pebbles in the pond, I throw a bunch of pebbles in the pond and
I look at them, the waves could care less if I'm looking at them or not.
So there's going to be no collapse happening.
So the wave mechanics part is the same, however, there is something that happens when you look
at the system and what you get is intrinsically a random outcome.
And as you may suspect, this intrinsic randomness that's true for quantum, that happens in quantum
systems can be used to generate certified random numbers, which is one application of
this principle.
Another application you can maybe infer is trying to do computation in parallel because
you have the ability to generate a state that has multiple different components in
it.
However, this is kind of misleading because it's not as powerful as you might think.
And the reason being here is that, yes, you can generate superpositions.
In that sense, there's some parallelization.
But you get to look at these things and they immediately collapse, for ruining the superposition.
And even though you can look at them from all sides and directions and you can perform
different types of quantum measurements, you still only get a one-shot look at partially
what the state is.
So you have to look at it in multiple times from, say, many different directions to really
get a feel for what the state is.
And so it's not like you have this bona fide state that you can really observe as a live
superposition.
So the principle of parallelization here is not quite the right analogy.
Third principle is uncertainty.
Here I can demonstrate it using the ingredients we have in our quantum system.
And I want to immediately say that this is also a principle that you see or hear more
precisely when you hear a classical music concert or any music concert.
And this just has to do with the fact that being precise in one variable or parameter
comes at the expense or price of being in precise in another.
Let's use our ingredients here for our particle in a box.
And the two parameters we're interested in are frequency and position.
I'm going to measure these things.
And how come I can use the word frequency here?
Well, because if I, let's say, start with a super high energy state that has lots of
these nodes here, then this state that almost fills up the well, and I'm trying to make
these all look the same.
So pardon the artistic rendition.
These types of high energy states, they basically start to look like waves for high enough energy,
especially if you ignore the ends of the box or make the box really big, really wide.
So when they start to look like waves, then they begin to gain a notion of frequency.
And you can see that if you fit a lot of repetitions of this wave in here for a high
frequency this can happen for a fixed size of the well, then you can see that you can
more or less discern the frequency with relative certainty.
Now, conversely, if you were to try to look at where the position of the particle is,
remember, the position here is X for us.
So where is this particle?
Can we pin it down to a precise position by looking at it in a way that measures the,
collapses it onto a position?
Well, then we would be more or less uniformly distributed.
Our guess as to where this particle will be if we look at it is more or less uniform.
We don't, it's kind of all spread out all over the well.
And in that sense, this particle doesn't have a very precise position when it is in
this high energy state.
So relative to the frequency that we can already see by just looking at the studying
the wave function here, the position is less certain of this particle.
Okay, now let's look at the sort of the converse state or the closest counter example to this
type of behavior by looking at the ground state, the one with no nodes.
And here, if you even consider thinking of it as a wave, which, you know, you don't even
have a single wavelength fit in here, you have half a wavelength fit in here.
So because you don't have a lot of repetition, you can't really discern any repetitive behavior.
And so any notion of frequency here is very much less certain.
Conversely, if you were to try to guess, you know, pick a, pick some range of numbers where
this position would be, in contrast to this case where it's very delocalized here, you
know, it's more or less kind of focused on the center.
And it tends to ignore, you know, it doesn't like being near the ends as much as it does
near the center.
Now, granted, this is not as sharply, as sharply peaked as I would like in this analogy, but
it's sort of the ingredient we have for this specific system.
So I don't want to make things more complicated by drawing something that we don't have out
of these.
In principle, it's possible to engineer something like that by superposing a bunch of these.
And there are videos on Fourier analysis that you can, you know, look a number file.
And so now if we look at this position, right, it kind of tries to avoid the ends a little
bit.
And so you can say that relative to, you know, having any notion of frequency, it definitely
has a clearer notion of position.
So what is the point here?
Well, the point is that you can create states of quantum systems that are more precise,
have more precisely determinable values of one parameter at the price of being less precise
in another parameter.
And this is useful for sensing quantum or quantum sensing or quantum metrology or quantum
imaging, because creating a state that has a very precisely centered and a sharp distribution
of one parameter allows you to sense shifts in that parameter very nicely.
Let's say I wanted to sense the kicks in position, say I have some probe that kicks
my particle a little bit, changes its position.
Which state would I want to use?
Well, I want to use the state that a priori has a well-defined position to begin with
so that when there's a small shift, the position for a sufficiently small shift will also remain
more or less, you know, focused and we'll be able to measure it precisely just by looking
at the position.
If we are trying to kick a position of a state whose position is smeared out all over
the well, that's not going to work.
And what's interesting is that this sort of total uncertainty between one variable and
another is constant.
And so you can smear it around, you can make one variable more precise at the expense of
making the other one less precise.
And this is something that people have utilized in detection of gravitational waves.
The fourth effect is entanglement.
And this is something that there's also misconceptions about, but it's not really nothing but the
upgrade of the superposition principle to multiple systems, multiple quantum systems.
So far I've looked at one quantum system and I've showed you that it has different states.
But now let's consider we have, you know, two systems or two particles and we want to
study what states they have.
To draw a ket of two particles, we need to have some way of denoting which state the
first one is in and which state the second one is in.
So we need to have basically comma separated symbols.
And let's say we have some, the state of the first system or first particle is in the
no-node state and the state of the second one is in this one-node state.
And now to demonstrate entanglement, we just apply the principle of superposition and just
superpose it with another two-body state.
Let's say now where things are the opposite.
You have the first system in the one-node state and second in the no-node state.
So this is an entangled state and what is entangled about it?
Well, the point is here that the two particles are following some rule which leads to them
being correlated in a way.
So what is this rule?
Well, the rule is that if you have two states they can be in, but if one of them is in one
of the states, the no-node state, the other one automatically is not in the no-node state,
which means it's in the other state, the one-node state.
Likewise, if the first particle is in the one-node state, the other one, the second
particle is in the no-node state because it cannot be in the one-node state.
So this type of rule makes these particles correlated in this way and because these are
in quantum superposition, this correlation is intrinsically quantum and this is what's
called entanglement.
The rule though is something that again you see in classical physics because the rule
is something that I can demonstrate using socks.
If I promise you that I wear opposite colored socks, red and blue, then if you see a red
sock on my right foot, then you're going to see a blue sock on the left foot.
And there's nothing spooky about that or anything.
It's just set up by the rule, by the sort of the type of state that I'm looking at here.
So what's cool about the quantum version of this is that you can infer the state of the
other system just by looking at the first system because of this rule.
If I collapse the first state in this way onto one of these or the other no-node or
one-node state, I will be able to infer what state the other system is in.
If I get the no-node outcome for the collapse of the first system, I know the other one
will be in the one-node state.
It doesn't matter how far separated these are.
The rule has a priori determined the correlation that they're going to have and it's only
up to now the collapse principle to figure out which one of these states they're in.
And this powerful notion of quantum correlations or entanglement is useful for quantum computing.
And while it's pretty simple for two systems, as we scale it up for n being greater than
2, 3, 4, etc., this gets pretty complicated.
And it's really because for two states per system, you have two to the n states for n
systems and meaning that the number of states doubles every time you add one more particle.
And you have a nice video about that demonstrating that and the usefulness of that in quantum
computing.
Each qubit itself is doubling.
So you have to think of that number of doublings each time.
These are basically the four quantum effects.
The hope is really that everybody will know them because they've really been utilized
for metrology, being utilized now for computing, utilized for gravitational waves, MRI, lasers,
etc., but really all four are necessary for modern quantum technologies.
It's a superposition of waves on that string.
This string can be in a range of different types, variety of different types of molds
of oscillation, waves of vibrating.
They've never written it onto this file, but it's left the rest of this file intact
because it's not truncated the file.
It's really truncated.
