So what we should really talk about next is how teams use Git, because that's the other function.
Git protects your code from other people in a way, right? So it's designed to stop, you know,
say there's a company with like 100 developers in it and they're all working on different parts of
the code base and that code base is stored in a Git repository. It's got to find a way to make sure
that developer number 50 doesn't overwrite the code to developer number 12 when they're working on
like the same area. So this involves a mixture of things. This involves Git protecting code when
you're trying to do Git pushes and Git commits, but it also involves coordination between people.
And so one thing, one of the main reasons you will see things like GitHub and Git labs being used
is because those products, those sort of online websites provide you with lots of other features
that are sort of added around Git functionality to help you communicate with each other and coordinate.
So let's talk about first the Git pushes and Git commits and what would happen in practice.
So if you have two developers and they're both being tasked on fixing a bug at the same time
and to fix that bug, they both need to make a change to one particular file. So maybe I'm editing
files one, two and four and he's editing files three, five and four, but we're both going to edit
file four at some point. This becomes a situation that Git needs to manage for you.
So if person one edits those three files, including file four, creates a Git commit
and pushes them to the server, that's fine. The server will accept it because there hasn't been
any updates from anybody else. It's fine with that. The second person will create their Git
commits and then type in Git push and then the server will say, no, you can't do that because
from the last time you downloaded the latest version, someone else has added more content.
So your version is out of date basically and it will force you to get yours up to date
before it will let you push. So there's a really handy feature is protecting the code by stopping
one person overwriting someone else. So then what you have to do is type Git pull if you're that
second person. You can do a couple of things. You can do Git fetch which downloads metadata about
what has changed and then you can manually and carefully merge things or you can just type in
Git pull and it will pull down the latest version and it will try to automatically merge everything.
So for those separate files that you both edited and even if you're in one file and you edited
different bits of the file, Git will say, when you download the latest version, it'll say, great,
I can merge your changes with the latest version and just does it for you. But if you both edit
the same sort of area and Git isn't sure, it's very good then it says, oh okay, I can't do that.
I'm not smart enough. As a bit of software, we need a human who is more smart to tell me what
should have happened here. So what it will do is it will add both of your lines of code into the
file with like some metadata above it. You see a bunch of side arrows and then the word head
and then you see the first person's code and then you see like a separator in the middle
and the second person's code. And then some other line, the arrow is facing the other way
to show you the last, the commit you've been making. And it will say, okay, as a human,
you tell me which one to keep or if I should keep a bit of both, figure it out intelligently.
And so your job then is to delete the metadata lines and delete the lines of code that don't
need to be there anymore and do the merge cleverly as a human. So that's, it's sometimes a painful
process. It involves you communicating maybe with the other human to make sure that, you know,
why did you do that? Why did I do this? You know, do we need to keep both that sort of thing?
And then once you've merged it, you can then create and you commit and then you can push
the server, hoping that no one else has pushed something in the meantime. But it's your job
as a developer to make sure that you're going to push something that doesn't break other people
and get helps you do that by saying no. Because I can imagine that if you're two developers working
for, say, someone like YouTube, and you're both working on the code base for YouTube servers,
if you need to sort of subtly adjust that, that could affect nearly everybody working on all
the different areas. So yeah, for sure, in principle, you're right that there's these bits
that might get reused by lots of people. In practice, those bits would also be carefully
protected either through procedure or through, because the one thing you can do is you can
limit people to pulling areas of code, you know, or sub projects within Git on the server so that
not everybody is doing. And some bits which are really crucial that are going to affect millions
of users, they, you know, they will have serious protection lines. And that's actually the best
thing we should talk about next is the kind of process that teams go through to make sure they
coordinate who's doing what. So companies like GitHub and GitLab, they have added these extra
features like milestones and issues, issues like tickets, things that need doing. And so
what they'll say is, okay, here's a ticket that needs like a bug that needs fixing or a new
feature we want to add, and we'll assign it to a person or a set of people. And those people will
be responsible for writing the codes that will resolve that ticket. So what they'll do in practice,
actually, is kind of interesting. The team is most likely to then create a temporary branch,
which we've talked about before, with the idea of that ticket as this kind of name,
because otherwise you'd have millions of tickets, millions of numbers. So you name the branch after
the kind of ticket you're trying to fix, the issue you're trying to fix. And then as a group,
you'll work only on that version that's set aside. So you're not disrupting the main version of your
software, you're not disrupting the main branch, you're working on like this side developer branch,
just for this particular issue. And then you will all kind of work on that, finish it, test it
yourself probably. And then you will push that code onto the server. And then you will create
what's called a merger request or a pull request, depending on what, whether you're using GitHub
or GitHub. So they've got slightly different language. One that really then says is we want a
senior developer to check it's all okay and then merge it if it's fine. And that's not that job
is normally reserved for someone who's job that they've got the authority to check something and
check it's good. And also to put it do something risky, like merge it with the product you're
about to release, you know, some more senior people may be given that job. And so you can ask
lab or GitHub to notify people that like a new set of code for an issue is ready to review.
And companies will have review processes that are there required to do like someone will check that
it meets legal standards. Someone will check that the code structure conforms to the company's
standards and that sort of thing. And people will say, yes, this looks fine to me. Yes,
it's fine to me or no, go back and do more. And it creates a conversation forces them to have a
conversation. And then only when they're happy with it, the senior person will do the job of
get merge and merge it into some sort of main main version of the software.
What you'll find is some companies, they will have the main version, which is like
their release product, not have like a release candidate branch. And the people who are doing
their fixes are branching from that branch. And so they make sure the side one works. And then
only then at some point in the future, this okay, this is a release ready version that we have
collectively built. And then someone really important will carefully make that a public thing
for someone to use. So lots of companies will protect what's the main branch or protect different
versions. And they won't give permissions to types of users like developers to push directly to that
because that will break it. So might break it, they're really worried that people will just
push a version and delete, you know, delete something critical to the main version of the
software. So all these protections and processes are put in place to help teams collaborate.
But I mentioned earlier that sometimes they create like a beta version, and they name the
version with the git tag like a beta release ready or release candidate. What they're doing is
they're releasing the software to a set of authorized users who are able to download that beta version.
And then hopefully there's more expert sort of known beta users will say, oh, I found something
that breaks and then let you know before you release it to the whole world. And you can actually
do that with Chromium, which we talked about before, because on Chromium, you can download
the latest beta version, you can download the latest release candidates, you can download
the final version they ended up with yesterday. So you can choose as a developer to go and get
these potentially buggy versions and help them to debug it by being part of a sort of
small unknown community. And all the people that don't know what a beta is in practice,
they just download official releases that Chrome tells them to update when they're told to update.
So it is handy having these kind of first set of people that will try something to show that it
breaks, which is normally like your own developer community. And then a slightly broader community
you're happy to have the beta version of. And then when it's been tested by lots of people,
then it goes out. Because of course, there are benefits in having the beta version, it might
have new features that, you know, nobody else has got right. Yeah. And so like, I know a lot of
computer science students are always happy to get like the latest beta version. And for a while,
I was subscribing to the latest release candidate of Mac OS X. And that was fine until like the
first release candidate for two weeks, they broke Apple Mail, you know, and which, you know,
if people were using this on test machines, that wouldn't matter because I was using it on my main
work machine and suddenly I couldn't use Apple Mail for two weeks. But you know, as a person who's
happy to test release candidates or beta versions, you expect that stuff maybe doesn't work entirely.
You get early access to features. That's maybe exciting. And probably you're technically competent
enough to not worry if something breaks or, you know, delete your beta version and then download
the proper version if you really need it. So what happens is we so we'd have to go over here
across the distributed shared memory link to get the value and then we could bring the value back.
So rather than taking 100 nanoseconds, it would just trying to get packets from one lab to another.
Now, obviously, by 1986, we've got lots of things in Europe.
