Ayn Rand is one of the most provocative voices of the 20th century.
Her novels The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrug have earned her fame for their popularity
and notoriety for their content.
In her many essays, public lectures, radio and television interviews, Ayn Rand offered
a unique perspective on a wide range of philosophical problems.
Yet academic philosophers, both in her time and hours, have responded to her work largely
with derision and dismissal.
What explains this attitude by professional philosophers?
Why do they routinely dismiss Ayn Rand?
Welcome to New Ideal Live, the podcast of the Ayn Rand Institute.
I'm Aaron Smith, a fellow instructor at ARI.
Joining me today is ARI associate fellow Mike Mazum.
Now, Mike, in your article, Why Can't Professional Philosophers Get Ayn Rand Right?
You address this question.
And I wanted to spend some time talking with you about the article and about the case you
make in that article, because I think it's an important case.
And I want to just read a quote from that article.
You say, until professional philosophers engage with Rand's actual arguments, their
pat dismissal of her philosophy remains an unprofessional prejudice.
End quote.
For those who may not have read the article, can you give us some kind of an overview of
what that article is about and what you're arguing in it?
Yeah, thanks, Aaron.
So there are dozens of criticisms of Rand floating out there, dozens as probably an understatement.
And part of what we do at ARI and part of what I see myself as doing is advocating, expanding
on and teaching about Rand's philosophy.
So part of that means responding to criticisms.
And many of the criticisms that are floating out there have responses to them in the Objectivist
secondary literature in podcasts on websites.
What I wanted to do in the article was to draw attention to a thread or a through line
that characterizes most of these criticisms, particularly the ones that are coming from
professional philosophy.
If you have been in philosophy classes as an undergraduate and discussed I and Rand with
your professors, you probably get some version of she's not serious, she's not a philosopher.
Her arguments are lame, bad, weak.
And if they even concede that she has arguments at all, there's more than a few who would
just say she doesn't even argue for her position.
She takes these controversial positions, but she won't give arguments for them.
What she'll do is she'll write a mean character who has a view that she doesn't like and make
them look stupid and then the view that she does like looks heroic in another character.
So why do they have this attitude?
Why do they have this such a strong and impassioned rejection of her?
It's a kind of puzzle that a lot of her fans have, why am I getting this hostility from
my professors because I like these ideas?
And also why can't my professors seem to criticize the views that I think I agree with?
Is the accusation of straw manning Rand is a common kind of response to these criticisms?
So what I do in the article is go through some of the criticisms that are sort of viral
in the Rand fan world, that's the Mike Cumers criticisms that I discuss have been floating
around the internet for decades.
And also criticisms from people in philosophy who are prominent, even if I don't think they're
good criticisms or even criticisms that have a lot of viewership, they're still notable
because of the stature of the people in the profession.
So what I did in the article is made the case that there's a feature that all of these arguments,
all of these criticisms have in common that fans of Rand and people who maybe aren't Rand
fans but are just kind of interested in objectivism as a cultural phenomenon haven't noticed
or aren't aware of.
So a lot of the responses to the criticisms that I discuss, for example, the responses
to Mike Humer or the responses to Robert Nozick, take the criticisms as given and just you've
got in respond by saying, well, you haven't correctly characterized her in this way or
that way.
What I'm trying to do is not reply directly to these criticisms but show that these criticisms
stem from some a wrong approach to the project of understanding and criticizing Rand and
that's the what I call philosophical procalism.
One of the things that I noticed from your article is that you don't take the tack that
I think a lot of people take is they look at this some sort of mis-presentation of one
of Iron Man's arguments and they say, well, this is dishonest, this is obviously dishonest.
And even if there is an element of dishonesty there sometimes, it's I think that's not the
tack you take in this article.
And so we're going to look at the issue of what you call philosophical parochialism and
sort of unpack that.
But just I don't know for motivations point like what who cares what these academics think?
I mean, you mentioned people like Brian Leiter and now many people in the audience might
not know who these people are, but these are all academic philosophers of mixed prominence.
Some are quite prominent, some are less like maybe semi prominent, but Brian Leiter, Masimo
Piliucci, I've written about him before, James Rachel's, Robert Nozick and you mentioned
Michael Humer.
Why do you think it's important to respond to these critics?
And I think in particularly the way you do.
So one thing to say is that part of advocating a radical philosophy is you look at the criticisms,
you think them through, respond to them.
That's part of your job as an advocate of controversial ideas.
So it just so happens that as bad as I think some of these criticisms are, they're not
all terrible, but as bad as some of them are, they're about as good as you'll find anywhere.
So if you look at the kind of criticisms you see in more popular presentations, popular
books, not academics, but public intellectuals who aren't academics, you get the much more
cruder.
She thinks Rand hates the poor.
She wants to industrialize a moral hero.
Yeah.
So if you're rich, that means you're great, like that kind of that level.
And what the even the bad article or bad arguments from the professional philosophers do is try
to, you know, how is Rand reasoning about this and where is it wrong?
That's what they're at least attempting to do or claiming to do.
They happen to be the best you find out there.
Now the other reason to do that is most people who have an impact on the culture at large
go to college and some, you know, most people take some sort of philosophy class, whether
it's a introduction to philosophy or whether it's just like an ethics business ethics.
And that's where you're introduced to different ways of thinking about philosophical issues
if you, if you don't learn about them on your own.
And in those textbooks and in those classrooms, it's the professionals who get discussed.
And when Rand comes up and I go through in the article, some textbook presentations of
Rand, it's always or almost always a hatchet job, a misrepresentation, or just, just, you
know, that's a attributing some motives to the people doing this.
It's just incompetence.
They just can't accurately portray her.
They won't quote her.
They'll say Rand says this, they won't give a quote, they won't give a citation.
Or they'll say, go read James Rachel's on Iron Rand, you know, you don't have to read
her.
So let me just interject for a second, for the sake of the audience.
So you mentioned James Rachel's and they might not know who that is, but he wrote a book
called The Elements of Moral Philosophy and it's one of the most popular and widely used
introductions to ethics, at least in the US, I don't know how broadly that's said, but
at least in the US, it's very slender, brief presentations, concise presentations of different
major ethical positions, and it's just used all over the place.
So it's, you know, when you address James Rachel's, it's like, you might not know who
that is, but it's, it's the author of a widely used textbook that's just all over the place
in philosophy departments.
And so if you get a treatment that mangles Iron Rand in such a popular and widely used
textbook, I mean, a lot of eyes are on that piece.
So yeah, it's also, so it's one, it's one of the most popular textbook.
But I think it's in its 14th edition, something like that.
It's been around for quite some time and it's, even when it's not assigned, the other textbooks
that cite Rand are clearly taking their view of what Rand is saying from James Rachel's
presentation of her.
So it's, it's not, yeah, and I think also that, I mean, one of the major things is that
these mangled arguments, these mis-presentations of Rand's arguments that you get, lead people
to dismiss Iron Rand as a serious thinker.
And I think the more that happens, the more this matters, I think, to us who think that
her philosophic thought is new, original, really important, and to the extent to which
they go to professional philosophers, they read treatments by these people who are experts
in the field.
And their assessment, judging by their presentation, is, yeah, this is a pretty bad argument.
So she can't think straight and, you know, nothing to see here, kids.
And that, I think, is the overall impact of this.
Half the country goes to college, you think half of them take an ethics class, maybe three
quarters of them encounter Rand in their ethics textbooks.
She's discussed, to some degree, in a lot of the ethics textbooks.
And they think, this is it, like, they come in with no opinion.
I've heard of her, she's, you know, whatever.
And this is it, this is all there is to it, this is nothing.
And then, you know, you don't have infinite time in your life to go explore everything.
So you just dismiss her and then look back, yeah.
So it's important to address these, these kind of criticisms.
Even though it's easy to dismiss academics as off in the ivory tower, I mean, they have
an impact on each subsequent generation just through the fact that everyone goes to college.
Yeah.
Okay.
So fair enough.
So let's, let's get into the parochialism here.
So this is your main sort of claim in the article that one of the reasons why, a major
reason why academic philosophers don't get her arguments right is because there's something
like a certain kind of parochialism going on.
Can you say what parochialism is and how it's, how do you think it's operating?
I mean, for the full treatment, you can read the article, but just what, what do you want
to bring out here?
Right.
So you're being parochial if you're assuming your own and projecting onto someone else
your own sort of views on the subject, assuming they agree with you on, on, on what you're
discussing and in philosophy.
So if you're discussing a philosophical theory, it's assuming concepts, definitions, views
of what philosophy is and how it argues when you're approaching a figure who's disputing
that.
So if you're reading Ayn Rand or if you're reading Heidegger from the German tradition
and you're an American 20th, 21st century mainstream academic and you read them and
you're just assuming that they must be interested in the same problems, 20th century American
academics are interested in, that they share the same definitions, that they, they share
the same methods and standards, that's a parochial approach to them.
You have to understand that people in different philosophical or historical contexts just
have different, different interests, different definitions, different standards of, for what
they're doing.
And part of interpreting them objectively is not imposing on them your own parochial
assumptions.
And my, my basic argument is that this is how Rand is being approached.
And I give an example in the article of a philosopher, Massimo Piliucci, who's criticizing
Rand on, on, on her metaphysics.
And he's, she, she defines a metaphysical concept axiom one way, and he just says, no,
that's not how we define it, and my response is, yeah, that's not how you define it.
Yeah, we, who's we, yeah, who's we, that's how you define it in the philosophy you're
familiar with.
But philosophical terms and definitions are, I mean, there are things people argue over.
What's the right way to define justice?
What's the right way to define freedom?
What's the right way to define axiom is the concept in question.
And to just assume, well, this is the way my people define, yeah, that's what's in dispute.
We're disputing.
There's a, there's a different way to think about it.
And Rand's saying hers is superior or correct.
And you're not going to, you're not going to decide who's right by just asserting your,
your side.
So that's a pretty crude version of it.
That's why I start with it just to familiarize the reader with what it looks like.
But there's more, as the article goes on, we go into more complex versions of this, assuming
that Rand must be arguing a certain way because, well, how else would you argue?
That's how we argue in 20th century academic philosophy.
Not being sensitive to act that she argues a different way.
Yeah.
So I want to ask you about the sort of form of argument that they think is, I don't know,
the gold standard, like how you're supposed to properly argue as a philosopher.
But just to come back to Massimo Piliucci, I mean, just to read that, there's a real
unseriousness on his part toward Rand, a real contempt for his subject.
So it's, you know, he quotes, like, as you say in the article, he quotes, he quotes
some statement by Ein Rand, which says something about an axiom, but it's not a definition
of the axiom.
So he leaves out the definition of an axiom, leaves in the quote, whereas he just characterizes
some aspect of it and says, this is what she, how she defines an axiom, wrong.
He says, oh, you know, without even like doing a little mini minor due diligence and just
kind of like, so where does she write about this?
How does she define this?
What?
It's just, there's none of that.
This is obviously wrong.
This is obviously silly.
And it just, that's not what it is.
An axiom is what, what do you say, a premise where you start a discussion or something
like that, and it's like something you take for granted in a discussion.
And like, there's no investigation, no thought as she have a different conception of what
an axiom and what is that?
And what do I think of it?
And there's just none of it.
Well, we'll come, we'll come back to this, I'm sure.
But one of the things that's so frustrating about this is that, I mean, I put in the article
and you just said, these, a lot of these people writing about Rand obviously have contempt
for her. And it's actually possible to have contempt for a figure you're discussing and
not misrepresent them.
This happens all the time in good philosophical, historical scholarship.
You're discussing a figure, you think, yeah, their views are really wrong and really bad,
really evil.
And I can write a paper about it and not caricature them or misrepresent them.
So there's, there's a lot of things going on.
And that, that case is especially, a lot of things, a lot of the things that are going
on are especially obvious in that case.
Yeah.
And so part of it, I think is stemming from this, just there's a contempt for the subject,
which leads to a cavalier, unserious treatment of the subject, which then leads to
wide, just common errors, gross misrepresentations, things like, it's hard to take
seriously. And I mean, speaking for myself, like, I want to respond to these things.
And at some point it feels like, like you're flooding, swatting a fly, so to speak,
it's just sort of like, it's not worth the effort.
And yet you want to respond.
And yet the criticism is so poor that it's, it's, it's kind of embarrassing to respond.
But not all these criticisms that you mentioned for sure in your article are of
that caliber where it's just so silly, like it's, it's going to be a bit embarrassing
to respond to it.
And you make the case that they're looking for a certain kind of argument.
They don't see it in Rand and they try to reconstruct it according to what they
think an argument should look like.
And then something goes awry there.
So maybe you can tell, tell us a bit about that.
Maybe I hope I'm not mischaracterizing that.
No, that's, that's, that's fair.
So there's a standard that philosophy, or I should say, philosophers in the kind of
Anglo-American, what's sometimes called analytic tradition, that they, they want
their craft to aspire to.
And it's sort of like the standards of rigor in mathematics, where you can put
down certain propositions and then prove as a matter of formal deductive necessity
that some controversial conclusion follows from them or some, some important
conclusion follows from them.
And that's now people in that tradition are aware that that's really hard to do to, to
find it, knock down argument that just follows as a matter of pure formalism.
Like you think of, if you've taken a logic class and you write down like symbols, you
turn an English sentence into a string of symbols and prove something about it.
That's really hard to do.
It almost never happens, but that's a kind of standard we can try to approximate that.
And if you have that view as a kind of, well, this is what a good philosophical
argument looks like.
And it's not as bad as it used to be, but there was a period of time where, you know,
if you looked in a philosophy journal, this is 60s, 70s, 80s kind of, you'd see a lot
of articles, yeah, when Einren was writing, you'd see articles on, you think it's an
ethics article, oh, okay, this is going to be very, you know, how to live your life,
what's a virtue, what's a vice, what's a good, and you instead, you get analyses of
the logical structure of sentences that has the, have the word ought in it.
And there's a whole bunch of symbolic logic, is that what does this have to do with, that's
the way people were thinking and writing at the time.
And that still goes on to a lesser degree today.
A lot of the criticisms that I'm responding to originated in this time period and kind
of just have been repeated without any reflection since then.
And if that's your view of what good philosophy looks like, and that's your view of not just,
that's what good philosophy looks like, but that's just what philosophy looks like.
And then you approach Rand, you read one of her articles, and she's not arguing that way
at all, like she rejects arguing that way, she thinks that's a bad way to argue,
it's never going to get you anywhere, it's not going to get you to the truth.
There's a question of what do I make of this?
And if you went to graduate school during that period of time, you might not even know
that there are other ways people reason and argue, you might not have learned that.
And you might not see that major figures in the history of philosophy are arguing that way
because it's hard to parse an interesting philosophical argument and see what its parts are.
So my conclusion is that a lot of the more sophisticated criticisms are trying
to take something resembling what Rand says in her published essays and like shoehorn them
into this premise, premise, conclusion structure of reasoning that the profession values.
And that's just not how she's arguing.
And you make a case in the, I mean, I'm not, I take it you don't have any problem
with putting together premises and conclusions.
I mean, one of the things that you do when you look in an article is what are the points
that are adduced that are intended by the author to support or give evidence for
or plausibility for a conclusion?
I think obviously we're not saying anything negative against that, but there's a particular kind
of deductive structure that they're trying to, they don't find in Ayn Rand.
So part of it is they think, well, she doesn't really have arguments because they don't find that.
And then part of it is, well, she doesn't really have arguments, but let's see if we can put it
in a deductive form so where the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises.
And then you're saying that's often not what you find in Rand's work.
And you give an argument in the piece.
I don't know how much you want to talk about this, but her argument.
No, just as a point of evidence in favor of this as an interpretation of what they're doing.
This is what Robert Nozick says he's doing, like explicitly.
He starts his article saying, yeah, he starts his article saying, I'd like to reconstruct Rand's
argument as a deductive argument with premises and et cetera.
And then he says, I don't know what that is.
So I'm going to fill in the blanks for her.
Yeah. And that was on the Randian argument.
That's on the Randian argument in 1971, or maybe 73.
Yeah. And that gets referred to a lot.
Yeah. Just look at Nozick's takedown and on the Randian argument.
Again, that's the way these things function.
So it's not like those arguments have been given, in this case, there were responses,
contemporaneous responses to Nozick's on the Randian argument article.
And maybe you can mention some of those, but often it's just they stand as, yeah, just see,
just see Nozick or just see James Rachel's and that's already been taken care of.
And then that's part of the way.
There's an amusing exchange on one of the major professional philosophy blogs.
Somebody writes in and asks, what are the best academic criticisms of
Ayn Rand looking for like ammunition?
And there's a whole bunch of threads or a whole bunch of replies with, you know,
recognizable names replying.
And they come up with a whole lot of nothing except Robert Nozick's article.
And he starts the article saying, I don't really know how to accurately represent Rand's argument.
I'm going to give my own version of it.
So that's like the best they can do when they're when they're asked.
So that's, I mean, you asked earlier, why is this worth responding to?
Yeah, that's another reason worth responding to.
It's like, you'll go to your professors and ask them, what do you think about Ayn Rand?
And you'll get hostility.
And then like really ask them, like, what's a good response?
And if that's, yeah.
I think one of the really valuable things, I mean, about your article is that you take
the time to show what's how these arguments go wrong.
So it's Sidney Hook's famous criticism.
Robert Nozick's now famous article on the Randian argument.
James Rachel's widely popular treatment of Ayn Rand's egoism in his moral
philosophy textbook and to show that they go wrong, that they don't match Rand's
argument and then go on to say underlying why they, what's generating this, what's
the mistreatment of the mishandling of the argument, the mispresentation of the
argument is they have a kind of parochial view about what an argument looks like,
what philosophy, what it means to practice philosophy and they, as a result, they
don't find these kinds of arguments in her.
What kind of arguments do you find if you're not finding deductive arguments?
I mean, she obviously, well, you have people that say she makes no arguments.
Again, for someone who reads that and thinks, like, what are you talking about?
I think this also helps to see like they're looking for a specific kind of
thing when they're looking for an argument, they don't find it.
But does she make arguments, Mike?
Yeah, so read the article for the details, but in short summary, she does make
arguments, they're not the kind of arguments you find in math, they're more
like the kind of arguments you find in the sciences, they're explanatory arguments.
She's looking at some phenomenon about, so the example I give in the article is
her argument for egoism, she's looking to explain why we pursue values to begin with.
And then she's using that explanation to go on and give a further explanation.
So if this is why we pursue values to begin with, why do we need to pursue
values under the guidance of a systematic code?
So she gives a series of explanatory arguments.
It's more help, if you want to understand the form of the argument, like how she argues,
it would be more helpful to learn about explanation in the history of the
biology or something, than it would be to look at how math structures its arguments.
But the pattern in philosophy has been to look to math, not to the inductive sciences.
So yeah, for the details, you have to look at the article.
Okay, so I think one of the values of the article, for people who are interested
in objectivism and frustrated by these kind of presentations of Rand's work,
I think this helps it go some distance in explaining what's behind it,
beyond other than or in addition to some kind of dishonesty or hostility toward Rand.
Because the hostility is real, whether or not that factors in the presentation of Rand or not.
I think sometimes it does and sometimes it doesn't.
Like you mentioned, Nozick wasn't hostile to Rand and he was more sympathetic to her.
As far as you can tell, trying to present, to fairly present her case.
Whereas other things are just kind of smears and it's not always like that, though it often is.
Yeah, I mean, I don't think Nozick is hostile.
I don't consider Mike Humor hostile.
So if we're thinking about, my question is why do professional philosophers,
why can't they get Rand right?
What I'm trying to do is give a major factor that people aren't aware of.
So if you really want the full answer to the question, it's like a multi-factor explanation.
So as we pointed out with Massimo Piliucci's criticism,
yeah, there's just some intellectual dishonesty here.
He's quoting her out of context.
He's kind of just crudely asserting his own view as if that in and of itself is a response to anything.
And the guy has three PhDs, like he knows what's wrong with that.
So that's certainly, you can't have a full understanding of why some academics reject her so strongly.
Part of it is there's just some dishonesty.
But I mean, dishonesty doesn't exist in a vacuum.
So other relevant factors are there's hostility to her.
Moral and political views are that's certainly relevant to understanding why she's rejected.
Most philosophers are very left-wing.
That's certainly relevant.
They're all bought into altruism or just computer subjectivism as a moral framework.
So they're hostile to the egoism just as in so far as the content is concerned.
And then you have to see all of those things interacting with the prokulism.
So there couldn't possibly be a better argument for a good argument for capitalism.
I mean, I've read Nozick, I've read Milton Friedman.
She just has to be saying some other version of that.
And those arguments are dumb, so I don't need to bother taking her too seriously.
That's a kind of prokulism in and of itself.
And then if you are deep into Rand's philosophy, you'll be familiar with her claims.
You can't defend capitalism without a radical revision of your moral and epistemological views.
So that kind of factor interacts with the professor's rejection of the political views.
So these are all relevant factors.
And what I want to draw people's attention to is just this additional one that you might not have noticed.
Yeah, because I think it's really non-obvious, particular to people who aren't in the field.
And there is a sense in which, so in graduate school often we're taught to...
So we both have PhDs in philosophy, so we spent time in academia and learning about what philosophic arguments are supposed to look like,
at least as we're taught, and you're often taught to sort of put things in standard form.
You put it in terms of premises in conclusion.
And often you'll read a piece that it's hard to do that with.
And it's not just on Rand.
So one of the most widely assigned pieces of reading in introductory philosophy courses,
or introductory ethics courses, is Plato's dialogue, Euthyphro,
where Socrates is talking to this guy named Euthyphro and part of what happens in the dialogue is that
he's questioning Euthyphro about his use of a particular concept and his understanding of it.
Because his grasp of that concept is going to have an impact on how he functions in his life and on some important issue.
And as they sort of go around and through the discussion, it turns out, he doesn't really know what he's talking about.
He doesn't have a clear-headed notion of what kind of concept.
It's in this case, it's piety, but you could substitute it, like in many of his other dialogues,
it's justice, it's knowledge, and so on, courage.
And what he's pointing out is you don't have a clear view of what you mean by this concept, and yet you're functioning with it.
And it's part of your operating system, and yet it's clearly unsatisfactory, like in a significant way.
And you need to pay more attention to that.
Now, it's very hard to put that in some sort of standard form, and I've seen professors try to do it, like as a TA in, of course, in ethics,
I saw professors do that, and it was, it misses most of what the dialogue is about.
It's like, yeah, Socrates is making this argument, and if you put it in this form, clearly the conclusion doesn't follow,
and so because there's all sorts of counter-examples, and this is silly, and what a dumb argument,
and it's like you miss the force of a really important philosophical dialogue that has resonance today.
Like, I mean, I assigned, I teach Objectivism, I assigned the youth of Rome for its power and its impact and the point it makes,
and it's kind of, Rand is making something of a similar point in philosophy who needs it, and yet you miss it completely.
And that's just another example of this. This is how you're supposed to think about an argument.
You don't find it in there, let's shoehorn it into some kind of argument.
The argument doesn't really work very well. It doesn't really represent what's going on in that philosophical work.
And then you say, and then the students are going, yeah, well, Socrates is not much of a thinker.
Well, I allude to this a little bit in the article where I make the point that the way Rand's arguing shouldn't be,
it's not as if she's got a completely out of left field new way to give a philosophical argument.
Now, she's much better at it than the philosophers in the historical canon.
But other philosophers give explanatory arguments, including Plato.
I don't think they're good explanations, but that's how they're reasoning.
And one of the pieces of evidence to think that there's something unjust and dishonest about how Rand is discussed by academic philosophers
is if you really took the standards they're trying to apply to her and apply them to somebody like Descartes or Plato,
you'd have to say they're not good philosophers either.
They don't make the kind of rigorous deductive arguments that you look that the 20th century figures are looking for.
At least they don't always. The theories they're most well remembered for are not argued for in that way.
They're more argued for. The forums best explain certain things, like I cite the Fido in my article.
And if you really held yourself to that standard they're trying to impose on Rand, then none of these people are serious thinkers either.
And now they don't do that. So why not?
And that's where you have to factor in it.
One is just, well, we're supposed to think Plato is a good philosopher, so we don't raise these objections to him.
But also Rand's a right winger and we hate her for that.
And she's a capitalist and she says it's good to be selfish, so we hate her views too.
And again, all these factors interact.
But I mean, any time you see a kind of inconsistent application of a standard, and it's really strong evidence.
At least raises a flag.
Yeah, at least raises a flag. Yeah, there's several things going on here.
One of which is just there's an injustice and the other of which is, you know, you have to dig into understanding that and that's part of what bringing out the prokulism of the approach does.
Okay.
So your article focuses mainly on the prokulism. And I think it's good that we did mention, you know, there are other factors going on, it's not just this but one thing is just like this is one factor that's not often seen or noticed.
And I think it's like,
maybe this is a bit of a side point, but can you say why you think it's important to flag that the issue of prokulism because I think about graduate students.
I think it's important now.
So, you take a standard sort of fan of I ran they read out the shrug they read the fountain head. They get inspired by the novels. In some cases it feels right quite liberating it's the, it gives them a framework that is empowering and so on.
And they read something like I ran is not really a philosopher arguments are all bad. And it doesn't.
But if you're actually studying philosophy or intellectual fields, and you come across these things, I think it's useful to note.
I think your articles worth reading, I think in part that I was just talking to somebody who was in political science. And she was saying, I, you know, I want to I want to see Rand's argument in deductive form and she wasn't critical.
She wasn't, she wasn't a criticism of critical mind renders just sort of like, that's what I'm looking for. And it's like that's what we're seeing effect taught to look for. And then if you don't see those you don't find those you start to think well maybe there's something to that criticism
maybe she just doesn't really make arguments or her arguments are bad. If you try to put them in deductive form and then it sort of mangles the argument.
Yeah, I mean, Rand is saying philosophies not like that.
Yeah, say more about that because that's important because she rejects that method of argumentation, not just that she doesn't do things like professionals today do it.
And so there's some confusion, and she's saying, you guys don't know how to argue in philosophy. And I mean she thinks the field has collapsed.
The whole field of philosophy in fact, has collapsed in a in a fundamental way they're not, they're not forming systems anymore, predominantly.
And yeah, she thinks that there's a kind of dereliction of the field.
So to just to just indicate that that there's more going on here like you wouldn't say that about the origin of the species, or like Galileo's arguments for the for the for the sun being the center of the solar system.
You wouldn't say I can't put it in a deductive form.
So that means there's no arguments easy. Yeah, that's just not the sciences just aren't like that.
And Rand's saying something similar about philosophy is not like that it's not like math where maybe in math you can do that sort of thing saying no it's more like the sciences and is she right about that I mean that is a philosophical question.
What methods should philosophy use. What kind of subject is it.
And she's calling that into question and she's, she has her own way of thinking about it. And I mean even it.
She indicates that she's doing that in most of the major texts when she argues for egoism in the objectives ethics.
She starts the essay by talking about how the science of ethics should look how it should proceed what its questions are.
And why people have not like been able to see that she gives a whole argument that the first question of ethics is does man, what are values and does man need them.
That's not usually how you start ethics when you take intro to ethics that's not how it begins.
But she's got a different view and she's telling you she has a different view. And that's one of the, you know, one of the just indications that these critics commentators are approaching their, their subject with this populism is that she's
literally telling you that she's doing something different. And they just doesn't register they don't even acknowledge that she say they don't say, well she says she's doing something different which is really not.
It just goes in one ear at the other like it's not even there.
Yeah, and I think so one of the things I appreciated the most in my own graduate school and philosophy.
And I tried to emulate because I thought like this is the right way to approach a particular philosopher.
Particularly when you disagree with them or don't understand him but it was usually him is to understand the philosopher in his own terms or on his own terms in the context of his times addressing the kinds of issues that person does so one of
things that's standard. And I think it's interesting that the philosophers that you mentioned in the article, predominantly are not historians of philosophy.
So I studied in departments where they had people and I tended to gravitate toward these people that are historians in philosophy, whether in ancient Greek philosophy or typically early modern where
it's like if you take Dick Hart says this and this and you put some premises and that's stupid. It's like none of them approach it like that.
They look at this and say what Dick Hart is doing is he's trying and they try to put it in a context. What are his own aims.
How does he think philosophy should properly function how do you think you should argue why does he take these premises which seems strange to us for granted.
Why doesn't he question these other things which we think are obviously questionable. And it's taking the philosopher seriously like yeah no there's a reason why he doesn't question these things.
And it's not because Dick Hart's stupid. He's brilliant.
And yet he doesn't take these things doesn't seem to take X seriously or whatever it's in we do, or he takes this for granted and we certainly don't.
And they don't simply jump in as yeah but he's stupid and we dismiss that they're like, you know what's behind that.
Why is that and they approach their subject with a seriousness and I was really appreciated that you learn much much more about the thinker.
You learn how to think about a given philosopher in context, and it gets you out of this parochial view where, you know, I came from a small town and everybody's Christian and this is our background and everybody knows there's a God and Jesus saved us.
It's just like, as if you couldn't think outside that village mentally.
And I think a lot of what the good good history of philosophy is getting you outside of your mental village.
And there's.
Yeah, and I think that's what has really expanded and enriched I think my understanding of Spinoza of Plato of Piero of Ellis you know take the any of these figures, where you have really good professors that know the context and take their subject seriously
and learn an immense amount. I only wish that philosophers would take that attitude to Iran. I mean some do.
They're typically fans of Iran, who are wind up being the experts in her philosophy, but then if you're a fan of Iran or proponent or an advocate in some sense.
It's easy for others to dismiss all those are just the fans and then, you know, but you'd like so you take something like the companion to Iran right this is kind of an academic but where you're right here.
It's an academic publication with a lot of serious content on Iran's a lot of scholarly work on it, and, you know, it's often ignored, sadly.
I wish that was more the approach.
You started reading, I think it's the, is it the last sentence of my article I think I think it is I should know.
But they're the their dismissal is unprofessional I mean, this is one of the things that's actually praiseworthy about philosophy of the last 50 or so years professional philosophy is that the history of philosophy is way better than it used to be for just the kind of reasons you're
the richer it's they're much more sensitive to the authors philosophical historical context, understanding on their, them on their own terms, and they have no patience for people who would approach those figures in a like play though in a parochial
matter that's why it doesn't happen because there's good
I've heard professors like this guy doesn't know anything like that that's that there is like this is the stupidest presentation of Kant or Plato or whatever it is because like these people take their subjects seriously, and it's like you're just way off and from the
you could you could you could never do the kind of criticism that Sidney hook or Massimo Piliucci did it that I go through in the beginning of my article to a major canon figure you just be like,
this is foolish like why why is a philosophy professor writing this way. So that's why I say it's it's unprofessional of them because there are good standards in there are some good standards in professional philosophy and the kind of historical interpretive standards are
basically right on and well functioning and part of the issue is when they deal with iron Rand.
Yeah, when they do with iron Rand, I would imagine if if if there if there are other parallel controversial figures that professional philosophers hate that we'd see something similar in the way in the way they approach them.
Them to.
But I mean Rand's a but ran part of the reason ran gets such strong reactions is that she's not an obscure an obscure figure that the profession kind of looks down at she's like a mainstream
person to regular to regular people she's popular she's more popular than most almost any like living philosopher today. So that's you know what another part of why she gets so much of this and other other people do not.
Yeah, that's an important point to raise is that if other canonical figures in the history of philosophy were afforded the treatment that the philosophers you mentioned talking about iron Rand.
Give iron Rand, I mean, they probably wouldn't get published they'd be sort of laughed out of the out of the journal out of the journal so to speak, because I like like in, I wrote a piece called why Massimo Piliucci gets iron ran wrong, and it had to do with.
He wrote some piece on iron Rand and our relation to aerosol. And I mean, it was largely just silly. And he took two quotes, put him into one block quote as if it's from the same thing.
Once by iron ran from one source, one's actually by Leonard Peacock from a book, and they attributes it to a wrong source by some other article that iron ran wrote that he didn't know iron ran wrote.
It was like, he said that this comes from some objectivist or something I get that objectivist is iron ran Massimo. And it's just so cavalier, which the way he treats it.
But I like the way you definitely one of the article, the people who take iron ran more seriously as well.
Yeah, so what one of the, the one of the points I make in the article is that, yeah, that you can laugh at how crude, the foolish Massimo Piliucci is, and if jibes are, but it's basically the same thing is going on in the Rachel's textbook.
It's just, you know, more, it's a more clever than, than what he does. And I don't want to put Mike humor in this, in this camp, I think in fairness to him. He actually treats her with the level of respect that professional philosophers treat each other when they're criticizing each other.
Like, it's a lot of times you get back and forth like, well, you didn't really get me right. This isn't, but it's like, no, he gives the sites paragraphs that he's getting drawing his points from and, and there it's just more like you could have a serious, I like, I think he's, you could have a serious back and forth with him.
I don't think you could with Rachel's or Piliucci or Sidney Hook or some of the others I cite.
So we've been talking about the critics right now of Inrand.
But my guess is there are ways in which even fans of Inrand or could be parochial in their thinking as well.
Parochial thinking isn't restricted to critics of Inrand. So it's a kind of general kind of phenomenon, a way of approaching ideas from a kind of local limited perspective where you're not fully aware that you're taking for granted a lot of things that are at issue.
And then are there ways in which you think even fans of Inrand can be parochial and ways in which, if so, we can avoid that.
Well, you mentioned the value of the history of philosophy for, for breaking out of your parochial habits. I mean, like I say in the article, this is kind of the default way.
Where, where else would you start, but with what you're already familiar with and comfortable with? Like, that's sure that there's nothing wrong with starting that way.
But then you also want to be self conscious. Like, yeah, there's a whole wider world out there that I'm not, you know, not familiar with.
There's different ways of thinking about things. And part of, especially if you're into Inrand and you're like an undergrad, one of the best things you can do is just seek out other philosophies and like think about,
Okay, the Plato approaches it this way. Inrand approaches it that way. Like try to understand why there's a difference there and really think about who's right and what is Plato assuming that I'm not or that Inrand's not, what is she back and forth.
And you can, you know, you can do the same thing with your professors, get criticisms from them.
And can I really answer this? And do I, do I know what's, what, where he's coming from? Is it just a, you know, is he just being more like Massimo Pealeucci, just straight up misrepresenting things?
Or is he being more thoughtful, like a more like a Nozick or a bicumor? And do I have answers to these things? And if I don't, what does that mean?
That's, that's the best thing you could do to train yourself to just question your own assumptions, question your own premises, check your own premises, is to have them challenged?
Yeah, I mean, a lot of times you're assuming.
You're assuming straight out of Inrand's attitude toward a proper methodology.
A lot of times, a lot of times you don't know you're holding something as an assumption, as a premise, until you encounter somebody who doesn't.
And then it's like, what, what, they seem stupid. And this is what I say in the, in the article about, like, the way Rand looks to some of these people who are criticizing her.
Like, she's disputing assumptions so basic that they don't, that they have that they don't even, like, bother debating about talking about, and then she doesn't share them.
And it's like, who is this weird person who doesn't know that everything is like math?
Like, who doesn't know that?
Like, we all know this.
And then what we're saying here is it goes the other way too.
Yeah, for a lot of people, including myself, reading Inrand as a young person was my introduction to philosophy.
I mean, I heard the word philosophy, but I hadn't studied any particular philosopher before I read the fountain head and out the shrugged and then everything.
And it was like, and of course, I ran introduced me to the subject of philosophy, in part via her own philosophy, but also her treatment of other philosophers.
And so that's what I sort of took for granted, sort of at the outset.
Now, I went on to study philosophy and take other philosophers quite seriously.
And I benefited enormously from that.
But there is that sense in which you get introduced, many people get introduced to philosophy and to other philosophers via Inrand's philosophy and what she thinks of those other philosophers.
And then they can come in and spouting off things about Kant and the never read Kant.
It's that kind of thing, which must be just as irritating to a Kant scholar.
Yeah, this is his view. And it's like, have you ever read Kant?
Well, no, but I mean, that's would be just that's the sort of analog of what's so irritating to us when people treat Inrand that way.
It goes both ways. And the solution goes both ways is applicable to both.
I mean, a good little a good little test for yourself is just if you're super into objectivism and you're an under like your young philosophy student want to make make the most out of your time in college.
Just a little check for yourself is when you're making an argument or a criticism of someone.
So another figure, Kant or whoever would, if somebody wrote what I or said what I just said about Rand.
How would I take that? Like, this is a complete representation. You don't know what you've read. You haven't read anything.
Yeah, if you're going into philosophy class, you say, Oh, I know all about Hume.
I didn't read Hume. I listened to Leonard Pieckoff lecture about Hume once. Now I know all about Hume.
That's a good place to start, but you don't know all about Hume. And you don't want to do the same thing that the critics are doing. You want to aspire to a better approach.
Don't don't take objectivism as if it's self evident and unquestionable.
I mean, that's that's an aspect of objectivity.
Yeah.
Yeah, so Mike's article is called Why Can't Professional Philosophers Get Rand Right? That's the one we've been talking about today.
And I also want to point people toward an article I wrote called Why Massimo Piliucci Gets Rand Wrong.
He's a prominent philosopher of science and it addresses a similar issue to the one Mike is addressing.
I also want to point people toward a companion to Ein Rand. This is the book of scholarly work on Ein Rand's thought, and particularly toward chapter one, which is by Greg Salmiere, which is available online as a free PDF.
So if you click the link in the show notes, you can get that.
It's particularly important reading I think in this context because it addresses Ein Rand as a philosophical outsider and how to approach her work in that vein.
So that's it for resources for today. I think so stay tuned for next week's show. And please send questions for future podcast or future Q&A episodes to experts at Ein Rand.org.
If you appreciate our content, subscribe to our channel on YouTube, click the bell to be notified for when we go live or we post new recordings.
If you're watching on Facebook, be sure to like, comment or share the episode. It helps us reach new viewers.
If you have questions or comments about today's episodes or suggestions for further episodes, just email us at newidealateinrand.org. We read all of your emails and we reply to many of them.
And with that, we'll see you next week.
