Thank you to NordVPN for supporting PBS.
It's about time we discussed an obscure concept in physics that may be more fundamental
than energy and entropy, and perhaps time itself.
Ready?
Action.
In order to wrench the laws of physics from the reluctant clutches of nature,
we need to watch for clues, patterns in its behaviour that can reveal deeper truths.
Here's an example.
Around 40 AD, Heron of Alexandria, noticed that when light moves between two points,
out of all possible paths between them, it follows the shortest one.
He proposed what you might call a principle of least distance to define the path of light.
Of course, we now know that light doesn't always travel in a straight line,
like when it's refracted by glass or travelling through a gravitational field.
It took a millennium and a half following Heron for Pierre de Fermat to propose a solution
for the case of refraction.
What if light didn't travel the path of least distance, but rather of least time?
If light changes speed between media, then the fastest trajectory is no longer a straight line.
With this principle of least time, Fermat was able to explain all of the field of optics.
It seemed as if we'd stumbled upon a powerful guiding pattern in nature,
minimising principles.
What if there was a similar property that could be minimised to determine the trajectories
of matter as well as light?
There were some efforts, for example, Euler considered properties involving
momentum and kinetic energy, but to no avail.
In the meantime, Isaac Newton came up with his laws of motion, which gave us the
instant and miraculous power to explain the motion of all particles in the universe.
To do this, all you needed to do was know the exact vector forces on each body at
each time, which lets you calculate that body's exact vector position,
velocity and accelerations at each time.
That's doable for, say, a ball flying through the air, but it gets, frankly,
pretty hellish for complicated systems.
So maybe we were still in the market for a simple guiding principle after all.
It was Joseph Louis Lagrange who found that principle.
Consider again the ball flying through the air.
We can describe that motion without the painful vectors if we use energy.
The ball starts out moving fast, it has a lot of kinetic energy,
which it trades for potential energy as it rises and then back to kinetic as it falls.
If you need a refresher on the energy stuff, check out our previous video when you're done here.
You can figure out a lot just using energy like the maximum height the ball will reach,
but because energy doesn't include directional information, vectors,
it seems that you shouldn't be able to determine the exact path, except you can.
Lagrange realized that a particular combination of kinetic and potential energy
had the same minimizing property as does time for the path of light.
He found that the ball will always follow the path that minimizes
the timed average difference between these energies.
In other words, add up the difference between kinetic and potential energy
at all time steps during the flight and you get a number.
Then try the same for any other path that you can imagine.
The result will come out higher for every path other than the path that the ball actually travels.
Lagrange called this new quantity the action.
Formally, it's the integral over time of the kinetic minus potential energies,
and that difference in energies itself got the name Lagrangian,
which itself turns out to be an enormously important and useful quantity.
Lagrange proposed that everything in nature happens in such a way that action is always
minimized, and so was discovered the principle of least action.
A century later, William Hamilton made the important correction that action
is always minimized or maximized.
Here's an imaginary graph of how the action can change between paths.
You get paths where it's at its lowest and at its highest.
Moving objects tend to choose paths where the variation of the action between nearby paths
doesn't change much. In other words, where the slope of this curve is zero,
and that's true at both the minima and maxima.
Most of the time it's the minimum, which is why people still call this the principle of
least action, but others call it the stationary action principle.
If the principle of least action is true, then it should be possible to figure out the path
that any object will take between two points as long as you can find a way to determine
which has the minimum action. That sounds hard, but thankfully Lagrange and Euler already did
most of the work for us by finding the Euler-Lagrange equations, allowing both physics students
and nature to minimize their action.
The principle of least action, in combination with the Euler-Lagrange equations, leads to
Lagrangian mechanics. When you study Newton's mechanics and then move on to Lagrangian mechanics,
it seems almost like a miracle. The hellishly complex equations needed to solve problems using
pure Newton seem to just melt away into much simpler forms. This simplicity comes from the fact
that with Lagrangian mechanics we can dispense with forces and vectors in general and only
consider the energies. The principle of least action is so powerful that it really seems like
it must be telling us something deep about the universe. But what? It's hard to interpret
what this action property really signifies. Well, if it really is so fundamental, then it should
apply well beyond classical mechanics and into our modern theories, in particular general
relativity and quantum mechanics, and perhaps in these we'll find clues as to what the action
is really about. Let's start with Einstein's general theory of relativity, which as we've
discussed before, describes the force of gravity in terms of the bending of the fabric of space and
time. One of Einstein's motivations in developing general relativity was the fact that Newtonian
mechanics failed to correctly predict the orbit of Mercury. If you calculate that orbit using
the Einstein equations in their full glory and full gory detail, you get the right answer. But you
don't even need to go that far. If the principle of least action really is a fundamental law,
then there should be a relativistic version of the action that we can minimize to find Mercury's
orbit. After all, planets trade between potential and kinetic energy as they move around in their
orbits just like the ball. It turns out that we only need to make a couple of relativistic
corrections to do this. The most important is writing the Lagrangian as a function of something
called proper time. In relativity, clocks run at different rates depending on things like relative
speed and position in a gravitational field. Proper time is the time that an object will
perceive in its own reference frame. If you plug the relativistic Lagrangian into the Euler-Lagrange
equation, you get equations of motion correctly describing the orbit of Mercury around the sun.
This shows us that the principle of least action holds up in GR, but it reveals a lot more. First,
it means that Lagrangian mechanics based on this principle can be made to be Lorentz invariant.
It gives equations of motion that are valid even in the shifting frames of Einstein's relativity,
and we also start to learn something about the nature of the action. Once we apply the relativistic
corrections, the action simplifies into just an integral over proper time. Let's take a moment
to think about that, before action was a somewhat vague notion of change in energy. But working with
a more precise model of the universe, we see action is much easier to understand. Action
is now just how much time is perceived by an observer in their own frame of reference.
All objects moving through spacetime move through paths that minimize the time measured
on that path. Remember that Fermat figured out that light always travels the path that
minimizes its travel time, the principle of least time. Well, it turns out that this is just a special
case of a principle of least proper time. The reason for this is that in the classical limit,
proper time becomes kinetic minus potential energy for objects with mass. But for objects
without mass, like light, proper time and time are the same. Okay, it seems like we're getting
somewhere. Let's see if quantum mechanics will get us any deeper, or perhaps just make everything
more confusing. Let's start with the famous double slit experiment as we so often do when
talking quantum mechanics. In it, a stream of quantum particles are launched at a barrier with
two slits cut in it. When the stream reaches a detector screen on the other side, the individual
particles make individual spots, but over time the spots make out this series of bands and
interference pattern. The quantum interpretation of this is that the particle travels between
the source and the screen, not as a particle with a well-defined trajectory, but as a quantum
wave function that represents all possible paths that it could take. The wave function at the screen
represents the range of possible final locations for those paths, with some being more probable
than others. The particle that appears to randomly select a position from that distribution, but
there seems to be a conflict here. The principle of least action says that a particle will always
land where the action of the trajectory is at a minimum or maximum. That should correspond
only to the central points of those bands. However, we see particles landing at every
location in between, albeit with more likelihood the closer you get to these
action stationary points. So perhaps action isn't as fundamental as we thought it was,
or perhaps this is telling us something more about what the action really is. Paul Dirac very
nearly figured this out. He realized that a quantum analog of the action existed that was
related to the integrated time evolution of the wave function, and he realized that this quantity
should result in destructive interference in most places, like the dark bands in the
double slit experiment. It would lead to constructive interference only where this
quantum action varied slowly, near its stationary points, just like with classical action.
But the real action hero of this story is Richard Feynman.
Remember that the action tells us about a particle's history along some hypothetical path?
Feynman realized that the path of a quantum object could be determined by adding together
all possible paths that particles could take weighted by this quantum action. In this case,
the quantum action doesn't come from adding up kinetic minus potential energy,
nor the proper time. Instead, it effectively calculates the phase shift that a particle picks up
along each path towards its destination. Then it adds the phases of all conceivable paths to
that destination. We find that the most likely destinations are those where the phases line
up, constructively interfere. This is Feynman's path integral formulation of quantum mechanics,
and it exactly reproduces the predictions of previous versions of quantum mechanics,
for example Schrodinger's wave mechanics, that talks about the evolution of a single wave function.
This is analogous to how Lagrangian mechanics reproduced Newton's mechanics,
and it's no coincidence, because the path integral is the quantum analog of the principle
of least action. So what does this tell us about the action? Well, the path integral tells us that
a particular final destination is likely if the phases of the many paths that could lead to that
destination line up. Away from those special points, very tiny changes in the path lead to rapid
changes in the phase, causing those paths to cancel out. As Dirac started to guess, particles
tend to end up near the stationary points of the quantum action. In the path integral, this happens
for paths that take the shortest path, but not the shortest path through space, the shortest path
through something called configuration space. And this configuration space is what ties all of this
together. Configuration space is the space of all possible trajectories given our object's
constraints. In the case of the ball, configuration space refers to all the places the ball could
reach with its current potential and kinetic energies. When we take this to relativity, we see
that the configuration space becomes configuration spacetime, where the shortest path minimizes
proper time. In quantum mechanics, configuration space could mean phase space, which is the space
of all possible positions and momenta. Or it could be the more general state space, representing
all the quantum states that a system could evolve through. The application of the quantum
action principle to the evolution through quantum states underpins modern quantum theory.
Back to Paul Dirac, just for a moment. His eponymous equation was derived to describe
the quantum evolution of the electron. Well, it turns out that this equation is just the Lagrangian
for a spin half quantum field. And there's a Lagrangian for each quantum field, which describes
how that field and its particles tend to evolve. Combining these gives the standard model Lagrangian,
which allows us to track the evolution of all quantum fields through configuration space and
so predict the behavior of all known particles. And remember, all of this started with Heron of
Alexandria studying light 2000 years ago. He found a very simple and beautiful pattern in nature,
and this has been inspiring us ever since. Through Fermat and Lagrangian Dirac and Feynman,
each seeking a path through the configuration space of ideas, guided by mysterious principles,
not least of which is the action, pointing the shortest way to the fundamental nature of space
time. We'd like to thank NordVPN for supporting PBS. Imagine VPN as a secure encrypted tunnel
for online traffic to flow. Nobody can see through the tunnel and get their hands on your internet
data. NordVPN allows you to use public Wi-Fi and coffee shops or hotels or anywhere else that you're
on someone else's network. That way you can access personal and work accounts on the road,
or simply keep your browsing history to yourself. With NordVPN, your one account lets you connect
securely up to six devices. They don't log your activity while you're online. They've got thousands
of servers in 60 countries and 24 seven customer support. To learn more about NordVPN, just check
out NordVPN.com slash spacetime. As always, if you've joined us on Patreon, I can't emphasize
enough how helpful your support is in keeping this show going. But today, I want to give a huge
shout out to our quasi supporter, Michael Schneider. Hamilton's principle tells us that action must
always be minimized or maximized. Michael, thank you for choosing maximal action. You clearly have
a Lagrangian of the highest order, and we are delighted that our equations of motion have joined
forces. Let's get into your comments on our recent episode on Constructor Theory. This was a
contentious one. Many of you were dubious that Constructor Theory really offers anything new,
and honestly I started out wondering the same, and it took me a lot of time
to get an inkling that there probably is something in it. I'm still not as convinced as, for example,
David Deutsch that this is some sort of huge revolution, but at least it seems a useful path
to explore. Nestor de Buen asks, isn't this more of an epistemological framework than a
theory, adding that everything would be better if physicists and philosophers of science collaborated
more. So my sense is that Constructor Theory does try to bring a philosophical perspective shift,
which in principle can be incredibly useful. All great discoveries came from perspective shifts.
But there is math behind it also, which I understand is based on set theory and
gothic theory, and for a great resource on those, I recommend the internet.
Speaking of the math, Corbin Simpson and Skooks say that Constructor Theory sounds like category
theory. I only learned about category theory while researching this episode when Chiara
Maletto was asked at the end of one of her lectures whether she tried formulating Constructor
Theory in terms of category theory, and she said she hadn't, but agreed that maybe they should.
So nice insight there, Corbin and Skooks. As for what category theory is, it's loosely a way
to generalise mathematics by representing mathematical concepts and the relationships
between them with graphs. But for details, check my previous reference, the internet,
chapter 7.4 I think. But as far as I understand, category theory, set theory, and presumably
Constructor Theory are all attempts at formalising how we define and arrange our axiomatic foundations.
This is all some pretty obtuse stuff, and some of you did a better job at explaining the point
of Constructor Theory than I did, so let me just summarise. The Andy points out that Constructor
Theory seeks to narrow down the space of all possible functions that might represent physical
laws into the subset of functions that are consistent with the restrictions that come
from observation. Subsequent observations and constraints then allow that set to be further
narrowed. The hope is that this process converges on a single function, which means physics is over.
Or we might find that there are still infinite functions that can perfectly describe the universe.
Joe Habel also puts it well. If we assume the universe operates under certain assumptions,
infinite finite discrete continuous space-time, invariance, quantum, etc., then Constructor
Theory gives us insights as to what math is possible and what math should be restricting
our models. Well that's nicely put Joe. So, rather than digging for the particular equation
that describes the precise details of a given observed phenomenon, usually by trial and error,
we come at it from the other direction and ask what sub-realm of math space we should be looking at
given what we know with certainty is possible and impossible. DJ Club notes that Constructor
Theory feels like alchemy. Relatedly, Cube C says, rough shade on Newton with the whole
you can't transmute apples into gold line. And for those who are unaware, Isaac Newton was an
avid alchemist. But I think there's a point to be made here. How could Newton have known which
lines of inquiry would be fruitful without exploring them? Constructor Theory might be
another alchemy or it might be another Newtonian mechanics. Shall we find out?
Not according to Sinseverus, who says, it's honestly the dumbest thing in existence,
best to forget it exists. Well, I am swayed by the strength of your conviction, Sinseverus,
I guess we can rule out. What were we talking about again?
