I don't have any slides because I decided to talk like 18 minutes ago.
So my name is Chris Pfeiffer and I'm the head of data science at Cluster Truck.
And so I thought I'd use this as an opportunity to explain what makes us different from a
real restaurant and or a traditional restaurant and how we use data to our advantage.
So in a traditional restaurant, they have data that they call the PMix or the product
mix.
And this is the main thing driving their menu decisions.
And what this is is just how many of each item on their menu that they've sold each week.
And at Cluster Truck when we launched, it was important for us to have that same PMix so
that our chefs could look at that in the way that they're used to.
But we also are able to go much deeper since we're a vertically integrated digital-only
kitchen.
How many people have heard of Cluster Truck or tried Cluster?
OK, so Cluster Truck is basically a tech-enabled delivery-only kitchen.
So the main difference between us and someone like DoorDash or Grubhub is that we cook all
our own food and manage our own menu and are engineered 100% for delivery instead of basically
attaching digital ordering and delivery to existing restaurants.
So what we look at in addition to the traditional PMixes, for a certain item, if someone ordered
it for the first time, what percentage of the time do they come back and order Cluster
Truck again?
We also look at for a certain item, if somebody ordered that on their first order.
What percent of the time when they do order again, are they ordering that same item versus
something else?
And so we use this to optimize not only the most popular menu items, but the menu items
that are more likely to result in a longer-term, more valuable customer.
So another thing we're able to do differently than a traditional restaurant by leveraging
data is that in a traditional restaurant, if something was wrong with your meal, you
would say that to your server.
They would maybe go back to the kitchen, have them modify it, tweak it, and then bring it
back out, but that data wouldn't be getting captured anywhere.
Well those types of errors are even more critical for us because our customer is not eating
our food at the restaurant, they're eating it at their home or their workplace.
And so what we've done is engineered systems that allow when we get issues through our
customer experience team, we document, classify, and store all those, and our culinary team
has custom data tools to look through all the different types of issues that are happening,
what items have the most issues, which kitchens have the most issues, and how is that varying
across items.
So for example, if the Indianapolis kitchen is always nailing the Applewood chicken salad
and the Columbus Ohio kitchen is always messing that up and has a high error rate, we can
look at what are those two kitchens doing differently, and we can use this data to drive
action and actually result in a better result for the customer.
So that's another way we use data differently than a traditional restaurant.
The other thing we can do is in a restaurant, you may have no traceability to a transaction.
So if someone pays with cash or if they pay with card and then a different card next time,
you don't really know how that customer is behaving over the long run.
We use customer data because you always have to have a digital account to order a cluster
truck.
We can track lifetime value of customers and figure out where our most valuable customers
are coming from and where they're getting delivery to, and then therefore push for traction
in venues that are similar to where the most valuable customers are coming from, not just
the most customers are coming from.
Another way we use data to our advantage differently than a traditional restaurant.
In a traditional restaurant, you walk in and they say, we're on a wait right now.
It's going to be about 20 minutes.
And they're doing this by essentially just looking at their wait list and kind of looking
at their watch and making a guess.
And most of the time, they're airing on the side of caution so that you'll be pleasantly
surprised that your wait time was less than what it was.
But you really don't know how long it's going to take.
But when you come to Cluster Truck's website, you have no visual clue of how busy we are
because you can't see a line out the door.
You can't see the servers looking busy or anything like that.
So what we do is we use machine learning to predict to you how long it will be if you
were to place your order right now for your food to get delivered.
And we're able to do this much better than our competitors like DoorDash and Grubhub
because we're vertically integrated.
We have insight into what everyone's cooking, how busy each station is, how many orders
are being withheld until we have the driver bandwidth, and driver bandwidth or cook bandwidth
to cook them.
And so basically, we're able to leverage machine learning to predict our wait times with an
average error of about four and a half minutes.
So that's some of the ways that Cluster Truck leverages data to be different than traditional
restaurants.
And we're still just kind of at the beginning of understanding how powerful what we can
do with the data what we have is, thanks.
