Calling all COBOL programmers.
Hi, everybody.
Carol Novie here for Tech Republic with Esther Shine.
Thanks for being with us today, Esther.
And who would have thought that a decades-old programming
language would be this much on the forefront here
of the minds of those who are trying
to get things in order to file unemployment claims.
And we are looking for those people who may be skilled
in this arena.
Let's start with just COBOL, the language of itself.
First, talk a little bit about that.
And then we'll get into why these programmers are so
needed right now.
Sure.
So COBOL has been around, gosh, for about 60 years.
And it was one of the first, if not the first, programming
languages for those huge mainframe computers
that you may have thought are no longer around,
but they actually are.
They are still the common platform
for running government systems, like motor vehicle
registration, real estate tax, income tax.
And of course, right now, they're
in the spotlight because a lot of states' unemployment systems
run on a mainframe using COBOL.
And we have a tremendous spike in unemployment claims
being filed right now due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
So programmers who know COBOL are in desperate need
right now, which is pretty interesting.
I also read a report by Reuters that found
that there are still 220 billion lines of COBOL in use
today, which is pretty stunning.
And that 43% of banking systems are built on COBOL,
and 95%, 95% of ATM swipes rely on COBOL code.
So just let that sink in for a minute.
COBOL is still very much alive and well,
as are the mainframes they run on.
Yeah, I think that that would shock people.
Esther, we talk about Python and all of these languages
that are the top languages, the hot languages.
So often, we're talking about them here on Tech Republic
and ZDNet.
And if you're in school or looking to make a transition,
and these are the languages you should look towards,
but it's crazy to think that actually so much of our
infrastructure involves COBOL, yet people aren't learning
the language anymore.
Right.
And I had an interesting conversation with an analyst
from IDC, and he said that even as desperate as states
are to find programmers to help with the tremendous uptick
in unemployment claims processing
that they're looking for, he feels
that that's not what the real problem is.
He feels that modern mainframes are highly scalable,
and getting more throughput is usually just a matter of paying
to turn on more CPUs.
But the problem is that states have
had to make specific changes to these current applications
they're using to accommodate the changes related
to the unemployment process driven
by the federal government's response to the crisis
and the individuals who are affected by it.
So surprisingly, COBOL skills are still
maintained in the industry simply
because state government, federal government,
even large enterprises continue to have mainframes
and COBOL applications to maintain.
You won't find many COBOL developers anymore
because it's not their preferred language.
It's antiquated.
And most do the maintenance of COBOL applications
because they have to, not because they necessarily want to.
And a problem that state governments face
is that the chances are pretty good.
They don't have the deep bench of professional developers
that a large enterprise would have.
And as a result, they haven't been
able to replace COBOL programmers who have retired
or build those skills across less senior employees.
Yes, you can find consulting firms and offshoring services
that will do development work in COBOL.
But that's not going to help out states in the next week
or so.
Yeah, and that's what we're talking about.
Time is of the essence, obviously,
Esther, as we're trying to get these millions of claims
processed across all of this state.
So what can we do about it?
How do we get people that are possibly in retirement
to come back and help out?
What can happen from here in a short amount of time?
Sure.
IBM and the Linux Foundation, I know,
have teamed up on a free training course this week.
So they're teaching the 60-year-old programming
language coders.
They've also launched a forum where
people who have knowledge of COBOL
can be matched with companies and state governments that
are in need of help maintaining their critical systems.
Some of these positions are paying.
And of course, I believe the states
are looking for volunteers to help right now,
given how critical the need is with this unprecedented surge
in people being laid off and having
to file for unemployment benefits.
And then IBM has also got some COBOL training material.
And I know that I think in a few weeks,
they're going to be launching a series of videos
on platforms like Coursera.
And they've got this talent match portal
that's also being used to match programmers
with companies and government organizations that
need their help.
Excellent.
So really, just like a lot of things right now,
asking American people to do what they can,
step up in whatever way that they can.
And certainly, this is a very niche area
that they need people to come forward and say, yes, I can
help and put my knowledge to work here.
So really an interesting thing here.
And I know the great thing is, Esther,
you put together two great articles that
explain the situation with COBOL and what's
being done with the programs with IBM and things like that,
and also have included some links there as well
that people have to.
So that's a great resource.
Yeah, so I would just say that if you are a programmer
and you're retired or you have some semblance of COBOL skills
and maybe you feel you don't know enough,
that's not an issue.
You are wanted.
You are still relevant.
And if you're willing, there are plenty of people
who could use your help right now.
Most definitely.
All right, very well said.
Well, Esther, we appreciate it very much.
And your article tier links, all of that, of course,
can be found on TechRepublic.
We hope all of you guys will check it out.
And we certainly appreciate you watching.
